                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          THE ECONOMICS OF CURRENCY RISK

                                    Tarek Alexander Hassan
                                          Tony Zhang

                                      Working Paper 27847
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27847


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2020




We thank David Lagakos, Thomas Mertens, Jesse Schreger, and Jingye Wang for helpful
comments. We thank John Caramichael for excellent research assistance. All mistakes and
omissions remain our own. The views in this paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and
should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System, any other person associated with the Federal Reserve System, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Tarek Alexander Hassan and Tony Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Economics of Currency Risk
Tarek Alexander Hassan and Tony Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 27847
September 2020
JEL No. E22,E4,F31,F34,F4,G12,G15,G3

                                           ABSTRACT

This article reviews the literature on currency and country risk with a focus on its macroeconomic
origins and implications. A growing body of evidence shows countries with safer currencies
enjoy persistently lower interest rates and a lower required return to capital. As a result, they
accumulate relatively more capital than countries with currencies international investors perceive
as risky. Whereas earlier research focused mainly on the role of currency risk in generating
violations of uncovered interest parity and other financial anomalies, more recent evidence points
to important implications for the allocation of capital across countries, the efficacy of exchange
rate stabilization policies, the sustainability of trade deficits, and the spillovers of shocks across
international borders.


Tarek Alexander Hassan
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
thassan@bu.edu

Tony Zhang
Federal Reserve Board
20th Street and Constitution Avenue N.W.
Washington, DC 20551
tony.zhang@frb.gov
1    Introduction

A key tenet in economics is that the degree to which firms should be willing to invest in a given
project depends crucially on the required rate of return to capital: A price-taking firm should install
just enough capital for its expected marginal product of capital, M P Ki , to equal the required rate
of return to capital, ri ,
                                       E (M P Ki ) = rf + RPi .                                      (1)
                                                          ri

This equation is the point of departure for many classic questions in economics. Students of asset
pricing are taught that a firm's ri has two components: a risk-free part, rf , and a risk premium,
RPi , that depends on the firm's risk characteristics. One of the classic puzzles in asset pricing asks
why RPi is so large relative to rf (the equity premium puzzle). Monetary economists are interested
in a central bank's power to increase or decrease investment by manipulating rf , whereas students
of economic growth often take differences in M P Ki as a measure of inefficiencies in the allocation
of capital across countries, sectors, and firms.
    In this article, we argue that recent insights from the study of currency risk premia have impor-
tant lessons for how we should think about equation 1, and by extension, for its key applications
in asset pricing, macroeconomics, and the study of economic growth. The simplest, and perhaps
most important, of these lessons is that countries differ dramatically in their risk-free interest rates.
These differences in risk-free interest rates are large (on the same order of magnitude as the equity
premium puzzle), appear to be highly persistent over time (lasting for decades rather than years),
and cannot be explained by predictable depreciations, government default, or differences in inflation
rates. Instead, these differences in interest rates appear intimately linked to the risk characteristics
of the country's exchange rate and to its exchange rate regime.
    The left-hand panel of Figure 1 shows the difference in the risk-free interest rates of the New
Zealand dollar and the Japanese yen as an example (we discuss below how one can measure such
risk-free rates and compare them across countries). The figure shows the New Zealand dollar had
a higher risk-free rate than the Japanese yen in every month between January 1988 and December
2016. On average, this difference was about 5.26 percentage points (pp) on an annualized basis.
When we adjust for movements in exchange rates over the period, the difference in returns on the
two countries currencies is 5.10pp ­ meaning a US investor who borrowed in Japanese yen and lent
in New Zealand dollar made an average annualized excess return of 5.10pp over this period. (For
comparison, the annualized excess return on US stocks was about 7.95pp during the same period.)
    We now know such highly persistent differences in interest rates, similar to those between
New Zealand and Japan, are common in the data, even among developed economies. These large

                                                   1
                                    Figure 1: New Zealand Dollar vs. Japanese Yen

          Difference in 1-Year Interest Rates (Pct)                         NZD / JPY Exchange Rate

                                                                            1990s Recession                    Great Recession
    7.5
                                                                    0.020



    5.0



                                                                    0.015
    2.5




                                                                                      Asian Financial Crisis
    0.0
                                                                    0.010
             1990            2000             2010                             1990               2000                 2010
Notes: The left-hand panel plots the one-year risk-free interest rate in New Zealand dollars minus the one-year risk-free interest
rate in Japanese yen. Risk-free rates are measured using each currency's one-year forward premia against the US dollar (USD).
The right-hand panel plots the nominal exchange rate of the New Zealand dollar (NZD) to Japanese yen (JPY) in units of New
Zealand dollars per yen.



differences in interest rates do not appear to be equalizing over time, and translate into large
differences in returns investors can earn when investing in these currencies.
    Why would rf differ permanently across countries? The emerging consensus in the literature is
that the most likely explanation is currency risk premia ­ the idea that some currencies are safer
investments than others.
    A useful way to think about this problem is to take the perspective of a retail investor in a third
country, say, in Hong Kong. As is common in many countries, Hong Kong-based banks regularly
offer savings accounts denominated in multiple currencies, so our fictitious investor might have the
option to invest in yen at a deposit rate of 0.1% or in New Zealand dollars at a rate of 3.0%.
How might she decide between these two options? Because both accounts are with the same bank,
any likelihood of sovereign default is irrelevant. Similarly, our Hong Kong-based investor does not
directly care about inflation in these two faraway countries. Instead, the only relevant factors for
her choice between these two investments are the difference in interest rates and the stochastic
behavior of the JPY-to-NZD exchange rate.
    Because changes in exchange rates are largely unpredictable over short horizons, our investor
should not expect either currency to depreciate over the coming year, leaving only one relevant
consideration: covariance.1 Which of the two currencies does our investor trust to retain value in
a possible recession or crisis? Intuitively, she might think yen are a safer bet ­ and she would be
right.
    Along with a number of other so-called "safe-haven currencies," the yen tends to appreciate
   1
     A regression of the log change in the JPY-to-NZD exchange rate on their interest-rate differential yields an
R-squared of 0.00.


                                                                2
during large international recessions and crises. Figure 1 shows some evidence of this pattern by
plotting the NZD-to-JPY exchange rate in terms of dollars per yen (so that an increase in the
exchange rate indicates yen appreciation). The shaded areas highlight three distinct periods of
global economic turmoil: the early 1990s recession (1990 - 1993), the Asian financial crisis (1997 -
1998), and the Great Recession (2007 - 2009). In each of these periods, the yen appreciated markedly
against the New Zealand dollar. If these appreciations during periods of economic turmoil are part
of a broader pattern, investors should naturally consider the yen the safer currency ­ and if yen
are a safer store of value, accepting a lower deposit rate might make sense. That is, international
investors might be willing to lend at lower rates in currencies they expect to retain value when
times are bad.
   As it turns out, this simple intuition has a lot of support in the data from international bond and
derivatives markets. For example, a seminal paper by Lustig and Verdelhan (2007) shows currencies
with low interest rates tend to appreciate when US consumption growth is low, and depreciate when
US consumption growth is high. That is, currencies with low interest rates appreciate when times
are bad for US consumers, making these currencies a safer store of value for US investors.
   In addition to this empirical evidence, the theoretical work on currency risk has identified a
number of theoretical reasons to expect the emergence of safe-haven currencies and long-lasting
differences in interest rates. In a nutshell, persistent differences in countries' currency risk premia
arise naturally in a wide range of international macro models. For example, Hassan (2013) shows
allowing for some economies to be larger than others within a conventional international real busi-
ness cycle model is sufficient to generate long-term differences in interest rates between countries,
because shocks that affect consumption in larger countries spill over more to the rest of the world.
That is, even within the most canonical, frictionless, international macro models, currency risk pre-
mia tend to arise naturally in equilibrium. Other authors have similarly pointed to the emergence
of currency premia in models with intermediary capital constraints, trade costs, and differences in
resource endowments, among others.
   We survey the rapidly growing empirical and theoretical literature on currency risk premia
in detail in section 2. Because the initial focus of this literature was mainly on resolving asset
pricing anomalies, many of its key papers tend to use technical finance language. For this reason,
we attempt to keep this review as non-technical as possible, focusing primarily on the underlying
economics.
   A major difficulty this literature shares with a broader literature in asset pricing is that models
with conventional preferences tend to produce risk premia that are quantitatively small. That is,
although a number of papers have identified compelling reasons why, for example, the interest rate


                                                  3
in Japan should be lower than that in New Zealand, most of these models suggest it should be
lower by something on the order of 0.50pp rather than the 5.26pp we measure in the data. In
this sense, the literature is running into a quantitative "currency premium puzzle," which is in
some ways analogous to the equity premium puzzle. Both puzzles fundamentally struggle with
the prediction of models with standard preferences that risk premia should be small given the
relatively small aggregate variation in consumption growth we measure in the data, though we also
show the currency premium puzzle poses some unique challenges that have yet to be resolved. The
development of quantitative models of currency risk and exchange rates is thus a major area for
future research.
   Although the literature on currency risk premia has proliferated in recent years, it has perhaps
been less successful at making clear the relevance of its findings beyond the financial context, a gap
we hope to partially fill with this article.
   Perhaps the most immediate implication of currency premia for the real economy is for capital
accumulation: If countries differ persistently in rf , those with higher interest rates have a persis-
tently higher cost of capital and thus, according to equation 1, should produce with relatively less
capital. Returning to our example from Figure 1, we find that, indeed, the capital-to-output ratio
in New Zealand is 22% lower than in Japan, suggesting the marginal product of capital is a lot
higher in New Zealand than in Japan. More generally, countries with persistently higher interest
rates appear to have higher marginal products of capital in the long run. This simple insight has
direct implications for several strands of literature in macroeconomics, asset pricing, international
finance, and monetary economics that have yet to be explored systematically.
   The first is for the so-called Lucas Paradox (Lucas, 1990), which posits that over long periods
of time, capital-to-output ratios do not appear to be equalizing across countries. In particular,
not enough capital appears to be flowing to developing nations to equalize the marginal product of
capital. If, indeed, some currencies are permanently riskier than others, currency risk is one possible
factor preventing such equalization. Monetary and fiscal policies that reduce the perceived riskiness
of a given currency could then also contribute to equalizing the marginal product of capital across
countries. In addition, some of our own recent work suggests attracting investment by making one's
currency a safer store of value for international investors may be a powerful motive determining
the choice of a country's exchange rate regime (Hassan et al., 2020).
   A second, related, implication is for a large literature that focuses on assessing the efficiency of
the allocation of capital across countries (Hall and Jones, 1997; Caselli and Feyrer, 2007). A basic
assumption in this literature is that rf is equalized across countries, so that systematic deviations
from this required rate can (partially) be attributed to inefficiencies. However, if fundamental


                                                  4
(efficient) reasons exist for rf to differ due to differing currency (and country) risk characteristics,
some of these calculations will have to be revisited ­ possibly altering our assessment of how much
of the discrepancy in income per capita across countries is to blame on inefficiencies.
    Third, an active literature in international finance has studied the propensity of firms and
governments to borrow in foreign currency (C´
                                            espedes et al., 2004; Du et al., 2020; Maggiori et al.,
2020). If lending in a low-interest-rate currency is safer than lending in a high-interest-rate currency,
the opposite is true for borrowing. That is, firms that borrow in dollar, yen, or other safe-haven
currencies may be loading up on systematic risk ­ a price they pay for enjoying lower rates. This
systematic risk may then be a concern threatening the resiliency of firms' balance sheets and
governments' solvency during major crises.
    Finally, long-lasting differences in interest rates across countries may also change how we think
about the sustainability of trade and current account deficits (Gourinchas and Rey, 2007), and the
appropriate design of monetary policy across countries.
    The remainder of this article is structured as follows. Section 2 summarizes the empirical
evidence that links currency risk to long-lasting differences in interest rates. Section 3 reviews
macroeconomic models of currency and country risk. Sections 4 and 5 discuss implications of
currency and country risk for capital accumulation, exchange rate regimes, and macroprudential
regulation. Section 6 discusses the link between time variation in currency risk and capital flows.
Throughout, we highlight promising avenues for future research.


2     Interest Rates and Currency Risk

We begin by reviewing the major stylized facts on the violation of Uncovered Interest Parity (UIP)
and related profitable trading strategies in currency markets. We then turn to the reduced-form
evidence linking these anomalies to currency risk.


2.1   Failures of Uncovered Interest Parity and Profitable Currency Trades

Early work on currency risk began as an attempt to understand three puzzling empirical facts in
currency markets. The first, often referred to as the forward premium puzzle, is that regressions of
changes in exchange rates on differences in interest rates yield a coefficient smaller than one. This
fact suggests that, on average, high-interest-rate currencies do not depreciate enough to wipe out
any differences in interest rates (Bilson, 1981; Fama, 1984). The second is that investors in the
carry trade make money by borrowing in currencies with low interest rates and lending in currencies
with high interest rates. The third puzzling fact is that differences in interest rates and currency


                                                   5
returns are highly persistent, so that the same countries tend to have high or low interest rates on
a very long-term basis.
   Definitions
   Uncovered Interest Parity (UIP): A theory that postulates, for a given pair of currencies,
   the expected rate of depreciation should be equal to the interest differential. UIP is frequently
   violated in the data.

   Forward Premium Puzzle: A violation of UIP. Regressions of changes in the exchange
   rates on differences in interest rates yield a coefficient smaller than one.

   Carry Trade: A violation of UIP. A profitable trading strategy that involves selling a
   portfolio of low-interest-rate currencies and buying a portfolio of high-interest-rate currencies.


All three of these facts have in common that they describe different violations of UIP; that is, for
a given pair of currencies h and f , the expected rate of depreciation is usually not equal to the
interest differential,
                                                       f    f
                                                 Es = rh - rf .

An extensive literature has documented these violations of UIP. Hodrick (2014), Froot and Thaler
(1990), Engel (1996), Lewis (2011), and Engel (2014) provide excellent surveys.2
    One difficulty for students of this literature is that it evolved simultaneously as an attempt to
understand exchange rate dynamics (e.g., the forward premium puzzle) and asset pricing anomalies
(e.g., the carry trade), and thus often alternates between regression-based and portfolio-methods
that are often not directly comparable to each other. We next give a brief overview using the unified
approach by Hassan and Mano (2019). This approach allows us to show the main empirical facts
in a form where regressions map one for one into portfolios. However, it also forces us to abstract
from many of the details uncovered in the two branches of the literature.
    Following this approach, we implement the carry trade by forming a portfolio at the beginning
                                                                                             f
of each month where we weight each currency i by the difference between its risk-free rate, ri,t and
the average risk-free rate of all currencies at the time, rf
                                                           t . That is, we go long currencies with high

interest rates and short currencies with low interest rates such that we are long and short the same
number of dollars. The return on this portfolio is

                                                          f
                                             i   rxi,t+1 ri,t - rf
                                                                 t    ,                                       (2)
  2
    Koijen et al. (2018) expand the notion of UIP to other asset classes and apply it to equities, bonds, and com-
modities.



                                                        6
                 f      f
where rxi,t+1 = ri,t - rU SD,t + st+1 is the return to borrowing in USD and lending in foreign
currency i at between t and t + 1.
   Implementing this strategy using one-month forward rates for 31 currencies between 1986 and
2010 yields an annualized mean return of 4.50% with a Sharpe ratio of 0.54. For comparison,
the Sharpe ratio of the US equity market during the same time period is 0.42. The carry trade
is therefore a highly profitable trading strategy that rivals the equity premium and demands an
explanation: Are carry traders being compensated for taking on risk? If so, what kind of risk are
they taking?
   We get the third fact mentioned above from decomposing these returns to the carry trade into a
static and a dynamic component. Because interest rates do not change much over time, re-sorting
the carry trade portfolio every month yields few benefits: on average, our carry trader would have
still brought home 70% of the same returns if she had used only three years of data on interest
rates at the beginning of the sample to learn which currencies usually have high and low interest
rates, sorted her portfolio once, and then never changed it afterwards. Most of the returns to the
carry trade thus come from the static component.
   In fact, Hassan and Mano (2019) show the incremental gain to re-sorting the carry trade portfolio
every month is usually not statistically distinguishable from zero. To see how one could assess which
variations in currency returns are statistically different from zero, note the carry trade return in
equation 2 is simply the covariance between currency returns at t + 1 and interest differentials at
time t. Thus, we can evaluate the expected return to the carry trade using a regression of the
following form:
                                                     f
                              rxi,t+1 - rxt+1 =  ct rit - rf
                                                           t +
                                                                   ct
                                                                   i,t+1 ,                         (3)

where rxt+1 denotes the mean return across all foreign currencies at t + 1. In this regression,
we can interpret  ct as the elasticity of expected currency returns with respect to interest rate
differentials ­ a measure of how much of the interest rate differential carry traders can expect to
pocket, net of any systematic depreciations. (For this interpretation, it is important that the right-
hand-side variable in the regression, like the portfolio weights in equation (2), must be known to
investors at time t.) In our sample of 31 currencies, we estimate    ^ct = 0.57(s.e. = 0.19). Hence,

within any time period, investing in high-interest-rate currencies yield significantly higher returns
than low-interest-rate currencies, although part of the interest rate differential gets wiped out by
predictable depreciations of high-interest-rate currencies. Specifically, our estimate implies that for
every dollar carry traders make on interest differentials, they lose 1-0.57=0.43 dollars on predictable
depreciations. We can thus conclude that high-interest-rate currencies depreciate on average, but
not by enough to eliminate the interest differential.

                                                  7
   Measuring Risk-free Interest Rates and Currency Returns

   In the US, we often regard T-Bills as risk free. However, even if we assume the US government
   cannot default, yields on the government debt of many countries are contaminated with the
   possibility of government default. For this reason, most of the recent literature constructs
   synthetic risk-free rates using currency forward contracts and applying covered interest parity
   (CIP) (Lustig et al., 2011; Du and Schreger, 2016).a To understand CIP, consider again our
   example of Japan and New Zealand, and suppose each country has a risk-free savings account
   denominated in its national currency. A Japanese investor with access to both accounts and
   to currency forward contracts then has two ways to make a risk-free investment in yen. First,
   she can simply save at the yen deposit rate. Alternatively, she can convert yen into New
   Zealand dollars at the spot exchange rate, invest the dollars at the local savings rate, and
   sign a forward contract to exchange her dollars back to yen at the end of her investment
   period. Both strategies are risk free because the spot and forward exchange rates are known
   today. Therefore, if no arbitrage occurs, the two strategies must yield the same return:

                                            f                    f              S
                                       1 + rJP Y         = (1 + rN ZD ) ×         ,                            (4)
                                                                                F
                                    yen risk-free rate
                                                           Implied yen risk-free rate


   where S and F denote the spot and forward exchange rates, respectively. Taking logs on
   both sides of this equation shows rJP Y - rN ZD = s - f ; the difference in risk-free interest
   rates must equal the difference between the (log) spot and forward exchange rates. This
   difference is known as the forward premium. As a result, we can reliably measure risk-free
   interest rate differentials from forward prices, even if a government's ability to repay its debts
   may be in question.b For this reason, commercial providers of the carry trade also tend to
   implement it by buying and selling forward contracts, rather than by trading corporate or
   government bonds.
      a
        A forward contract is a rate at which a bank agrees to exchange one currency for another at a pre-specified
   date in the future.
      b
        Prior to 2007, deviations from CIP have been on average close to zero. However, CIP deviations increased
   dramatically in magnitude for a number of countries during the Global Financial Crisis. This has led to a
   resurgence of interest in CIP deviations (see Du et al. (2018)).


   We should note some confusion in the literature on this point. In many papers, authors show
regressions of exchange rates on interest rate differentials with a country-specific intercept:

                                                  f      f
                                   si,t+1 = i +  ri,t - rU S,t + i,t+1 ,                                              (5)



                                                            8
and interpret the fact that the slope coefficient  is often negative as evidence that investors
expect high-interest-rate currencies to appreciate instead of depreciate. This finding has prompted
a considerable theoretical literature trying to rationalize extremely volatile currency risk premia
that are negatively correlated with predicted depreciations (the "Fama conditions", Backus et al.
(2001)). However, this interpretation is incorrect, because a regression with currency fixed effects,
such as equation 5, is not predictive ­ investors at time t do not know the fixed effect for each
currency. Hassan and Mano (2019) show that once one corrects for this discrepancy between
realized and predicted appreciations, one recovers results consistent with the view that, on average,
investors should expect high-interest-rate currencies to depreciate, not appreciate.3
       To summarize, the carry trade is highly profitable because highly persistent differences exist in
risk-free interest rates across currencies that are only partially reversed by predictable deprecia-
tions. Taken together, these stylized facts form the empirical basis for the notion that long-lasting
differences may exist in the risk characteristics of different currencies.
       In addition to these major stylized facts, researchers have also documented a number of addi-
tional patterns in violations of UIP that have so far received relatively less attention from theorists.
For example, Chinn and Meredith (2004) look at long-term bonds and find UIP tends to hold
better at longer maturities. In other words, the currency of the high-interest-rate country tends to
depreciate more over longer periods of time to negate some of the differences in interest rates. In
related work, Lustig et al. (2019) show monthly carry trade returns also decrease with the maturity
of the bonds used to implement it. Lustig et al. (2014) show another highly profitable trading strat-
egy in which investors buy non-US currencies whenever the average interest rate among advanced
economies is higher than that of the US (the dollar trade).


2.2      Interest Rate Differentials as Differences in Risk Premia

The conventional approach in financial economics for attributing differences in returns to risk is to
construct a risk factor and check to what extent differences in covariance with this risk factor can
account for differences in returns. Because knowing exactly what kind of risks investors may worry
about may be difficult in practice, a popular approach, going back to Fama (1976), is to construct
this risk factor directly from asset returns. This method has been highly successful in studying
stock returns, where researchers sort stocks based on some characteristic that is associated with
a profitable trading strategy (e.g., the firm's market capitalization), and then divide them into a
small number of portfolios based on the sort. The first portfolio typically contains stocks with
   3
     This finding, of course, does not preclude the possibility that investors may expect or may have expected some
high-interest-rate currencies to appreciate in specific historical circumstances. That is, the Fama conditions may be
relevant in specific instances, but they do not describe the typical behavior of a typical currency in our sample.


                                                         9
the lowest values of the characteristic of interest (e.g., the smallest firms), and the last portfolio
contains assets with the highest values (e.g., the largest firms). A risk factor is then constructed
by taking the difference in returns between the first and last portfolio. Researchers determine a
risk factor explains the differences in mean portfolio returns by running regressions of the returns
to the remaining portfolios on the risk factor, and showing those portfolios with higher regression
coefficients ("loadings") on the risk factor also yield higher expected returns.4
       In a seminal paper, Lustig et al. (2011) apply these techniques to currencies and provide sys-
tematic evidence that the greater returns obtained from investing in high-interest-rate currencies
result from greater exposure to what they call the carry trade risk factor. For every month be-
tween November 1983 and December 2009, the authors sort currencies into six portfolios based
on their risk-free rate differential relative to the US dollar. The first portfolio contains currencies
with the lowest risk-free rates and the last portfolio contains currencies with the highest risk-free
rates. The authors then construct the carry trade risk factor by taking the difference in the returns
between the portfolio containing the highest-interest-rate currencies and the portfolio containing
the lowest-interest-rate currencies.
       Lustig et al. (2011) then regress the returns of each of their currency portfolios on the carry
trade risk factor, and show the portfolios with higher-interest-rate currencies obtain a higher average
return and also covary more positively with the risk factor. An increase in the loading on the carry
trade risk factor from 0 to 1 is associated with a highly significant increase in excess returns of
5.5% per year.
       In this sense, Lustig et al. (2011) identify a common source of risk in currency markets that can
account for cross-sectional differences in currency returns. However, the major drawback of this
method is that it does not reveal the ultimate source of risk. In other words, we know exchange
rates and currency returns co-move in a way that suggests common exposure to risk, but we do not
know the economic forces that drive this co-movement.
       Many researchers have therefore tried to identify relationships between currency returns and
macro-financial variables to understand the sources of this currency risk. Most appealing from a
theoretical perspective, Lustig and Verdelhan (2007) show that low-interest-rate currencies provide
a hedge against US consumption growth risk. Low-interest-rate currencies systematically appreciate
when US consumption growth is low, while high-interest-rate currencies tend to depreciate. In this
sense, low-interest-rate currencies provide a hedge against US consumption risk, explaining why
US investors may accept a lower interest rates and returns when investing in them.
   4
    For example, Fama and French (1992) construct two risk factors by sorting US equities into portfolios based on
market capitalization and book-to-market ratio, and show portfolios of stocks with greater exposure to these two risk
factors obtain higher average returns.



                                                         10
       Other studies highlight the resiliency of low-interest-rate currencies to periods of financial tur-
moil. Lettau et al. (2014) show that currencies with low interest rates tend to appreciate when
US equity markets perform badly and, in this sense, have a lower "downside beta," providing a
hedge to stock market investors. They argue this variation in downside betas accounts for much of
the returns to the carry trade. Similarly, both Lustig et al. (2011) and Campbell et al. (2010) ar-
gue that low-interest-rate currencies tend to appreciate in periods when equity markets are volatile,
whereas high-interest-rate currencies tend to depreciate. Instead of using data from equity markets,
Menkhoff et al. (2012) measure periods' financial market turmoil using average realized exchange
rate volatility. High-interest-rate currencies tend to depreciate in response to increases in the aver-
age realized exchange-rate volatility, whereas low-interest-rate currencies tend to appreciate. Thus,
low-interest-rate currencies also provide a hedge against global exchange rate volatility.
       Another strand of the literature stresses the presence of crash risk as a possible driver of currency
excess returns. Brunnermeier et al. (2008) study eight major currencies and show high-interest-
rate currencies exhibit a greater chance of experiencing large devaluations (i.e., crash risk), whereas
lower-interest-rate currencies do not. Jurek (2014) formally assesses the share of carry trade re-
turns explained by currency crash risk by constructing carry trades that are protected from crash
risk. Specifically, Jurek (2014) proposes to combine the carry trade with a portfolio of currency
options that protect against large exchange-rate fluctuations (around 1.4 times the magnitude of
the monthly standard deviation). He finds that buying protection from crash risk decreases the
returns to the carry trade by about a third. Thus, the presence of crash risk explains about a
third of the carry trade. Farhi et al. (2015) propose a structural model of currency returns that
are driven by the presence of crash risk. The authors calibrate the model using currency-options
data and also find eliminating crash risk can reduce carry trade returns by a third.5
       Ultimately, each of these papers highlights different ways in which high-interest-rate currencies
may be riskier than low-interest-rate currencies. Their common thread is that persistent differ-
ences in the returns to investing in different currencies reflect persistent differences in risk premia.
Low-interest-rate currencies provide lower returns to investors because they are safer and tend to
appreciate during periods of economic distress. Meanwhile, high-interest-rate currencies depreciate
during periods of economic distress and must therefore reward investors with higher excess returns.
   5
    These papers are also related to a larger literature on "peso problems" (Lewis, 2011), which occur when interest
rates are high to compensate risk-neutral investors for an anticipated future currency devaluation.




                                                        11
3        Macroeconomic Models of Currency and Country Risk

Prompted by this reduced-form evidence, the theoretical literature has identified several macroe-
conomic forces that may make a given currency safer or riskier from the perspective of global
investors. Although which of these forces may be most important in practice has been the subject
of an ongoing debate, many of these microfounded models share a common structure, which we
can summarize using just a few key equations.
        Consider a world economy in which international assets are priced by the marginal utility of
an international investor, mT , which will be our measure of "good" and "bad" times. Times
are good when mT is low, and times are bad when it is high. In different models, mT may
be the marginal utility of consumption of traded goods (the part of consumption that is shared
internationally), the marginal utility of consumption of a key investor who intermediates between
segmented international markets, or the capital constraint of a financial intermediary. Households
consume a country-specific final good, the price of which (accounted for in a common unit) depends
on mT and a country-specific shock, xn ,


                                             pn = amT + bxn .                                           (6)


The country-specific shock interchangeably may stem from a country-specific supply, demand, or
monetary shock; in other words, it is a stand-in for any factor that affects the price of consumption
in one country more than in others. The higher xn , the higher the price of domestic consumption
                                                                      2 ) and x  N (0,  2 ) are
relative to that in other countries. For simplicity, assume mT  N (0, mT       n       x

normally distributed, not necessarily independent, shocks and a and b are positive constants.
        The real exchange rate, Sf,h , between two countries f and h is the relative price of their
respective consumption bundles. In logs,


                                       sf,h = pf - ph = b(xf - xh ),                                    (7)


where lowercase variables denote logs and the second equality substitutes equation 6. Because
of xn , the relative price of consumption may differ between the two countries, allowing the real
exchange rate to move. When the price of consumption in country f increases, its consumption
bundle appreciates relative to country h. In this sense, we can speak of "currencies" even without
formally introducing money into the model.6
        By definition, the risk-free bond in country h pays ph with certainty, whereas that in country f
    6
    For this reason, speaking of "country risk" rather than "currency risk" may be more appropriate. See the
discussion in the text box labelled "Currency vs. Country Risk" below.


                                                     12
pays pf with certainty, so that each country's risk-free bond pays exactly one unit of that country's
consumption bundle with certainty. However, because the real exchange rate may fluctuate, country
h's risk-free bond is not risk free from the perspective of households in country f , and vice versa.
For this reason, one country's risk-free bond may be more expensive than the other country's risk-
free bond. The risk-free rate of interest is the yield to maturity of the risk-free bond. Hence, the
country with the more expensive risk-free bond automatically must have the lower risk-free rate of
interest. In this sense, any model with a variable real exchange rate as in equation 7 may produce
differences in risk-free interest rates across countries.
       Different theories of such differences in interest rates apply elementary asset pricing to equation
7 to show the log expected return to borrowing in country h and to lending in country f is

                                    f            f
                                   rf + Esf,h - rh = cov (mT , ph - pf ) ,                                      (8)

       f
where rn is the risk-free interest rate in country n.7 Equation 8 shows the currency that tends
to appreciate when mT is high pays a lower expected return. Moreover, if Esf,h is not large
enough to overturn the interest rate differential (as is the case in the data), this currency also has
a lower risk-free interest rate. In other words, a currency that appreciates in bad times (e.g., in
times when consumption goods are expensive everywhere) provides a hedge against consumption
risk and therefore pays lower returns in equilibrium.
   Currency vs. Country Risk

   Although we follow the literature in referring to the spread in equation 8 as stemming from
   "currency risk," note that equations 7 and 8, as well as virtually all models written on
   the subject, describe the stochastic behavior of the real, not the nominal, exchange rate.
   Fundamentally, what we mean by "currency risk" is therefore the risk that comes from
   country-specific shocks to a country's consumer price index. Different models may invoke
   various supply, demand, or monetary shocks for this purpose, but most models we discuss
   below actually do so without formally introducing money into the model. In this sense,
   speaking of "country-specific risk" or "country risk" is also accurate.


       Equations 6 and 8 are the main ingredients of risk-based models of differences in interest rates
across countries. Different approaches identify various reasons why countries differ in the degree to
which their price indices covary with mT .
   7
    Esf,h is defined as the logarithm of the ratio of the countries' expected real price changes. See Appendix A for
a formal derivation.




                                                        13
Spillovers: Country Size and Trade Centrality                         Perhaps the most obvious reason for such
differences in covariance to arise in the context of a microfounded model are differences in how
important a given country is for the world economy. In particular, most models of exchange rate
determination suggest any shock that raises the price of consumption in a larger economy also
makes the part of consumption that is shared internationally more expensive. Thus, mT tends to
rise more in response to a shock that raises the price of consumption in a larger country. As a
result, their currencies retain value precisely when the marginal utility of international investors is
high. The currencies of larger countries are therefore safer, have naturally lower interest rates, and
pay lower returns to international investors (Martin, 2012; Hassan, 2013).
       This result is easiest to see in a frictionless model with traded and non-traded goods. In such
models, mT coincides with the marginal utility of traded consumption, which must be equalized
across all countries in equilibrium, and pn coincides with the marginal utility of overall consumption
in a given country n. Whatever country-specific supply, demand, or monetary shock raises a given
country's pn then typically also prompts this country to import more traded goods. Whereas a
small country's imports, by definition, have little or no effect on the world supply of traded goods,
rising imports by a large country make traded goods relatively scarce in world markets, raising
their price, and increasing mT , so that


                                                mT = -c            n x n ,                                         (9)
                                                               n


where c is a positive constant and n is a measure of country n's share of world GDP. It then
follows that larger countries' consumption bundles tend to appreciate when mT is high. Comparing
equation 9 with equations 7 and 8 yields

                                       f            f              2
                                      rf + Esf,h - rh = g (h - f ) x ,                                            (10)


so that larger countries have lower interest rates, and their currencies are a safer store of value and
pay lower returns on average.8
       Variations of this result in Hassan (2013) also show that, by the same logic, firms producing
non-traded (i.e., country-specific) goods in larger countries should have a lower cost of capital, and
joining a currency union (an area that shares a common monetary shock) may lower interest rates
in the participating countries.
       More recent work by Richmond (2019) highlights another force that may make a country's
   8
    If we allow for heterogeneity in the volatility of country-specific shocks xn , the right-hand side of this formula
                          2         2
generalizes to read g (h x,h - f x,f  ), so that countries also have lower interest rates if they have more volatile
country-specific shocks. To and Tran (2020) show evidence of this pattern in the data.


                                                          14
economy more important for the world economy: its trade centrality. Shocks to countries that are
located near the center of the network of world trade, such as Singapore and the Netherlands, may
have an outsized impact on the production of traded goods ­ even if they are small. To arrive
at this result, Richmond introduces multiple countries and non-traded goods into a model where
traded goods are produced with intermediate inputs through a network of input-output linkages
(Long and Plosser, 1983; Acemoglu et al., 2012). Within this framework, shocks that affect central
countries spill over more to the rest of the world because these countries add a (small) amount of
value to a large number of goods produced in the world. Shocks that raise the price of consumption
in these central countries have an outsized effect on mT because they are more disruptive to global
supply chains. Therefore, the currencies of central countries are safer and pay lower interest rates
than the currencies of peripheral countries.9
       This result relies on two key assumptions: First, shocks to the production of traded and non-
traded goods are positively correlated within countries. In other words, the shocks that increase
the price of domestic consumption must also raise the costs of its traded goods. Second, these
shocks to production are more correlated across countries if two countries trade more with each
other. (Both of these assumptions have broad empirical support.) Richmond (2019) can then show
mT = -c        n n x n - d   n n xn ,   where d is a positive constant and n is a measure of the country's
trade centrality.


Differences in Stochastic Properties of Consumer Price Indices While both spillover-
based approaches (size and centrality) put structure on which countries' shocks are more important
for the marginal utility of international investors (mT ), another set of papers study innate differences
in the stochastic properties of countries' consumer price indices (pn ).
       Farhi and Gabaix (2016) study a model where countries differ in their resilience to rare worldwide
disasters. The non-traded goods of resilient countries increase in value whenever a disaster strikes,
so that these resilient countries appreciate upon the disaster's impact ­ making their currencies a
safer store of value. Resilient countries therefore have lower interest rates, though how researchers
should distinguish resilient from non-resilient countries in practice remains unclear.
       Maggiori (2017) argues the relatively low interest rates in the US may be explained if foreign
exporters have relatively more trouble accessing trade credit in large financial crises. In his model,
mT depends on intermediary credit constraints, so that "bad times" occur when obtaining credit is
difficult (i.e., in a financial crisis). If these credit constraints bind relatively more in countries that
are less financially developed than the US, trade credit needed for shipping goods from the rest of
   9
    Lustig and Richmond (2020) provide further empirical support that currencies of countries that are geographically
farther away from all other countries are riskier.


                                                         15
the world to the US becomes relatively more expensive than trade credit for shipping goods from
the US to the rest of the world in a crisis ­ making the US consumption bundle relatively more
expensive. He suggests this may be one reason why the US dollar tends to appreciate in extreme
crisis periods, making the US dollar a safer store of value for international investors.
   Ready et al. (2017) note that a number of "commodity countries," such as Norway and Australia,
largely export basic commodities, such as coal, oil, and iron ore, but rely much more on imports of
finished goods than "producer countries," such as Japan and Germany, which export these goods.
In their model, worldwide shipping capacity can only adjust slowly over time. In a boom, when
output of traded goods is high, more commodities must be shipped from the commodity countries to
the producer countries, and more finished goods in the opposite direction. This increased demand
for shipping drives up trade costs disproportionately more in the commodity countries because, in
effect, any finished goods they consume must travel farther. Therefore, the price of consumption in
commodity countries increases in a boom (when mT is low) and decreases in a downturn, relative
to the price of consumption in producer countries. It follows that, in effect, commodity countries
appreciate in "good times" and depreciate in "bad times." With quadratic shipping costs, we have

                                                                                     2
                                                          Finished goods shipped
               pCommodity Country - pProducer Country                                    .
                                                            Shipping Capacity

An additional implication of this model is that the real exchange rates of commodity countries are
positively correlated with worldwide commodity prices.
   Powers (2015) derives similar results without appealing to stochastic trade costs, but instead
argues commodity booms drive up wages in commodity countries, so that local non-traded goods
become more expensive through a Balassa-Samuleson-type labor-cost effect. The consumption
bundles of commodity exporters therefore tend to appreciate in worldwide booms and depreciate in
worldwide busts, making their currencies riskier than those of non-commodity-exporting countries.
   Aside from commodity-producing countries, Wiriadinata (2020) points out that countries that
have a large amount of outstanding dollar-denominated external debt tend to depreciate whenever
the dollar appreciates, and have high interest rates and currency returns. She rationalizes this
pattern with the wealth effect: when the US dollar appreciates, the real value of dollar-denominated
debt increases, effectively making countries that borrow in dollars poorer. This negative wealth
shock in turn reduces domestic demand, lowering the relative price of domestic non-traded goods,
and thus depreciating the currencies of countries that borrow heavily in dollars. Jiang (2020) shows
that countries' exchange rates tend to depreciate as their fiscal deficits increase. As a result, the
countries with fiscal deficits that are more correlated with global deficits have riskier currencies.



                                                  16
Portfolio Balance Models A third approach to understanding currency risk directly models the
capital constraints of financial intermediaries engaged in currency trading. Gabaix and Maggiori
(2015) consider a world in which a financier with limited risk-bearing capacity must absorb any
imbalances in the supply and demand for currencies across countries. The financier is willing to do
so only if she earns positive expected returns on the currencies she holds in her portfolio, so that
any currency that is in excess supply must earn higher expected returns in equilibrium. Gabaix and
Maggiori (2015) suggest that, in practice, financiers are holding assets of net-debtor countries. As
a result, investing in net-debtor countries' currencies should obtain positive excess returns. Della
Corte et al. (2016) provide systematic evidence for this hypothesis in the data, and furthermore
show the currencies of net-debtor countries systematically depreciate in times of financial turmoil.
   Malamud and Schrimpf (2020) consider a model in which currency risk is priced by the risk-
bearing capacity of country-specific financial intermediaries. Financial intermediaries with higher
risk-bearing capacity provide relatively more insurance to their households against economic down-
turns. As a result, their currencies are more valuable and tend to appreciate during times of
economic distress.
   Liao and Zhang (2020) study a portfolio balance model in which the stochastic properties of
currencies are determined by investor hedging demands. When investors in a net-debtor country
trade with financial intermediaries for the purposes of hedging their net foreign asset position,
the financial intermediaries must sell the net debtor country's currency, which leads to currency
depreciation. In practice, investors tend to increase their hedging demands during periods of
financial turmoil. As a result, the currencies of net-debtor countries tend to depreciate during
periods of financial turmoil and are thus systematically riskier.


3.1   Reduced-Form Evidence

Although many of the theoretical papers surveyed above provide detailed evidence on each of the
particular channels making a given currency safer or riskier from the perspective of world investors,
the literature currently lacks a comprehensive evaluation of their relative importance. As a first step
in this direction, Table 1 shows a set of regressions of currency returns for 31 currencies between
1988 and 2016 on variables that, according to various theories, should be associated with lower
interest rates and returns.
   The first three columns show a one standard deviation increase in a country's size (GDP share),
trade centrality, and net foreign asset position are associated with 0.5pp, 0.4pp, and 0.8pp decreases
in the returns on the country's currency, respectively. In addition, column 4 shows that currencies
that are stabilized relative to the US dollar or the euro (a lower FX Allowed Deviation) also have


                                                  17
                             Table 1: Currency excess returns and characteristics


                                                 (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)             (5)
              GDP Share                       -0.50                                   -1.27          -1.51
                                               (0.25)                                  (0.34)         (0.39)
              Trade Centrality                              -0.41                                      0.43
                                                            (0.22)                                    (0.26)
              NIIP / GDP                                                -0.84                        -0.85
                                                                         (0.25)                       (0.23)
              FX Allowed Deviation                                                     0.20           0.15
                                                                                       (0.05)         (0.08)
              Fixed Effects                     Time         Time         Time          Time          Time
              Num. obs.                         7,517        7,517        6,177         6,488         5,186
              R2                                 0.27        0.27          0.32          0.28          0.33

Notes: This table presents regressions of currency excess returns on currency-area characteristics. GDP Share is a currency
area's share of world GDP. Centrality is a currency area's trade centrality taken from Richmond (2019). NIIP / GDP is a
currency area's net international investment position as a share of GDP (Della Corte et al., 2016). FX Allowed Deviation
captures each currency's maximum allowable annual exchange rate deviation relative to its target currency according to Ilzetzki
et al. (2019). Standard errors are clustered by currency region.  p < 0.01,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.1



significantly lower returns. (We discuss this finding in section 4.2 below.) When we combine all
four variables in column 5, trade centrality loses significance.
    Although these results are suggestive, they are also inadequate. Because interest differentials are
highly persistent, all of these regressions rely primarily on cross-sectional variation for identification.
With fewer than 40 currencies for which we have reliable data, our statistical power for disentangling
the effect of multiple variables is limited. Moreover, these regressions have no way to account for the
ease with which each of the candidate mechanisms can account for the various auxiliary predictions
of each of these models. A key challenge to the literature is thus to develop and compare quantitative
models of currency risk.


3.2     Quantitative Models and the Currency Premium Puzzle

Quantitative work on currency risk is perhaps surprisingly under-developed and a major area
for future research. Few papers even attempt to match differences in interest rates as large as
those shown in Figure 1, and perhaps even more surprisingly, not a single paper speaks to the
correspondingly large differences in capital-to-output ratios between countries we see in the data.
Two major reasons explain this lack of progress.
    The first is a little recognized asset pricing puzzle ­ we call it the currency premium puzzle.
The essence of this puzzle is that the surprisingly large currency risk premia pose a fundamentally
different challenge to theorists than the equity premium puzzle. To see this challenge, recall that


                                                              18
much of contemporary asset pricing theory was developed to reconcile a large equity premium with
the fact that aggregate consumption data are relatively smooth. To rationalize a mean excess
return of stocks over bonds of 8% with a standard deviation of equity returns of 16%, as we see in
US markets, Hansen and Jagannathan (1991) show the stochastic discount factor in the US (the
marginal utility of overall consumption in most macroeconomic models) mU S must have a standard
deviation of at least 0.5, whereas the standard deviation of annual aggregate US consumption
growth is an order of magnitude smaller (about 0.03).
    To see how this challenge differs from the currency premium puzzle, we can rewrite equation 8
to read as follows:
                                f            f    1
                               rf + Esf,h - rh = - (var(mf ) - var(mh )) ,                                      (11)
                                                  2
where var(mn ) denotes the variance of the stochastic discount factor measured in units of the
consumption bundle specific to country n.10 Thus, if we assume the standard deviation of mJapan
is 0.5 (at the Hansen and Jagannathan bound), the standard deviation of mN ewZealand would have
to be 0.4 ­ or 20% lower ­ to justify the observed differences in interest rates of around 4.5pp.
That is, to solve the currency premium puzzle, a quantitative model not only has to make marginal
utility much more volatile than aggregate consumption, but also has to amplify differences in the
volatility of marginal utility across countries to the point that they are multiple times larger than
the standard deviation of aggregate consumption growth. Although many modern finance models
are equipped to do the former, whether they can be re-tooled to also achieve the latter is unclear.
    An added difficulty for these models is that, empirically, the majority of differences in currency
returns come from differences in interest rates, and not from predictable depreciations. Technically,
matching this empirical fact requires generating large differences across countries in var [mn ] without
generating large differences in conditional expectations Et [mn ].
    The second major challenge to microfounded quantitative models of currency returns is that
all of these microfoundations of course rely on introducing substantial heterogeneity in various
dimensions (country size, trade centrality, commodity endowments, etc.). This requirement con-
trasts with traditional solution methods in finance and macroeconomics, where the former tend to
be designed for closed economies, whereas the latter either target two symmetric countries or one
small country that is measure zero in the world economy. Introducing a large, but finite, number
of heterogeneous agents that make decisions affecting the equilibrium allocation within a dynamic
framework while solving for risk premia is thus a challenge for which relatively few tools exist.
  10
     This formulation is originally due to Backus et al. (2001). However, the traditional reading of this equation,
prior to the work by Lustig et al. (2011) and Hassan and Mano (2019), has not focused on rationalizing persistent
differences in currency returns, but rather the (as we argue overstated) idea that currencies tend to appreciate when
they have unusually high interest rates ­ the Fama conditions. See Appendix B for a formal derivation.



                                                         19
   Foreign Asset Portfolios and the Reserve Currency Paradox

   While we have focused our discussion on models' implications for interest differentials and
   violations of UIP, most models make additional predictions about the returns on other as-
   sets, the composition of equilibrium portfolios, and the co-movement of consumption across
   countries. One common prediction in models where households share risk across countries
   is that countries with low interest rates should also be net importers of insurance from the
   rest of the world.
      This result is easiest to see in equation 11: countries with lower interest rates have more
   volatile marginal utility, so they should need and want relatively more insurance. That is,
   the same forces that make a given country's currency relatively safe will also tend to make
   this country a net importer of insurance from the world market.
      Although the link between country risk and net foreign asset portfolios has not been
   systematically studied in the data, this prediction appears at odds with the US data, which
   is generally seen as having both a low interest rate and being a net exporter of insurance
   to the rest of the world (US investors tend to hold equity abroad, whereas foreign investors
   largely hold US safe assets, such as T-Bills (Gourinchas and Rey, 2007; Gourinchas et al.,
   2017)). Maggiori (2017) calls this puzzling pattern in the US data the "reserve currency
   paradox." Aside from resolving this puzzle for the US, future research should also explore
   whether the same puzzling pattern extends to the portfolio holdings of other low-interest-rate
   countries.

    Colacito et al. (2018) make an important first step in this direction by adding multiple countries
that differ in their exposure to a global long-run endowment shock to a quantitative model with
long-run risk and recursive preferences. They measure these different exposures in the data for
the G7 economies and argue these exposures can be thought of as a reduced-form representation
of the various fundamental drivers of country risk surveyed above, which all ultimately suggest
some countries are more affected by global downturns than others. Colacito et al. (2018) then
show a reasonable calibration of their model can replicate large differences in currency returns
across countries that align nicely with the returns on high and low-interest-rate portfolios in Lustig
et al. (2011).11 An added benefit of their framework is that the combination of long-run risk with
recursive preferences also resolves the forward premium puzzle and matches a number of other facts
about the dynamics of exchange rates and interest rates, as the authors show in their earlier work
  11
     Interestingly, because the model produces a tight link between interest rates and the portfolios held by each
country (see our discussion of the reserve currency paradox above), this sorting on interest rates closely corresponds
to a sorting of currencies on the country's net foreign asset position as suggested by Della Corte et al. (2016).



                                                         20
(Colacito and Croce, 2011).
         However, one difficulty the authors were unable to resolve is that the two thirds of the carry
trade returns in their model stem from predicted appreciations of high-interest-rate currencies,
which is at odds with the data, where currencies with high interest rates depreciate systematically.
This issue, and tying the reduced-form exposures to global risk to their economic origins, thus
remain major areas for future research.


4         Currency Risk and the Allocation of Capital across Countries

Equation 1 suggests firms in countries with high-interest-rate currencies should accumulate less
capital and operate at a higher marginal product of capital than those in low-interest-rate countries.
Indeed, solving for differences in capital intensity across countries within models of currency risk
yields this result. For example, Hassan et al. (2016) find that in a model with differences in country
size,
                                                    f            f
                                       kf - kh = d rh - Esf,h - rf ,                                               (12)

where d is a positive constant and kn denotes capital intensity in country n. That is, the class
of models surveyed above generally predicts long-lasting violations of UIP should pass through to
capital accumulation, so that currency risk directly affects the allocation of capital across countries
and firms.
         This theoretical result can be thought of in two equivalent ways. First, firms based in countries
with safer currencies should have a lower cost of capital, which increases their value in world markets
and prompts them to invest more.12 Second, from a risk-sharing perspective, accumulating more
capital in countries that are large or in other ways "systemic" is efficient, because shocks that
affect consumption in these countries tend to spill over more and affect allocations globally. A
social planner thus has a precautionary motive to allocate more capital to the countries that have
the largest spillovers. That is, one need not appeal to prices to understand the effect of currency
risk on capital accumulation.
         Figure 2 shows a strong negative relationship between capital accumulation and currency excess
returns for our sample of 31 countries. The slope shown suggests a 1pp increase in the returns on
a given currency is associated with a 0.26 level decrease in the issuing country's capital-to-output
ratio (corresponding to a decrease of 0.24 of one standard deviation). Altogether, variation in
currency premia accounts for slightly less than a quarter of the variation in capital-to-output ratios
    12
    This lower cost of capital generally applies to all firms that produce country-specific goods (whose value naturally
co-moves with the exchange rate), but not to firms that produce a homogeneous traded good.



                                                          21
across countries. The corresponding regression of K/Y on interest rate differentials similarly shows
a negative relationship (coef = -0.10). The aggregate data thus show clear evidence consistent with
a link between currency risk premia and capital intensity.

                              Figure 2: Capital intensity and currency excess returns



                          6




                          5
                    K/Y




                          4




                          3




                          2



                              -6           -4               -2                0               2
                                                  Currency Excess Return (%)
Notes: This figure shows the relationship between average currency excess returns and average capital-to-output ratios across
currency regions. The sample comprises the same set of 31 currencies from 1988 to 2016 used to produce Table 1. The line
of best fit has a slope of -0.26 (s.e. = 0.01). R-sqr = 0.23. The corresponding coefficient on a regression of capital-to-output
ratios on interest rate differentials is -0.10.


    Pushing beyond the aggregate data, Richers (2020) shows direct evidence of an effect of currency
premia on the cost of capital at the firm level: using data from the primary issuance of 100,000
corporate bonds of non-financial firms in 98 countries, he shows that differences in risk-free interest
rates pass through almost one for one to firms' cost of borrowing. That is, firms borrowing in low-
interest-rate currencies have cheaper access to credit than their counterparts that borrow in high-
interest-rate currencies. These differences in bond-level yields cannot be explained with observable
characteristics of firms issuing in different currencies (e.g., their credit rating, accounting ratios,
etc.), and even exist within firms that issue in multiple currencies within the same month. That is,
the same firm issuing in Japanese yen and New Zealand dollars in the same month pays a several
percentage point higher yield to maturity on the latter bond than the former bond.
    Consistent with these patterns, Richers (2020) also shows that firms that are headquartered
in countries with higher interest rates produce more output per unit of capital installed, again
suggesting these firms indeed operate at a higher marginal product of capital.
    David et al. (2016) add further evidence in favor of a risk-based interpretation of these patterns.


                                                              22
They show that although the returns to capital investment are higher in emerging market economies,
they are also more correlated with the US stock market. This pattern suggests emerging market
economies are more exposed to systematic risk, which the authors interpret as long-run growth risk.
Thus, capital investment in emerging markets should pay higher returns to compensate investors for
this risk exposure. The authors go on to calibrate a model with recursive utility where countries are
exposed to long-run growth risk according to their empirical correlation with the US stock market.
Their model is able to quantitatively account for a significant portion of the variation in capital
accumulation across countries.
       This link between a country's risk characteristics and capital accumulation poses challenges and
opportunities for at least two ongoing debates in the macroeconomics literature that have yet to be
explored systematically and may prove fertile ground for future research. We outline each of these
potential applications briefly below.


4.1      The Lucas Paradox

Perhaps the most important conclusion from this line of research is that differences in interest
rates between countries are tied to fundamental forces determining their risk characteristics and
are therefore here to stay for the long term. This view is at odds with a long history of thought
in macroeconomics going back to Solow (1956) that has traditionally viewed differences in the
marginal product of capital across countries as transitory. In particular, a large literature following
Lucas (1990) has been trying to reconcile large differences in the measured marginal product of
capital across countries with the fact that not enough capital seems to be flowing across countries to
equalize these marginal products, particularly from developed to emerging economies (the "Lucas
Paradox").
       The existing literature has debated various potential resolutions to the Lucas paradox and
the associated lack in convergence in GDP per capita across countries. These resolutions include
accounting for heterogeneity in the protection of property rights (Hall and Jones, 1997), in taxation
rates (Jorgenson, 1996), in depreciation rates, in the capital share of output (Karabarbounis and
Neiman, 2014), in distortions in the allocation of resources (Hsieh and Klenow, 2009), and in the
role of natural resources in production (Caselli and Feyrer, 2007; Monge-Naranjo et al., 2019).13
The common assumption in this literature, however, is that in the absence of these frictions, interest
rates, and the marginal product of capital should eventually equalize across countries.
  13
    To add another wrinkle into the debate, Coppola et al. (2020) show the vast majority of large developed countries
investment in emerging market firms occurs via these firms' affiliates in tax havens. This leads the official, residency
based, statistics of developed countries to substantially underestimate portfolio investments and the currency risk in
large emerging markets.



                                                          23
      To our knowledge, neither the role of persistent differences in risk free interest rates nor the
role of currency risk have been systematically evaluated relative to this literature. In other words,
one reason why we observe persistent differences in the marginal product of capital and see a
lack of convergence in GDP per capita across countries may simply be persistent differences in
currency and country risk. Thus, one avenue for future research is to test whether differences in
currency risk can account for the observed differences in capital-output ratios. If accounting for
differences in currency risk is indeed useful for understanding the Lucas paradox, then the task
of understanding the ultimate sources of currency risk still remains, as discussed in section 3.
However, these ultimate sources of currency risk must now also account for differences in capital
accumulation across countries.


4.2      Currency Risk and Exchange Rate Regimes

In addition to potentially shedding light on these long-standing puzzles about the lack of conver-
gence in M P K across countries, a recent paper by Hassan et al. (2020) argues the link between
the stochastic properties of a country's real exchange rate and the level of capital accumulation
also provides a new way of thinking about the costs and benefits of adopting different exchange
rate regimes. The authors note the pervasive practice among small and medium-sized economies
to stabilize their exchange rate relative to the US dollar or the euro (Ilzetzki et al., 2019) may
be thought of as an attempt to make their currencies (and by extension their economies) a safer
investment from the perspective of world investors.
      In their model, countries again differ in size, and the domestic prices of traded goods are sticky in
terms of the domestic currency, so that each country's central bank has some control of its country's
real exchange rate. When a small country stabilizes its exchange rate relative to a larger target
country, its real exchange rate inherits the stochastic properties of that larger target currency and
thus becomes safer from the perspective of world investors. A safer currency in turns comes with
a lower domestic risk-free rate, higher domestic capital accumulation, and higher wages.14 That is,
managing a country's exchange rate risk becomes a means of attracting international investment
and raising the world-market value of domestic firms. In the absence of policy coordination, small
countries then optimally choose to stabilize their exchange rates relative to the currency of the
largest economy in the world, which endogenously emerges as the world's anchor currency. Larger
economies instead optimally choose to float their exchange rates, because currency interventions
by larger countries are endogenously more expensive to maintain than those by smaller countries.
The model therefore predicts an equilibrium pattern of exchange rate arrangements that fits the
 14
      For evidence of the first result see column 4 of Table 1.



                                                            24
data, where almost all stabilizations target the same anchor currency (the USD), small countries
below a certain size stabilize, intermediate-sized countries maintain weaker stabilizations, and only
the largest economies in the world float their currencies.


5     Currency Risk, Macroprudential Regulation, and
      Monetary Policy

Beyond its consequences for the allocation of capital across countries, the study of currency risk
also potentially poses questions relating to monetary policy, macroprudential regulation, and the
sustainability of current account deficits.
    First, a large literature on the "currency mismatch" highlights that borrowing in foreign curren-
cies exposes the borrower to the risk of default in an event of an appreciation of the foreign currency
(Eichengreen and Hausmann, 1999; C´
                                  espedes et al., 2004, e.g). Indeed, although the propensity of
governments to issue debt in a foreign currency has decreased over time, firms often choose to issue
debt in low-interest-rate currencies ­ particularly those firms that are based in emerging markets
(Du and Schreger, 2017). Our discussion of currency risk adds an important wrinkle to this debate:
all currency mismatch is not created equal. Instead, if currencies such as the dollar and the euro
have low interest rates because they appreciate in times of economic distress, firms that borrow
in these currencies are effectively selling insurance against that distress, because the real value of
their liabilities increases in those states of the world. In other words, borrowing in low-interest-
rate currencies is not a free lunch, but instead exposes the borrower to systematic risk. This link
between borrowing in low-interest-rate currencies and systematic risk may provide a rationale for
regulatory intervention that limits the amount of foreign-denominated debt certain firms can issue.
    Recent evidence by Liao (2020), Richers (2020), and Salomao and Varela (2019) shows that
denominating part of their debt in low-interest-rate currencies allows firms to lower their overall
cost of capital, invest more, and lower their mean return on assets. Moreover, (di Giovanni et al.,
2019) shows firms can be further exposed to currency risk through foreign currency loans from
domestic banks, and that the availability of such loans within Turkey varies over time with global
shocks to international credit markets.15 In this sense, we have a growing body of evidence that
shows the upside of issuing debt in low-interest-rate currencies: a lower cost of capital.
    By contrast, very little is known about which firms, households, and governments can and
should take on the downside ­ the systematic risk. A number of recent papers suggest interesting
  15
     A related literature has highlighted the consequences of the currency denomination of corporate debt for the risk
of sovereign default (Du and Schreger, 2017; Ottonello and Perez, 2019).




                                                         25
interactions between currency risk, exchange rate policy, and regulation. Bocola and Lorenzoni
(2020) study one such example, where savers prefer to denominate deposits in dollars rather than the
domestic currency, because they expect the dollar to retain value and appreciate during recessions.
Domestic issuers meet this demand by denominating their debt in dollars, creating a currency
mismatch. Interestingly, the authors show ex-post bailouts to borrowers can be an attractive policy
alleviating the country's susceptibility to crises. Salomao and Varela (2019) develop a structural
model of the currency denomination of debt. In their model, productive firms with a high marginal
product of capital optimally take on currency risk. Moreover, the authors also highlight interesting
interactions between the local government's choice of exchange rate regime and the allocation of
currency exposure across firms. Keller (2019) studies foreign currency borrowing by corporations
in Peru and shows capital controls meant to reduce such foreign currency exposure may actually
end up increasing it. Du et al. (2020) instead analyze a model in which risk averse lenders demand
a risk premium for lending in the domestic currency, because the monetary authority would like to
inflate away domestic currency debt during economic downturns. Thus, governments without the
ability to commit to a low inflation target optimally issue foreign currency debt to avoid paying an
inflation risk premium on domestic currency debt.
   A second, potentially important implication of long-lasting differences in risk-free interest rates
is that countries with lower risk-free rates may be more likely to find themselves at the zero lower
bound on nominal interest rates. Although whether the Federal Reserve should raise its inflation
target in times of ultra-low rates has been debated (Coibion et al., 2012; Holston et al., 2017;
Mertens and Williams, 2020), we are unaware of any work on how inflation targets or other aspects
of monetary policy should vary across countries with ordinarily high and low risk-free rates.
   Finally, as already mentioned in our discussion of the Reserve Currency Paradox above, variation
in currency and country risk should also affect the composition of foreign assets countries hold, such
that some countries are naturally more able to hold risky portfolios (and provide insurance) than
others. Countries that hold riskier portfolios should then, on average, collect higher returns, which
may then enable them to sustain persistent current account deficits. While this link between deficits
and the amount of systematic risk held by different countries has received some attention for the US
(Caballero et al., 2008; Gourinchas and Rey, 2007; Gourinchas et al., 2017), a systematic evaluation
for the rest of the world is still outstanding.




                                                  26
6    The Dynamics of Currency Risk

Up to this point, we have focused our discussion on the cross-sectional variation in currency risk,
which has also been the focus of the most recent literature. A natural extension of this discussion
is to understand the variation in currency and country risk over time, and in particular the role
such fluctuations may play in driving variation in capital flows across borders.
    As stated in section 2, much of the early work on currency risk began as an attempt to under-
stand the forward premium puzzle -- the finding that, on average, high-interest-rate currencies do
not depreciate enough to wipe out any differences in interest rates. In addition, many studies have
highlighted an apparent disconnect between macroeconomic variables and variation in exchange
rates (Meese and Rogoff, 1983), and that exchange rates appear surprisingly volatile compared
with aggregate consumption growth (Backus and Smith, 1993). In response to these empirical
facts, a large theoretical literature has argued time variation in currency risk premia may be able
to jointly rationalize these facts (Fama, 1984; Backus et al., 2001).
    One strategy for introducing large amounts of time variation in currency risk premia involves
using more complicated investor preferences from the asset-pricing literature that have helped re-
solve other asset-pricing anomalies. Verdelhan (2010) proposes a model in which representative
investors of each country exhibit preferences for an exogenously specified "habit" level of consump-
tion. As a country's consumption approaches its habit level, the domestic investor becomes more
risk averse. This increase in risk-aversion lowers the domestic interest rate while inducing a pre-
dictable depreciation. This additional force moving exchange rates then rationalizes the apparent
exchange rate disconnect we see in the data. (In the extreme, this mechanism can also rationalize
a situation where investors expect currencies that have unusually high interest rates to appreci-
ate instead of depreciate ­ the "Fama conditions"). Building on this intuition, Heyerdahl-Larsen
(2011) shows that adding "deep habits" ­ habits for specific goods within the consumption basket
­ allows the model to match the term structure of bond yields as well the dynamics of exchange
rates. Moreover, Stathopoulos (2017) shows one can also rationalize the volatility of real exchange
rates and the disconnect between exchange rates and consumption by adding consumption home
bias (in addition to habit preferences).
    An alternative assumption is to endow investors with Epstein and Zin (1989) utility functions
and allow for long-run risks. Within these models, shocks to expected long-term consumption
growth strongly influence exchange rates today ­ again producing an apparent disconnect with
contemporaneous consumption growth and other macroeconomic variables. Colacito and Croce
(2011) show a model with highly correlated long-term growth shocks can produce a low correlation
in consumption across countries along with a realistic volatility of exchange rates. Bansal and

                                                 27
Shaliastovich (2013) and Colacito and Croce (2013) further show long-run news shocks in combi-
nation with a high intertemporal elasticity of substitution also produce the kind of co-movement
of interest rates and currency risk premia required to explain the forward premium puzzle.
       Another strategy for introducing time variation in currency risk premia is to assume time
variation in the probability of rare disasters. Farhi and Gabaix (2016) show time-varying disaster
risk can produce realistic time-varying currency risk premia. In contemporaneous work, Gourio
et al. (2011) study a quantitative model with time-varying rare disasters and show the presence
of rare disasters generates volatile exchange rates, large currency risk premia, and an apparent
disconnect between exchange rates and macroeconomic fundamentals that is consistent with the
data.
       These papers all have in common that they study the interaction of two ex-ante symmetric
countries, and abstract almost entirely from the cross-sectional variation in interest rates and
currency returns that has been the focus of our discussion so far. Moreover, many of these papers
are calibrated to a version of the forward premium puzzle in which investors expect high-interest
rate currencies to appreciate rather than depreciate. As we argued in section 2, this focus may be
extreme and due to a misinterpretation of the data.16
       In light of our discussion above, there remain at least three important avenues for further
developing this literature. First, there is a clear need for synthesis. Models that match the cross
section have little to say about dynamics, and vice versa. Given that many of the dynamic models
contain various approaches to rationalize large risk premia, we also have reason to hope some of
these tools may be effective in addressing the (quantitative) currency premium puzzle as we have
stated in section 3.2 above.
       Second, although the various theories of the dynamics of currency risk provide ways to ratio-
nalize the stochastic behavior of interest rates and exchange rates, whether these models can also
explain the dynamics of capital accumulation is unclear. Colacito et al. (2018) make progress in
this direction by endogenizing capital accumulation in a model with recursive utility and both long-
term and short-term shocks to productivity. The authors show that an appropriate calibration of
the long-term productivity shock process allows the model to explain otherwise puzzling responses
of capital flows to productivity shocks we see in the data.
       Finally, if risk really is an important driver of capital flows, showing direct evidence of this
link by measuring time-varying perceptions of currency and country risk in the data should be
possible. The recent literature using text as data has produced several promising approaches to
  16
    In fact, the two issues are linked. In models that lack cross-sectional variation in interest rates, investors know
with certainty that the long-run interest rate differential is zero, resulting in the "reverse attenuation bias" described
in Hassan and Mano (2019).



                                                           28
this problem. First, a large literature following Baker et al. (2016) has constructed measures of
perceived economic policy uncertainty for 25 countries around the world by calculating the share
of newspaper articles that mention economic policy uncertainty in each country at each point in
time. Second, focusing more on commercial risks, Hassan et al. (2020) use transcripts of quarterly
earnings conference calls of thousands of listed firms around the world to measure the share of
the conversation between management and analysts devoted to discussing risks associated with
each of 45 developed and emerging economies. Using these novel data, the authors are able to
show increases in the perceived risks associated with a given country are associated with significant
valuation losses in that country's stock and bond markets, increases in local stock market volatility,
and large capital outflows.


7    Concluding Remarks

Research on the origins and effects of currency and country risk has proliferated in recent years
and is opening up truly exciting new research questions at the intersection of macroeconomics,
corporate finance, asset pricing, and monetary economics. We believe these important topics have
so-far received less attention than they deserve, in part because this work borrows methods and
terminologies from several fields that are not often taught together in graduate courses. As a
result, researchers often find it difficult to orient themselves in this new and rapidly evolving
literature. With this survey we hope to have provided an accessible and jargon-free introduction
to the literature, with a focus on productive areas for future research. Urgent research is needed
to understand the effects of currency and country risk on persistent disparities in wealth across
countries, capital flows, the sustainability of current account deficits, optimal monetary policy, the
choice of and effects of exchange rate regimes, and many other topics of immediate concern to
policymakers.




                                                 29
References
Acemoglu, D., V. M. Carvalho, A. Ozdaglar, and A. Tahbaz-Salehi (2012). The network origins of
  aggregate fluctuations. Econometrica 80 (5), 1977­2016.

Backus, D. K., S. Foresi, and C. I. Telmer (2001). Affine term structure models and the forward
  premium anomaly. The Journal of Finance 56 (1), 279­304.

Backus, D. K. and G. W. Smith (1993). Consumption and real exchange rates in dynamic economies
  with non-traded goods. Journal of International Economics 35, 297­316.

Baker, S. R., N. Bloom, and S. J. Davis (2016). Measuring economic policy uncertainty. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (4), 1593­1636.

Bansal, R. and I. Shaliastovich (2013). A long-run risks explanation of predictability puzzles in
  bond and currency markets. The Review of Financial Studies 26 (1), 1­33.

Bilson, J. F. O. (1981). The speculative efficiency hypothesis. The Journal of Business 54 (3),
  435­51.

Bocola, L. and G. Lorenzoni (2020). Financial crises, dollarization, and lending of last resort in
  open economies. American Economic Review Forthcoming.

Brunnermeier, M. K., S. Nagel, and L. H. Pedersen (2008). Carry trades and currency crashes.
  NBER macroeconomics annual 23 (1), 313­348.

Caballero, R. J., E. Farhi, and P.-O. Gourinchas (2008). An equilibrium model of "global imbal-
  ances"; and low interest rates. American Economic Review 98 (1), 358­93.

Campbell, J. Y., K. Serfaty-De Medeiros, and L. M. Viceira (2010). Global currency hedging. The
  Journal of Finance 65 (1), 87­121.

Caselli, F. and J. Feyrer (2007). The marginal product of capital. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics (122), 535­568.

C´
 espedes, L. F., R. Chang, and A. Velasco (2004). Balance sheets and exchange rate policy.
  American Economic Review 94 (4), 1183­1193.

Chinn, M. D. and G. Meredith (2004). Monetary policy and long-horizon uncovered interest parity.
 IMF Staff Papers 51 (3), 409­430.

Coibion, O., Y. Gorodnichenko, and J. Wieland (2012). The optimal inflation rate in new keynesian
  models: should central banks raise their inflation targets in light of the zero lower bound? Review
  of Economic Studies 79 (4), 1371­1406.

Colacito, R., M. Croce, F. Gavazzoni, and R. Ready (2018). Currency risk factors in a recursive
  multi-country economy. The Journal of Finance 73 (6), 2719­2756.

Colacito, R., M. Croce, S. Ho, and P. Howard (2018). Bkk the ez way: International long-run
  growth news and capital flows. American Economic Review 108 (11), 3416­49.

Colacito, R. and M. M. Croce (2011). Risks for the long run and the real exchange rate. Journal
  of Political Economy 119 (1), 153 ­ 181.


                                                 30
Colacito, R. and M. M. Croce (2013). International asset pricing with recursive preferences. Journal
  of Finance 68 (6), 2651­2686.

Coppola, A., M. Maggiori, B. Neiman, and J. Schreger (2020). Redrawing the map of global capital
  flows: The role of cross-border financing and tax havens.

David, J. M., E. Henriksen, and I. Simonovska (2016). The risky capital of emerging markets.
  NBER Working Paper Series 20769, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Della Corte, P., S. J. Riddiough, and L. Sarno (2016). Currency premia and global imbalances.
  Review of Financial Studies 29 (8), 2161­2193.

di Giovanni, J., S. Kalemli-Ozcan, M. F. Ulu, and Y. S. Baskaya (2019). International spillovers
  and local credit cycles.

Du, W., C. E. Pflueger, and J. Schreger (2020). Sovereign debt portfolios, bond risks, and the
 credibility of monetary policy. Journal of Finance Forthcoming.

Du, W. and J. Schreger (2016). Local currency sovereign risk. Journal of Finance 71 (3), 1027­1070.

Du, W. and J. Schreger (2017). Sovereign risk, currency risk,and corporate balance sheets.

Du, W., A. Tepper, and A. Verdelhan (2018, may). Deviations from covered interest rate parity.
 The Journal of Finance 73 (3), 915­957.

Eichengreen, B. and R. Hausmann (1999). Exchange rates and financial fragility. In Proceedings -
  Economic Policy Symposium - Jackson Hole, pp. 329­368. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.

Engel, C. (1996). The forward discount anomaly and the risk premium: A survey of recent evidence.
  Journal of Empirical Finance 3 (2), 123­192.

Engel, C. (2014). Chapter 8 - exchange rates and interest parity. In K. R. Elhanan Helpman and
  G. Gopinath (Eds.), Handbook of International Economics, Volume 4 of Handbook of Interna-
  tional Economics, pp. 453 ­ 522. Elsevier.

Epstein, L. G. and S. E. Zin (1989). Substitution, risk aversion, and the temporal behavior of con-
  sumption and asset returns: A theoretical framework. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric
  Society , 937­969.

Fama, E. (1976). Foundations of Finance. Basic Books.

Fama, E. F. (1984). Forward and spot exchange rates. Journal of Monetary Economics 14 (3),
  319­338.

Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1992, jun). The cross-section of expected stock returns. The Journal
  of Finance 47 (2), 427­465.

Farhi, E., S. Fraiberger, X. Gabaix, R. Ranciere, and A. Verdelhan (2015). Crash risk in currency
  markets. NBER Working Paper Series 15062.

Farhi, E. and X. Gabaix (2016). Rare disasters and exchange rates. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics 131 (1), 1­52.

Froot, K. A. and R. H. Thaler (1990). Anomalies: Foreign exchange. The Journal of Economic
  Perspectives , 179­192.

                                                31
Gabaix, X. and M. Maggiori (2015). International liquidity and exchange rate dynamics. Quarterly
 Journal of Economics 130 (3), 1369­1420.

Gourinchas, P.-O., N. Govillot, and H. Rey (2017). Exorbitant privilege and exorbitant duty.

Gourinchas, P.-O. and H. Rey (2007). International financial adjustment. Volume 115, pp. 665­703.
 The University of Chicago Press.

Gourio, F., M. Siemer, and A. Verdelhan (2011). International risk cycles. Journal of International
 Economics 89 (2), 471­484.

Hall, R. E. and C. Jones (1997). Levels of economic activity across countries. American Economic
 Review 87 (2), 173­77.

Hansen, L. P. and R. Jagannathan (1991). Implications of security market data for models of
 dynamic economies. Journal of Political Economy 99 (2), 225­262.

Hassan, T., T. Mertens, and T. Zhang (2020). A risk-based theory of exchange rate stabilization.

Hassan, T. A. (2013). Country size, currency unions, and international asset returns. The Journal
 of Finance 68 (6), 2269­2308.

Hassan, T. A. and R. Mano (2019). Forward and spot exchange rates in a multi-currency world.
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics 134 (1), 397­450.

Hassan, T. A., T. M. Mertens, and T. Zhang (2016). Not so disconnected: Exchange rates and the
 captial stock. Journal of International Economics 99.

Hassan, T. A., J. Schreger, M. Schwedeler, and A. Tahoun (2020). Country risk. mimeo Boston
 University .

Heyerdahl-Larsen, C. (2011). Asset prices and real exchange rates with deep habits. Review of
  Financial Studies 27 (11), 3280­3317.

Hodrick, R. (2014). The empirical evidence on the efficiency of forward and futures foreign exchange
 markets. Routledge.

Holston, K., T. Laubach, and J. C. Williams (2017, may). Measuring the natural rate of interest:
 International trends and determinants. Journal of International Economics 108, S59­S75.

Hsieh, C.-T. and P. J. Klenow (2009). Misallocation and manufacturing tfp in china and india.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (4), 1403­1448.

Ilzetzki, E., C. M. Reinhart, and K. S. Rogoff (2019). Exchange arrangements entering the twenty-
   first century: Which anchor will hold? The Quarterly Journal of Economics 134 (2), 599­646.

Jiang, Z. (2020). Fiscal cyclicality and currency risk premia.

Jorgenson, D. (1996). Investment - Vol. 2: Tax Policy and the Cost of Capital. MIT Press.

Jurek, J. (2014). Crash-neutral currency carry trades. Journal of Financial Economics 113 (3),
  325­347.

Karabarbounis, L. and B. Neiman (2014). The global decline of the labor share. Quarterly Journal
 of Economics 129 (1), 61­103.

                                                 32
Keller, L. (2019). Capital controls and risk misallocation: Evidence from a natural experiment.

Koijen, R. S., T. J. Moskowitz, L. H. Pedersen, and E. B. Vrugt (2018, feb). Carry. Journal of
 Financial Economics 127 (2), 197­225.

Lettau, M., M. Maggiori, and M. Weber (2014, nov). Conditional risk premia in currency markets
  and other asset classes. Journal of Financial Economics 114 (2), 197­225.

Lewis, K. K. (2011). Global asset pricing. Annual Review of Financial Economics 3 (17261), 435
  ­ 466.

Liao, G. and T. Zhang (2020). The hedging channel of exchange rate determination.

Liao, G. Y. (2020). Credit migration and covered interest rate parity. Journal of Financial Eco-
  nomics .

Long, J. B. and C. I. Plosser (1983). Real business cycles. Journal of Political Economy 91 (1),
  39­69.

Lucas, R. E. (1990). Why doesn't capital flow from rich to poor countries? The American Economic
  Review 80 (2), 92­96.

Lustig, H. and R. Richmond (2020). Gravity in the exchange rate factor structure. The Review of
  Financial Studies 33 (8), 3492­3540.

Lustig, H., N. Roussanov, and A. Verdelhan (2011). Common risk factors in currency markets.
  Review of Financial Studies 24 (11), 3731­3777.

Lustig, H., N. Roussanov, and A. Verdelhan (2014). Coutercyclical currency risk premia. Journal
  of Financial Economics 111 (3), 527­553.

Lustig, H., A. Stathopoulos, and A. Verdelhan (2019). The term structure of currency carry trade
  risk premia. American Economic Review Forthcoming.

Lustig, H. and A. Verdelhan (2007). The cross section of foreign currency risk premia and con-
  sumption growth risk. American Economic Review 97 (1), 89­117.

Maggiori, M. (2017). Financial intermediation, international risk sharing, and reserve currencies.
 American Economic Review 107 (10), 3038­71.

Maggiori, M., B. Neiman, and J. Schreger (2020, jun). International currencies and capital alloca-
 tion. Journal of Political Economy 128 (6), 2019­2066.

Malamud, S. and A. Schrimpf (2020). An intermediation-based model of exchange rates. Swiss
 Finance Institute Research Paper No. 18-14.

Martin, I. (2012). The forward premium puzzle in a two-country world. mimeo.

Meese, R. and K. Rogoff (1983). The out-of-sample failure of empirical exchange rate models:
 Sampling error or misspecification? In Exchange Rates and International Macroeconomics,
 NBER Chapters, pp. 67­112. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Menkhoff, L., L. Sarno, M. Schmeling, and A. Schrimpf (2012). Carry trades and global foreign
 exchange volatility. The Journal of Finance 67 (2), 681­718.

                                               33
Mertens, T. M. and J. C. Williams (2020). What to expect from the lower bound on interest rates:
 Evidence from derivatives prices. FRB of New York Staff Report No. 865.

Monge-Naranjo, A., J. M. Sanchez, and R. Santaeulalia-Llopis (2019). Natural resources and global
 misallocation. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 11 (2), 79­126.

Ottonello, P. and D. Perez (2019). The currency composition of sovereign debt. American Economic
  Journal: Macroeconomics 11 (3), 174­208.

Powers, T. Y. (2015). The commodity currency puzzle. mimeo Harvard University.

Ready, R., N. Roussanov, and C. Ward (2017). Commodity trade and the carry trade: a tale of
  two countries. The Journal of Finance 72 (6), 2629­2684.

Richers, J. (2020). UIP violations and the cost of capital: Firm-level evidence. Boston University.

Richmond, R. (2019). Trade network centrality and the currency carry trade. The Journal of
  Finance 74 (3), 1315­1361.

Salomao, J. and L. Varela (2019). Exchange rate exposure and firm dynamics. CEPR Discussion
  Papers 12654.

Solow, R. M. (1956). A contribution to the theory of economic growth. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 70 (1), 65­94.

Stathopoulos, A. (2017). Portfolio home bias and external habit formation.

To, T. and N. Tran (2020). Nontraded sector growth risks and economic sizes in international asset
  pricing.

Verdelhan, A. (2010). A habit-based explanation of the exchange rate risk premium. Journal of
  Finance 65 (1), 123­146.

Wiriadinata, U. (2020). External debt, currency risk, and international monetary policy transmis-
 sion.




                                                34
                                      Appendix
                                 -For online publication only-


A     Derivation of Equation 8

The country n risk-free bond pays off Pn units of the traded good at maturity. We derive the value
of the risk-free bond, Vn , by applying the asset pricing equation to the bond payoff:


                                           Vn = E [MT Pn ] ,

                                                                                            f
where MT denotes the stochastic discount factor. The country n risk-free rate (in levels), Rn , is
the inverse of the price of the risk-free bond:

                                               f          1
                                              Rn =          .
                                                         Vn

Putting the previous two equations together yields

                                                      f
                                          E [MT Pn ] Rn = 1.


As a result, the risk-free rates of countries f and h are related as follows:

                                                 f               f
                                  E [ MT P f ] R f = E [MT Ph ] Rh =1


If the stochastic discount factor and prices are log-normal, we can perform the following calculations:

                                  f               f
                      E [MT Pf ] Rf = E [MT Ph ] Rh
                                   f                                 f
                  E exp mT + pf + rf              = E exp mT + ph + rh
                                1           1                              f
                  E [mT + pf ] + var (mT ) + var (pf ) + cov (mT , pf ) + rf
                                2           2
                                  1           1                              f
                  = E [mT + ph ] + var (mT ) + var (ph ) + cov (mT , ph ) + rh ,
                                  2           2




                                                    35
We cancel out var (mT ) from both sides of the previous equation.

                  1                              f            1                              f
         E [pf ] + var (pf ) + cov (mT , pf ) + rf = E [ph ] + var (ph ) + cov (mT , ph ) + rh
                  2                                           2
          f                  1            1             f
         rf + E [pf - ph ] + var (pf ) - var (ph ) - rh = -cov (mT , pf - ph )
                             2            2
          f                             f
         rf + log (E [Pf ] /E [Ph ]) - rh = -cov (mT , pf - ph )


We define E [sf,h ] = log (E [Pf ] /E [Ph ]) . With this definition:

                               f                f
                              rf + E [sf,h ] - rh = -cov (mT , pf - ph ) .


B     Derivation of Equation 11

Letting Mn denote the stochastic discount factor measured in units of the consumption bundle
specific to country n and assuming no arbitrage, we know the risk-free rate in country n satisfies:

                                               f        1
                                              Rn =
                                                     E [Mn ]

If we further assume Mn is log-normally distributed, then

                                    f
                                   rn = - log (E [Mn ])
                                                      1
                                      = - E [mn ] + var [mn ]
                                                      2

Next, take the difference between the risk-free rates of countries f and h:

                           f    f                 1                  1
                          rf - rh = - E [mf ] + var [mf ] + E [mh ] + var [mh ]
                                                  2                  2
            f    f                  1
           rf - rh + E [mf - mh ] =   (var [mh ] - var [mf ])
                                    2

Finally, when financial markets are complete, sf,h = mf - mh so that

                            f            f            1
                           rf + Esf,h - rh =            (var [mh ] - var [mf ]) .
                                                      2




                                                     36
