                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           HISTORY AND URBAN ECONOMICS

                                      W. Walker Hanlon
                                      Stephan Heblich

                                     Working Paper 27850
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27850


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2020




We are grateful to Gabriel Ahlfeldt, Sascha Becker, Oliver Falck, Laurent Gobillon, Christoph
König, Jeff Lin, Will Strange, and Yanos Zylberberg for helpful comments. The usual disclaimer
applies. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by W. Walker Hanlon and Stephan Heblich. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
History and Urban Economics
W. Walker Hanlon and Stephan Heblich
NBER Working Paper No. 27850
September 2020
JEL No. N7,N9,R00

                                          ABSTRACT

This article reviews recent literature using insights from history to answer central questions in
urban economics. This area of research has seen rapid growth in the past decade, thanks to new
technologies that have made available increasingly rich data stretching far back in time. The
focus is to review innovative methods to exploit historical information and discuss applications of
these data that provide new insights into (i) the long run growth of cities or regional economies
and (ii) the spatial organization of economic activities within cities. The review also surveys the
growing literature outside urban economics that uses the historical urbanization as a proxy for
economic growth, discusses differences between how economic historians and urban economists
think about the relationship between urbanization and growth, and considers how these views
might be reconciled.


W. Walker Hanlon
Department of Economics
NYU Stern School of Business
Henry Kaufman Management Center
44 West Fourth Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
walker.hanlon@gmail.com

Stephan Heblich
Munk School of Global Affairs and Public Policy
University of Toronto
1 Devonshire Place
Toronto, ON M5S 3K7
Canada
stephan.heblich@utoronto.ca
1       Why turn to history?
The past decade has seen rapid growth in studies using historical data to address some of the
central questions in urban economics. The left panel of Figure I illustrates this phenomenon.
The columns in this figure show the count of papers with a historical theme published in
three leading urban economics journals, the Journal of Urban Economics, Regional Science
and Urban Economics, and the Journal of Economic Geography.1 The line plots the number
of papers across all economics journals (using the EconLit database) that list one of the
economic history JEL codes with topics related to urban or regional economics (starting
with N9). Both series show an increase in papers at the intersection of urban economics
and economic history starting from about 2010, relative to the previous decade.2
    As a second approach to tracking this development, we pick one prominent dataset on
the development of cities, Paul Bairoch's data on urban populations in Europe and the
world from the year 800 on, and track its use over the past few years.3 Studies relying on
Bairoch's data are only a small subset of work at the intersection of urban economics and
economic history, but they are easy to identify and provide further insight into research on
urban development over time. The right panel of Figure I shows citations of the "Bairoch
data" in economics articles.4 The datasets for Europe and the world (Bairoch et al. , 1988;
Bairoch, 1988) have been cited 172 times over this period. Most of these citations reflect
papers using the data. The graph shows a steady increase of citations over the past few
years. Closer inspection of the citations provides additional insight into who is interested
in urbanization. Out of a total of 172 citations in economics journals between 1992 and
2016, the "top five" journals in economics cited Bairoch 23 times and another 21 citations
come from other highly ranked general interest journals.5 Economic history journals cited
Bairoch 38 times closely followed by 37 citations from urban economics journals.6 Finally,
there are 23 citations in development and growth journals.7
    Motivated by the increase in research at the intersection of urban economics and eco-
nomic history documented in Figure I, this article aims to provide an overview of key
research trends in this area. A natural first question, then, is why has this recent increase
    1
     Specifically, this is the number of papers with at least one economic history JEL code (starting with N).
    2
     At this point, it is hard to interpret the drop we observe in the last two years. It may either be a general
trend decline driven by an increasing interest in big data that are typically not available for the past or it
may indicate that the low-hanging fruit (e.g. archival records that can easily be digitized) are picked and
we new methods to unlock additional historical information.
   3
     See (Bairoch, 1988; Bairoch et al. , 1988).
   4
     We use the definition of "article" and "Economics" from the Web of Science.
   5
     Among the top five, we observe QJE: 11; AER: 6; JPE: 3, ReStud: 3. Other top general interest journals
include EJ, JEEA, AEJ, and ReStat.
   6
     For history, we consider citations in JEH, EHR, EEH, EREH and for urban economics JUE, RSUE,
JRS, JoEG
   7
     This includes JDE, JEG, WD, JCE, WBER, RED.



                                                       1
  Figure I: Tracking the growth of historical papers dealing with urban economics topics

                                                    EconLit citations                                                                                          Citations of Bairoch




                                                                             250




                                                                                                                                                   25
                                         8




                                                                                   All Publ. with a History and Urban JEL (line)
  Urban Publ. with a History JEL (bar)




                                                                             200




                                                                                                                                                   20
                                         6




                                                                             150




                                                                                                                                                   15
                                                                                                                                       Citations
                                         4




                                                                                                                                                   10
                                                                             100
                                         2




                                                                                                                                                   5
                                                                             50




                                                                                                                                                   0
                                         0




                                                                             0

                                             2000   2005   2010    2015   2020                                                                          1990   1995   2000   2005   2010   2015   2020

                                                           Year                                                                                                              Year




Notes: The left panel plots, in columns, the number of publications in the urban journals JUE, JoEG and RSUE with
a history JEL code (starting with N)) and, in the line, the overall number of publications in all economics journals
with urban and history JEL codes (starting with N9). The right panel of the figure plots the number of citations of
"Bairoch 1988" or "Bairoch et al. 1988", the sources of Bairoch's city growth data, in English-speaking economics
journal publications. Source : EconLit and Web of Science database.



in urban-history research occurred? This trend is undoubtedly related to the increasing
availability of historical data as digitization methods and computing technologies advance
(Mitchener, 2015). Until recently, the advantages of using historical data to study cities
have been balanced by the constraints imposed by data availability. However, recent inno-
vations have substantially increased the quantity and quality of data available for studying
cities. Given their importance, we begin this article, in Section 2, with a brief review of
data sources that help us quantify economic activities in the past and recent methodological
advances to make this data usable.
    However, there is more to the rise of historical themes in urban economics than data
availability. While there have been amazing advances in the availability of incredibly de-
tailed and high-frequency data in modern settings, from cellular phones, taxis, web reviews,
and other sources, many of the core questions of urban economics deal with forces that play
out over long periods of time. For these questions, taking advantage of historical data offers
insights into urban economic processes that cannot be obtained from modern data alone.
    For example, one question at the heart of urban economics is, why do cities exist?
Urban theory suggests that exogenous location factors (first nature geography) together
with endogenous agglomeration and congestion forces (second nature geography) explain
observed differences in productivity and amenities. Yet these factors often play out over
many years, decades, or even centuries. First nature advantages, such as those offered by


                                                                                                                                   2
the portage sites studied by Bleakley & Lin (2012) or the sources of water power highlighted
by Crafts & Wolf (2014), change slowly over time as technology advances.
    Similarly, the urban built environment, and the infrastructure that connects cities,
evolves slowly. Large scale infrastructure projects, such as the rail network studied by
(Heblich et al. , 2020b), take years or decades to construct: Rome wasn't built in a day.
And once constructed, these enormous infrastructure investments depreciate slowly (Glaeser
& Gyourko, 2005). Historical buildings, bridges, sewer systems, and the layout of railway
tracks or roads are often testimonials of the distant past. This makes it particularly diffi-
cult to trace the factors that contribute to city dynamics using short-run data. Thus, while
short-run or cross-sectional data can shed light on processes that determine the existence
of cities, much more can be learned through the use of long-run historical data that explain
path-dependencies.
    A third reason why we might have to reach deep into the past is that some important
economic changes occur only infrequently. One recent example is the 2008 housing bubble.
Glaeser (2013) goes back in U.S. history to trace precedents and points out an optimistic
assessment of future price growth and the neglect of long-run elastic supply as important
similarity. Detecting such regularities is an important starting point for the design of public
policies. In a similar vein, catastrophic events like major earthquakes or urban fires that
destroy large parts of a city are luckily rare events (Belloc et al. , 2016; Hornbeck & Keniston,
2017). Nevertheless, they occur and studying them provides important insights into the
importance of location factors and the dynamice underlying the subsequent readjustment.
    Beyond the fact that many urban processes play out over long time scales, studying
urban economies through the lens of history also offers features that can help us identify
causal economic connections. By looking back in time we expand the types of variation that
can be harnessed. History offers a range of natural experiments that can help us identify key
features of urban economies. As pointed out by Holmes (2010), controlled experiments are
often not viable in an urban or regional context (in his words "Good luck to the researcher
trying to get a National Science Foundation grant to run a controlled experiment to set
up a new city!", p.14) which is why we rely on quasi-experimental variation to identify key
relationships. In the following sections we review papers drawing on natural experiments
as diverse as the bombing of Japan during the Second World War, the fall of the Roman
Empire, the construction of the U.S. highway system, and the division and reunification
of Germany. Each of these events provide a unique window into the working of urban
economies. Drawing on history also allows us to study cities across a broader range of
institutional and technological environments. As an example, in Section 3 we review a set
of recent studies suggesting that the impact of location fundamentals on city formation
evolves as technology changes.
    Another identification advantage offered by some historical settings is that there are


                                               3
fewer interdependencies between separate economic units, which can make mechanisms
more easily observable. To cite one example, Steinwender (2018) studies the impact of the
first trans-Atlantic telegraph cable on trade between the U.S. and Britain.8 Here, history
offers a setting where information flows can be isolated in a way that would be difficult in a
more modern and interconnected economy. A similar argument applies to regulations that
were often absent or less developed in the past, thus allowing researchers to focus on the
underlying economic mechanism.
     Of course, identification advantages arising either from the availability of a natural
experiment or from a unique institutional context also come with limitations. Most impor-
tantly, we should be vigilant in assessing the generalizability of the results and, in particular,
the extent to which lessons can be applied to current policy debates. Another word of cau-
tion is also required. While we believe that history holds many insights that contribute to
our understanding of spatial distributions today, harnessing the past successfully requires a
careful understanding of historical circumstances. Knowledge about contextual factors like
the socio-economic environment, political institutions, available technologies, etc. is the key
to working out sources of exogenous variation.
     Finally, recent research has highlighted the potential for historical work on urban and
regional economies to inform our understanding of economic growth. At least since Adam
Smith's inquiry into the nature and causes of the Wealth of Nations, economists have sought
to uncover the factors that drive differences in development. A natural starting point for
doing so is a comparison across countries, but one quickly realizes that countries vary so
dramatically in their features, from city-states like Singapore and Monaco to the enormous
expanses of Canada and Russia, that they may not be the most relevant unit at which to
analyze economic growth. Moreover, the borders of countries change over time, sometimes
for largely arbitrary regions. Often a more relevant unit to study is the city or region, and
since the study of growth naturally requires looking over larger times scales, this inevitably
leads to the use of historical data. This is a topic that we explore in Section 5.
     In the next section of this paper, we review recent methodological advances in the use of
historical data to address urban economics questions. The next two sections then review the
major stands of recent research in this area. In Section 3, we take a between -city perspective
where we attempt to understand the historical origins of why cities grow and develop, how
they interact and why they differ in size and perform different activities. This includes a
review of work on agglomeration forces, city amenities, or transportation links between cities
and regions. Then, in Section 4, we narrow our focus on look within cities. Specifically, we
turn our attention to the spatial distribution of people and economic activities within cities
and examine how this distribution is affected by factors such as new transport technologies,
   8
     In a similar vein, Koudijs (2015) studies how variation in sailing conditions affected the financial markets
in London and Amsterdam in the 18th century.



                                                       4
health infrastructure, local amenities and urban policies. Finally, Section 5 discusses the
use of urban data to understand long-run patterns of economic growth.
    Overall, our review reveals a vibrant literature using history to understand cities. While
recent methodological advances have led to a rapid growth in work in this area, many
interesting questions, particularly those related to long-run processes, remain to be explored.


2     Innovations in historical research
One important challenge in harnessing the past in order to improve our understanding
of urban economies is the availability of data. However, recent advances in computing
technology and creativity in the use of new applications and data sources have opened up a
digital window to the past. This section briefly introduces important sources for historical
data along with approaches to make these data usable for research.
    We first look at ways to digitize historical data from official statistics and other historical
sources that are available in print. Next, we turn from text to images and discuss ways to
unlock the information that is included in historical maps. Statistics and maps present the
most reliable sources of spatial information about the past. In the absence of such detailed
insight, there are other ways to look back in time. One approach is to focus on location
features that are observed today but likely did not change much over time. Such factors can
predict historical outcomes and thus provide useful covariates for historical studies. Another
way to predict historical outcomes and complete the picture is to use economic modeling.
A rising amount of research combines observed historical data with structural models that
solve for unobserved parameters and allow researchers to evaluate actual outcomes relative
to counterfactual development paths.

2.1    Historical statistics
Archives are one way to open the door to the past. Probably the most comprehensive source
of historical data with a spatial dimension are printed publications of official statistics such
as censuses, birth and death records, trade registers, patent records, immigration lists, or
tax records. More and more of these data have been digitized over the last few years thanks
to national archives and libraries, genealogy platforms, or large-scale academic projects.
    A central challenge in using archival data is that historical records are in many cases
not already digitized. Two approaches to digitization have emerged over the past years.
One relies on automated optical character recognition (OCR) programs that may embed
elements of machine learning. The accuracy of this approach depends on the quality of
the original printing as well as the scans. In particular, historic documents often present
a challenge for OCR methods because (i) the quality of the original records is low, (ii) the



                                                5
historical typesetting process was not automated and thus noisy, and (iii) characters and
fonts differ. Hand-written documents present an additional layer of complexity.
     An alternative way to digitize data from printed documents is to outsource this process
to specialized service providers who rely on manual labor and some automation. The use
of outsourcing companies, principally in developing countries, has dramatically reduced the
cost of digitizing data over the past decade. The main limitations to this approach are
historic records that are hand-written or printed in font styles (e.g. gothic or fraktur)
that are hard to recognize by laymen. A less expensive and viable way to digitize non-
standard records are crowdsourcing projects. For example, the British Library developed
the platform LibCrowds that allows users to help digitize records. Similarly the German
Society for Computer Genealogy developed a tool to administer the digitization of casualty
lists from the First World War (Zedlitz, 2017).
     Information from official statistics can be combined with other historical data sources
like the the Encyclopedia Judaica and the Germania Judaica which document the historical
location of Jewish communities across German cities (see for example Becker & Pascali,
2019; Johnson & Koyama, 2017; Voigtl¨    ander & Voth, 2012, for details). One way to combine
datasets is to assign them to common spatial units like counties or parishes which are
mapped. Linking these units over time is, however, often complicated by changes in the
geographic boundaries of spatial units. One way to overcome this is to fix boundaries in
one reference year and disaggregate units in other years into these boundaries using area
weights (Eckert et al. , 2020; Hornbeck, 2010). If one is concerned that area weights do
not adequately represent the spatial distribution of individuals or activities in space, one
could aggregate units using a transitive closure algorithm (Kitson et al. , 2012) or specify
alternative weights. But what weights can we use? If administrative data come with address
information, one could use the approach in Heblich et al. (2016) to geolocate addresses and
create population-adjusted weights. The approach combines fuzzy text matching with an
algorithm that exploits the spatial clustering of entries in enumeration books to infer the
location of unmatched addresses in historical UK censuses.9
     Some data sources are not organized in administrative boundaries but include geographic
information in the text. In this case, methods from computational linguistics can help
researchers to extract information from texts. For example, Perlman (2015) and Packalen
& Bhattacharya (2015) apply automated text analysis to historic U.S. patents which allows
them to document the movement of idea-use over time and space. Dittmar & Seabold
(2020) go one step further. They build on work by Gentzkow & Shapiro (2010) to measure
changes in the language of historical book titles. In this way, they track the dissemination
of new religious ideas across German-speaking Europe between 1454 and 1600.
  9
    Another promising way to exploit the systematic nature of enumeration books is to measure the social
composition of neighborhoods (Logan & Parman, 2017; Shertzer et al. , 2018).



                                                   6
   An alternative to joining data at a spatial level is to employ computationally more de-
manding matching methods that link individual names between censuses and registers or
across census waves. An early application is Abramitzky et al. (2012) who used fuzzy name
matching algorithms to identify distinctive immigrant names in U.S. censuses; in another
application, Dippel & Heblich (2020) link civil war rosters and immigrant ship lists to U.S.
census data; Arkolakis et al. (2020) link information from the U.S. Population Census,
patents and historical immigration record to study how European immigrants affected local
and aggregate economic growth in the U.S. between 1880 and 1920; and Heblich et al.
(2020a) follow individuals in the English and Welsh census between the years 1851­1911 to
study the distributional consequences of the invasion or new-world grain on geographical
areas within England and Wales. For a more detailed discussion of name matching tech-
niques, we refer the interested reader to recent reviews by Abramitzky et al. (2020) and
Bailey et al. (2020).

2.2   Maps
Historical maps present another great source to learn about the past. Maps often contain
spatial information about historical features such as political or cultural borders, neighbor-
hoods and building footprints, land cover, infrastructure, etc. Similar to historical texts
or statistics, maps are becoming increasingly available thanks to the digitization efforts of
archives and libraries. However, scanned maps still require substantial digital processing
before the spatial information they contain can be analyzed. Moreover, relative to scanned
texts or tables, maps (and especially historical maps) present even more complex chal-
lenges to automated pattern recognition methods, owing to the mix of symbols, lines and
area objects used to portray geographic information. As a result, researchers often have
to rely on time-consuming manual digitization. However, as discussed in Combes et al.
(2020), machine-aided methods are improving and this will facilitate the utilization of map
information in the future.
    A common use of historical maps in economic research is to identify transportation
infrastructure (Bogart et al. , 2015; Donaldson, 2018; Duranton & Turner, 2011; Hornung,
2015), boundaries (Becker et al. , 2016; Dell, 2010; Michalopoulos & Papaioannou, 2013;
Wahl, 2017), bilateral distances (Becker & Woessmann, 2009; Dittmar, 2011b), or trade
activities (Wahl, 2016). One complication for these approaches is that historical maps
often lack precision. This can be critical, e.g., for projects that study discontinuities along
boundaries. To overcome this, Sequeira et al. (2020) overlay an accurate modern shapefile
of the railway infrastructure over scanned and georeferenced versions of the historical maps
and trim the modern railway network to match the historical map. If significant changes
render this procedure unworkable, an alternative is to glean historic texts for information
that improves the precision. For example, historic texts might mention towns or landmarks


                                              7
along historic roads that still exist today and thus serve as anchor points.
   Once digitized, historical maps can provide a wealth of information. One common
use of map data is to reconstruct the structure of cities and neighborhoods in the past.
Examples include Ahlfeldt & McMillen (2018) who use printed maps from Olcott's Blue
Books of Chicago to derive detailed land value estimates for buildings in Chicago; Hornbeck
& Keniston (2017) who assembled plot-level data for Boston between 1867 and 1894; and
Redding & Sturm (2016) who digitized bomb damage maps that recorded World War II
destruction in London at the level of individual houses.

2.3    Time invariant factors
One way researchers compensate for a lack of controls that might explain the spatial distri-
bution of economic activity is to use modern data describing features that are time-invariant
(or change very slowly over time) in order to infer historical conditions. For example,
Combes et al. (2011) discuss the use of plausibly time-invariant geological characteristics
from the European Soil Database to explain the emergence of population concentrations.
The underlying logic is that geology and the nature of soils were an important predictor
of past settlement patterns and have changed little over time. Bosker et al. (2013) take
this one step further. To measure the importance of geography, they determine the agricul-
tural productivity of cities' hinterland using a combination of time-invariant soil and terrain
characteristics and climate conditions.
    Time invariant location factors may be used in balance tests that assess the instrument
validity or they may be interacted with year indicators in panel regressions where historical
records inform the researcher about the time when the location factor gained importance. A
canonical example of such a difference-in-differences strategy is Nunn & Qian (2011), which
combines historical knowledge about the timing of the arrival of the potato to Europe with
modern data on the spatial variation in local suitability for potato cultivation.
    Another group of time-invariant factors that have been productively used in economic
research are genetic markers and linguistic traits. Genetic databases as well as detailed lan-
guage and dialect surveys provide spatial variations which are employed to predict cultural
borders in space that limit integration or migration. The underlying idea is that differences
in cultural traits explain spatial disparities in economic development, possibly through bet-
ter functioning institutions (see Tabellini, 2010).10 Early papers that used genetic markers
to predict cultural borders across space include Spolaore & Wacziarg (2009) or Guiso et al.
 (2009). Falck et al. (2012) introduce an alternative measure to predict cultural boarders.
They exploit linguistic micro-data from a unique language survey conducted around 1880
in German schools to derive a measure of cultural similarity between German regions.
  10
     Nunn (2014) and Alesina & Giuliano (2015) review the growing body of literature on institutions, culture
and long-run economic growth.


                                                     8
2.4   Predicting outcomes
Historical conditions can also be inferred with the help of models from outside of economics,
such as transportation, engineering or atmospheric models, that predict conditions in the
past. One illustrative example is Pascali (2017), who simulates the routes of sailboats
to understand how the introduction of steamships changed trade patterns. To calculate
bilateral sailing times between country pairs, the paper divides the world into grid squares
and determines for all sea-cells the average velocity, direction of sea-surface winds and ocean
current. Knowing that these factors determined the sailing routes, one can predict least-cost
paths for sailing vessel between country pairs and compare them with, e.g., entries from
logbooks. In a similar vein, Feyrer & Sacerdote (2009) use wind patterns to identify islands
near prevailing sailing routes to show that they were more easily revisited and colonized.
    Historical travel routes on land can be predicted with the help of engineering rules.
Bogart et al. (2019) use insights into nineteenth-century railway construction to calculate
least-cost paths. Voigtl¨ ander & Voth (2014) and Faber (2014) use a similar approach to
calculate least-cost paths for roads. Information on historical travel speeds in combination
with transportation networks further provides a way to predict historical transportation
costs (Donaldson & Hornbeck, 2016; Donaldson, 2018; Heblich et al. , 2020b).
    A somewhat different example is provided by Heblich et al. (2016), who model the
dissemination of coal smoke from georeferenced industrial chimneys in 19th century Eng-
land in order to predict neighborhood pollution exposure. This study combines recent data
on meteorological conditions and terrain with historical information on height, exit veloc-
ity, and combustion temperature obtained from historic documents to predict pollution
dissemination patterns.
    Lastly, Fl¨uckiger et al. (2019) make creative use of archaeological data from excavated
Roman ceramics which name the production location. Combined with precise information
on the location of archaeological excavation sites, this enables them to predict interregional
trade volumes within Western Europe during the Roman era and they show that connec-
tivity differentials observed in the past continue to influence cross-regional firm investment
behavior until today.

2.5   Structural models
A growing strand of research now combines historical data and modeling to rationalize ob-
served outcomes. The latest generation of quantitative spatial models are sufficiently rich
to incorporate a large number of heterogeneous, interconnected locations and rationalize
them as an equilibrium of the model. If a unique equilibrium is identified and the struc-
tural fundamentals are stable and invariant to interventions, this framework will enable
researchers to quantify key theoretical mechanisms, evaluate policy interventions and simu-


                                              9
late counterfactual outcomes. An illustrative example of this approach is Nagy (2020) who
combines novel historical data for the U.S. on population, trading routes and agricultural
productivity at a high spatial resolution with a dynamic quantitative model of economic
geography to show that the availability of farm hinterlands fostered urbanization and ag-
gregate growth. The model captures key patterns of U.S. urbanization and city formation
and counterfactual analysis help quantify the effect of geography on cities and growth.
    Another recent paper illustrates how the creative use of economic modeling can help
us draw a more complete picture from quantitatively observable fragments of the past.
Assyrian merchants used clay tablets to record their shipment consignments, expenses,
and contracts. Excavated samples that were translated provide insights into merchants'
trade networks during the Bronze Age. Barjamovic et al. (2019) build on these data and
combine them with a structural gravity model of trade. Based on the model, they predict
the locations of yet undiscovered cities, some of which overlap with historians' conjectures.
Future excavations will tell us about the validity of these predictions.
    A more detailed review of this growing strand of literature goes beyond this brief
overview. Instead, we refer the interested reader to a review on Quantitative Spatial Eco-
nomics by Redding & Rossi-Hansberg (2017).


3    Long-run studies of cities and regions
One of the more fertile areas of urban economics research over the past two decades has been
the use of historical data to study the factors affecting the distribution of population across
space and, in particular, the existence of cities. This strand of research is well integrated
in a broader research agenda on the importance of history for economic development as
reviewed by Nunn (2014). Studies in this area address classic urban economics questions,
such as the size and type of cities, agglomeration benefits, the importance of locational
advantages, and the impact of place-based policies. Yet new lines of work are also building
bridges between urban economics and other areas of study, including international trade,
education and human capital, and structural change.
    Many of the papers described in this section are, in one way or another, related to
two classic urban questions. Why do cities exist? What causes them to grow or decline?
Among the answers considered by the papers reviewed below are locational fundamentals,
productivity advantages, amenities or disamenities, trade and market access, education and
information technology, and structural transformation. These answers, in turn, can inform
other questions, such as whether cities are too large or too small, which we discuss at the
end of the section.




                                              10
3.1    Locational fundamentals
One influential line of research in this area draws on historical natural experiments to inform
the theoretical debate over the fundamental drivers of city growth. A starting point for this
literature is Davis & Weinstein (2002), which used the U.S. bombing of Japanese cities
during the Second World War to study whether large temporary shocks have a long-run
impact on city size. Surprisingly, they found that, despite the severity of the bomb damage,
Japanese cities fully rebounded within a few decades. This result suggests that locational
fundamentals play a key role in shaping the distribution of economic activity across space,
while their results run counter to models of random growth (Gabaix, 1999) or those featuring
multiple equilibrium city locations (Krugman, 1991).11
    A second seminal paper in this literature, Bleakley & Lin (2012), studies cities in the
U.S. that were located on portage sites. Historically these were important trading locations,
but their natural advantages became irrelevant as river shipping declined in importance.12
Yet Bleakley and Lin show that these portage sites remained important urban centers
many decades after the value of their initial natural advantage disappeared.13 These result
suggests that there must be important factors other than locational fundamentals generating
the spatial distribution of economic activity that we observe.
    The strikingly different results found in the two seminal papers described above have
motivated a growing body of follow-on research. Recent studies have taken several ap-
proaches to making progress in this area. One approach focuses on building up evidence
from a variety of different empirical settings. Hanlon (2017), for example, looks at the
impact of a large economic shock to British cities that were heavily reliant on cotton textile
production resulting from the U.S. Civil War, which sharply reduced cotton supplies. This
paper provides evidence that the temporary shock had a persistent impact on city size.
    Persistent effects of a temporary relocation of population are also documented by Schu-
mann (2014), which studies the resettlement of Germans after the Second World War who
were expelled from land controlled by Germany prior to the war.14 This study uses an RD
approach that takes advantage of the fact that resettlement was generally not allowed in the
  11
     The basic approach introduced by Davis & Weinstein (2002) has been applied to German cities by
Brakman et al. (2004), Bosker et al. (2007), and Bosker et al. (2008) with mixed results. Another related
paper, Miguel & Roland (2011), looks at whether the bombing during the Vietnam War had persistent
impacts on outcomes such as the local poverty rate, consumption levels, literacy, etc. They find no evidence
of persistent effects.
  12
     The location and purpose of cities was typically determined by defense considerations (Dincecco &
Onorato, 2016; Glaeser & Shapiro, 2002) or their commercial capabilities (Bakker et al. , 2020; Michaels &
Rauch, 2018; Acemoglu et al. , 2005).
  13
     Using data on colonial railroads in Kenya, Jedwab et al. (2017) show that temporary advantages related
to railroad access can generate population agglomerations that persist, even after many of the benefits of
such access have disappeared. Maloney & Valencia Caicedo (2016) present a similar finding for the Americas.
  14
     Other recent papers that look at the economic effects of the inflow of expellees in Germany include
Braun & Kvasnicka (2014), Braun & Omar Mahmoud (2014), Burchardi & Hassan (2013), or Peters (2019).


                                                    11
part of Germany occupied by France after the war. The results show that the differences
in population generated by the resettlement were quite persistent.15
    Comparing the settings considered by Hanlon (2017) and Schumann (2014) to the
Japanese cities studied by Davis & Weinstein (2002) offers a potential explanation for
why these two studies find results that differ from those obtained by Davis & Weinstein
(2002). In Hanlon (2017), the cities affected by the shock were surrounded by many other
geographically-similar nearby locations where unemployed workers could move. Similarly,
Schumann highlights the fact that the border used in his RD setting runs through territory
that is fairly homogeneous in terms of topography and climate. In contrast, Japan's more
extreme mountainous geography may have limited the set of alternative locations. This sug-
gests that locational fundamentals may be key when differences across locations are large,
but other factors will dominate as locations become more similar.
    Two other papers falling into this literature look at the impact of shocks associated with
plague outbreaks on cities. Bosker et al. (2008) looks at the impact of plagues outbreaks on
the size of Italian cities. Jedwab et al. (2020) looks at the short and the long-run impact of
a plague outbreak across European cities. They find that cities recovered their pre-plague
population over two centuries, a much slower response than the one found by Davis and
Weinstein in Japan. They also provide evidence that the recovery from the Black Death was
heterogeneous, with cities in more advantageous locations recovering more rapidly. This
heterogeneous recovery links to work by Michaels & Rauch (2018) which we will discuss
later.
    Bosker & Buringh (2017) adds another perspective by highlighting that the success of
a city not only depends on a location's own fundamentals but also on the distribution of
fundamentals in the surrounding region. Comparing 250,000 randomly drawn potential
city locations to actual European city locations over the period between 800­1800, they
find geography to be the dominant factor underlying city location choices. Second nature
geography effects are less relevant but follow the regularity of so called market potential
curves that assign to every location in a given distance from an existing city the likelihood
to become a city as well (Fujita & Mori, 1996). Specifically, Bosker & Buringh find that
the net effect of large neighbors was negative, they imposed growth shaddows.16
    Historical studies also have the potential to help us understand how the impact of loca-
tional fundamentals on city growth changes over time as new technologies are introduced.
A seminal paper in this area is Nunn & Qian (2011), which shows that the introduction of
  15
     Sarvim¨
           aki (2012) presents similar results for the forced relocation of 11 percent of the Finnish population
after Finland ceded its eastern parts to the Soviet Union. The exogenous increase in the local labor force
had a positive effect on later population growth, industrialization and wages.
  16
     Cuberes et al. (2019) present a similar finding for the U.S. though interestingly, they show that the
negative growth effects of large cities turn positive after 1920. This coincides with the rise of commuting
technologies as discussed im section 4.



                                                      12
the potato to Europe had a substantial effect on city growth. To gain identification, they
interact the timing of the arrival of the potato with measures of local agricultural suitability
for the crop based on climatological features.17 This identification strategy is now being
applied in a variety of similar studies. Two other similar studies in this area focus on issues
of central importance to economic historians. Crafts & Wolf (2014) look at the factors that
drove the spatial distribution of the cotton textile industry in Britain, while Fernihough &
O'Rourke (2014) study the impact of coal reserves on economic growth in Europe during
the Industrial Revolution.18 Another paper in this area is Brooks et al. (2016), which looks
at how the introduction of containerized shipping affected economies near ports depending
on whether geographic factors made the port well-suited for handling large container ships.
They find that ports with geographic features that accommodated large ships experienced
increases in population and employment following the introduction of containerization. All
of these studies show that locational fundamentals matter, but that their importance is also
determined by the technologies available at any point in time. This raises questions about
the extent to which churning in city size or regional economic development can be explained
by the interaction of locational fundamentals and new technologies. This is likely to be a
fruitful area for future research.
    An innovative paper by Michaels & Rauch (2018) pushes our understanding of locational
fundamentals forward, by asking whether urban systems can be locked into patterns that
are sub-optimal as technologies change. They focus on a comparison of the urban systems
in Britain and France from 117-2012. They argue that the collapse of the Western Roman
Empire by 410 CE led to the collapse of the urban system in Britain, while the urban system
remained largely intact in France. In addition, they note that the Romans tended to rely
on road transport, while access to water transport became much more important later.
Using this variation, they show that after the re-establishment of urban centers in Britain,
the location of British cities tended to be further from the earlier Roman cities, compared
to the pattern observed in France, and closer to advantageous geographic features such as
seaports. Thus, they argue that path dependence trapped French cities in less advantageous
positions. This study opens a new range of interesting questions in urban economics, but
it remains to be seen whether additional settings can be found that allow these issues to be
investigated further.

3.2    Productivity effects of agglomeration
Results from papers such as Bleakley & Lin (2012) suggest that, while fixed locational fea-
tures are important, other agglomeration benefits also matter. One potential source of these
  17
    In a similar vein, Chen & Kung (2016) study the adoption of maize in China from 1600 to 1910.
  18
    Also see Ploeckl (2012), which looks at the impact of locational advantages on the spatial distribution
of population in Saxony in the 19th century.



                                                    13
other agglomeration forces are productivity advantages related to city size or the clustering
of particular industries. Next, we review papers using history to look at the productivity ef-
fects of agglomeration. In reviewing this literature, it is important to note that the approach
used in long-run papers looking for productivity effects differs from that used in short-run
papers with modern data. In particular, in historical data, direct measures of wages or firm
productivity, which may be the outcome of interest in papers using modern data, are gener-
ally unavailable. To overcome this challenge, historical papers often look at employment or
city size as the outcome of interest. The use of either wages or population/employment as
a measure of agglomeration forces relies on similar theoretical foundations. However, one
important difference between these approaches is that estimates obtained using population
or employment as the outcome of interest end up being denominated in terms of jobs or
population, rather than in value, which can make them more difficult to compare across
different contexts.
    Following up on their 2002 study, Davis & Weinstein (2008) considers the impact of the
bombing of Japanese cities at the level of city-industries. They find no evidence that Second
World War bombing reallocated industries across locations. In contrast, Redding et al.
(2011) show that the division of Germany did have a permanent effect on the location of
the main German airport, even after reunification. Even more focused studies are provided
by Buenstorf & Klepper (2009) and Buenstorf & Klepper (2010), which study the cluster of
tire manufacturers in Akron, Ohio; Cabral et al. (2018), which studies the development of
the early auto industry; and Klepper (2010), which looks at clustering among automakers in
Detroit and semi-conductor manufacturers in Silicon Valley. A slightly different approach is
taken by Borowiecki (2013), who focuses on a specific group of individuals, European classi-
cal composers in the late 18th and 19th centuries, and estimates the impact of proximity to
other composers on their productivity. Being located in a contemporaneous cluster of com-
posers has a pronounced effect on individual productivity, but historical cluster locations or
large cities in general have no effect, suggesting that second nature geography is the driving
agglomeration force. In a similar vein, Mitchell (2019) finds that prominent authors born in
the UK and Ireland in 18th and 19th centuries experience huge productivity increases when
they were residing in London, the only major literary cluster. These very detailed studies
provide evidence that can be used to inform our broader understanding of agglomeration
economies.
    The focus on industry-level outcomes connects to a classic line of work in urban eco-
nomics which compares city-industry growth over several decades to initial city features,
such as industry concentration or diversity (Glaeser et al. (1992), Henderson et al. (1995)).
While innovative at the time of publication, these papers were constrained by limitations
on the availability of historical data on city-industry employment or output. However, new
datasets tracking city-industry employment over long periods are increasingly available, al-


                                              14
lowing a richer analysis. In the U.S., data from the County Business Patterns going back
to 1957 have been digitized by Duranton et al. (2014) while data from the U.S. Census
covering an even longer period has been digitized by Lee (2015) and Klein & Crafts (2020).
Recently, Hornbeck & Rotemberg (2019) digitized the U.S. Census of Manufactures for the
years 1860, 1870, and 1880 as a source of county-by-industry variation. In the U.K., Hanlon
& Miscio (2017) digitize consistent data on city-industry employment for 1851-1911. These
data are then used to look at how the composition of industries in a city affects city-industry
growth. They find that industries grow more rapidly when they have more local suppli-
ers or other industries using occupationally similar workforces, while they find no evidence
that industries grow more rapidly in locations in which are initially large. This suggests
that cross-industry (Jacobs) spillovers are likely to be more important than within-industry
(MAR) spillovers.
    Another interesting paper in this area is Severnini (2014), which looks at the long-run
impact of hydroelectric power on local economic activity. Crucial for his identification
strategy is the fact that prior to the 1950s transmitting power across longer distances was
expensive, so dams provided a location-specific advantage, while the introduction of high-
voltage transmission cables after 1950 eliminated these advantages. The paper finds that
access to early, but not late, hydroelectric dams had both short and long-term effects on local
population and employment growth. In a related paper, Lewis & Severnini (2020) find that
the expansion of the U.S. electric grid into rural areas increased agricultural employment,
but that this crowded out non-agricultural work.
    Geographic concentration may also come with countervailing costs as firms compete for
scarce local inputs. The effect of increased local agglomeration on incumbent firm perfor-
mance is thus ambiguous. Falck et al. (2013) identify the impact of local firm concentration
on incumbent performance in the context of the German machine tool industry after the
Second World War. During that time, many firms fled the Soviet-occupied zone to prevent
expropriation. In the aftermath of the war, these location decisions were driven by non-
economic factors and thus quasi-random. The paper finds that relocating firms increased
the likelihood of incumbent failure in destination regions because they increase competition
for labor.
    One reason to care about how agglomeration affects productivity is that these effects
have implications for the use of place-based policies. Place based policies are widely used and
can be very costly, but evidence on their efficacy remains somewhat sparse. An important
recent paper that speaks directly to this issue using historical data is Kline & Moretti
(2013). They study the impact of a very large local development policy, the Tennessee
Valley Authority (TVA) project. This project, which began in the 1930s, peaked in the
1950s, and effectively ended in the 1960s, involved investments such as new dams, roads,
and canals, in several U.S. states. Taking advantage of the spatial and temporal variation


                                              15
offered by this project, Kline & Moretti provide evidence that these investments had a
long-run impact on manufacturing employment but not on agriculture, a pattern that can
be explained by the presence of agglomeration economies in manufacturing. In addition,
they use a structural model to assess the aggregate impact of the program, which they find
to have net positive effects on national manufacturing productivity.
    Ehrlich & Seidel (2018) looks a temporary place-based subsidies for the West German re-
gions that were located along the inner-German border to compensate firms and households
for their loss in market access (see Redding & Sturm, 2008). The paper finds persistent
effects on economic density which is attributed to physical infrastructure investments in
locational advantages such as industrial parks, roads, power networks, or sewage systems.
The benefits of the policy are capitalized in land rents.
    Becker et al. (2018) study a specific form of a place based policy, the decision to create
public sector jobs as an instrument to address employment problems in declining areas.
However, these employment effects may be offset if the location of public employment af-
fected private sector activity through wage effects, increasing housing costs and potential
productivity and amenity spillovers. The paper exploits the relocation of the (West) Ger-
man federal government from Berlin to Bonn after the Second World War as exogenous
shock to study the effect of public employment on the spatial distribution of private sector
activity. As expected, Bonn experienced a substantial increase in total employment and
population which was mostly due to the increase in public employment. Private sector
employment remained largely unchanged. This is in line with the predictions of a simple
economic geography model where public sector employment in a city can crowd out private
employment through higher wages and house prices, but also generates potential productiv-
ity and amenity spillovers. Further empirical evidence suggests that the results are driven
by an increase in amenities in Bonn while productivity in the private sector remained largely
unchanged.

3.3   Amenities and disamenities
Another classical urban economics question addressed using historical data is the role of
amenities or disamenities in contributing to city growth. On the amenities side, Falck et al.
 (2011) uses history to provide plausibly exogenous variation in the location of baroque
opera houses across Germany and shows that these locations attracted high-human-capital
workers which in turn has positive growth effects. On disamenities, Hanlon (2020) studies
the impact of industrial pollution on city growth using British cities in the 19th and early
20th century, which experienced extreme levels of air pollution. This paper finds that
industrial pollution substantially affected the growth of employment and population in
British cities during this period. Moreover, most of this effect appears to come through the
impact of pollution on the productivity of workers and firms, rather than through impacts


                                             16
on residents' utility.19
    Another historically important disamenity associated with cities, and one that continues
to affect urban areas in developing countries today, is poor sanitation. The impact of sani-
tation improvements on cities has been the focus of a number of studies at the intersection
of urban economics and economic history. We review this literature in Section 4.2.

3.4    Trade and market access
A very active line of research on cities using historical data explores the impact of trade or
"market access" on the development of local and regional economies. A transformational
paper in this literature was Donaldson (2018), which provided an early indication of the
types of rich historical data that could be brought to bear on this topic. Focusing on
India, this paper showed how theory and historical data could be combined to measure the
local impact of transportation infrastructure improvements. This contributes to a larger
literature looking at the impact of railroads or other transportation improvements on the
spatial distribution of economic activity.20 A follow up paper, Donaldson & Hornbeck
(2016), provides additional tools for assessing the impact of transportation infrastructure
on local economies and applies them to U.S. data from the 19th century. One application
of the market access approach that they introduce is provided by Jaworski & Kitchens
(2019), who study the impact of the construction of the Appalachian Development Highway
System on regional economic development. Another, Morten & Oliveira (2018), looks at the
construction of Brazil's the new capital city Brasilia in 1960 which triggered the development
of a new highway network that connected the national capital to the existing state capitals.
That paper finds a positive effect of the road improvement on both goods markets and
labor markets. In an extension, Hornbeck & Rotemberg (2019) use data from the U.S.
Census of Manufactures between 1860 and 1880 to show that improved market access from
railway expansions benefited manufacturing productivity.21 A key contribution of their
paper is highlighting the importance of the interaction between market access and factor
misallocation.
  19
     Other recent contributions on historic pollution effects include Barreca et al. (2014); Clay & Troesken
(2011); Clay et al. (2016).
  20
     Atack et al. (2010) studies the relationship between urbanization, population density and the coming
of the railroad in the U.S. Midwest in the mid-19th century. Berger & Enflo (2017) looks at the impact
of railroads on 150 years of urban growth in Sweden. Hornung (2015) undertakes a somewhat similar
exercise to Donaldson using data from Prussia in the 19th century. Bogart et al. (2015) compares the
growth contribution of railways in India and Latin America. Crafts & Mulatu (2006) studies the impact
of transportation improvements on the location of industry in Britain in the period before the First World
War.
  21
     Similarly, Costinot & Donaldson (2016) point to long-run gains from economic integration of US agri-
cultural markets that are comparable to the productivity improvements.




                                                    17
     Redding & Sturm (2008) also study the impact of market access on city growth, using
the change in market access induced by the division of Germany following the Second
World War and the subsequent reunification in 1990. Their results provide strong evidence
on the impact of market access on the growth of cities.22 A recent paper by Johnson &
Koyama (2017) suggests that cities in Europe with Jewish communities grew faster than
cities without Jewish communities over the period between 1400 and 1850, a result of Jewish
communities' ability to exploit increases in market access after 1600.
     Another study focused on how transport costs affects cities is Fajgelbaum & Redding
(2014), which uses data from Argentina in the 19th century to investigate the interaction of
falling international trade costs and internal transportation costs on the spatial distribution
of economic activity. Their data show that a reduction in international trade costs led to
relative increases in population density in locations with better access to external markets,
a pattern that they rationalize with a model in which improvements in market access lead
transport hubs to shift away from agriculture toward services and manufacturing, which
use land less intensively and therefore allow greater density.
     In a somewhat related vein, Nagy (2020) uses historical data, together with a dynamic
model of trade, labor mobility, and endogenous growth, to assess the impact of the con-
struction of railroads on the U.S. urban system on economic growth in the 19th century.
Longer-run effects of early transport-infrastructure investments that facilitated interregional
trade are reported in Fl¨  uckiger et al. (2019) and Dalgaard et al. (2018) who study the
persistent effects of the Roman road network across Europe. The former argues that trade-
links led to cultural integration which facilitates economic interactions today. The latter
paper adds an interesting perspective when it shows that the effects only persist in areas
where the road infrastructure was permanently used and supplemented with the emergence
of market towns. This in line with Wahl (2016) who shows that involvement in medieval
trade has a lasting effect on contemporary regional economic development across European
countries. The persistent effect of historical infrastructure investments is the underlying
motivation for studies that employ historical infrastructure investments as an instrument
in contemporaneous studies of road infrastructure and interegional trade (Duranton et al. ,
2014; Baum-Snow et al. , 2017; Volpe Martincus et al. , 2017).23
     All of the studies cited in this subsection suggest that locations benefit from improved
market access, in terms of greater population density, land prices, or productivity. However,
a recent study at the industry level by Juh´   asz (2018) shows a somewhat different pattern.
Juhasz studies a temporary increase in trade barriers in France in the early 19th century
caused by the Napoleonic Blockade of Britain. This sheltered French textile firms from
competition from more advanced British textile producers. Juhasz shows that this had a
  22
     Another interesting historical paper looking at the impact of access to trade on city growth in a very
different context is Jia (2014), which studies the development of Chinese treaty ports.
  23
     Section 4 refers to other studies that employ historical transport infrastructure as an instrument.


                                                    18
long-run positive effect on the development of the local cotton textile industry, a finding
that suggests that temporary trade protection may have long-term benefits for certain local
industries, and perhaps local economies as a whole.

3.5      Education, information and finance
One of the most active areas of research at the intersection of urban economics and eco-
nomic history focuses on the long-run impact of education and human capital on local
economic development. Historical research has a natural advantage in this area because it
makes available natural experiments that can provide exogenous variation in the location
of educational institutions or labor force skills, which is often difficult to obtain in modern
settings. In addition, many of the benefits of educational investments may accrue slowly
over time.
    One strand of work in this area looks at the impact of educational institutions on the
local economy. Cantoni & Yuchtman (2014), for example, provide evidence on the long-run
contribution of medieval universities to local economic development using an identifica-
tion strategy that relies on the founding of new universities following the Papal Schism of
1386. In a very different context, Kantor & Whalley (2019) find evidence of spillovers from
agricultural experiment stations in the U.S. which peak decades after the opening of the sta-
tions. Thus, both studies suggest that investments in educational and research institutions
can have important long-run effects which may take decades to fully manifest themselves.
In contrast, Andrews (2020) uses historical details on the founding of U.S. universities to
identify their (surprisingly modest) impact on local innovation rates.
    A second line of work in this area looks at the impact of transfers of knowledge or
skills across urban areas. Dittmar (2011b) focuses on the example of the printing press,
a groundbreaking technology that was invented in Mainz, Germany in the 15th century
(see also Rubin, 2014). He shows that cities that had earlier access to printing technology
thanks to their proximity to Mainz grew 60% faster from 1500-1600 than other similar cities.
Hornung (2014) provides evidence on the impact of inflows of skilled workers by looking at
the migration of the Huguenot Diaspora to Prussia following their expulsion from France
in the 17th century. He finds that these skilled workers had a long-term positive effect on
productivity in the receiving cities. One implication of these studies is that the gains that
urban areas receive from market integration may go far beyond access to goods alone.
    A third strand of work looks at the impact of education on industrialization and long-
run economic development. Becker et al. (2011) focus on Prussia, where detailed census
data are available at the county level before and after the onset of the Industrial Revolution,
which reached Prussia in the 1830s. Using instruments based on pre-Industrial Revolution
data, they provide evidence that education was associated with industrialization.24 More
 24
      In a somewhat related exercise, Cinnirella & Hornung (2016) study the relationship between large


                                                  19
recently, an innovative paper by Squicciarini & Voigtl¨ander (2015) uses data on purchasers
of the Encyclope´die in mid-18th century France to identify the location of "knowledge elites"
and then shows that these locations experienced more rapid city growth after the onset of
industrialization in France. Bai & Kung (2015) look at China and show how Protestant
missionaries promoted economic prosperity during the period from 1840 to 1920. While
the missionaries converted few Chinese, their presence triggered urbanization driven by
knowledge diffusion from the schools and hospitals that they established. In a similar
spirit, Caicedo (2019) shows that Jesuit missionaries instructing indigenous inhabitants in
reading, writing, and crafts had lasting effects on educational attainment and income in
those areas in modern-day Argentina, Brazil, and Paraguay.
    Another active area for research focuses on the local impact of finance. An example
of work in this vein is Heblich & Trew (2019) who use parish level data for England and
Wales in 1817 and 1881 to study the effect of banking access on manufacturing growth
and structural change. Similarly, Bodenhorn & Cuberes (2018) find that the entrance of
a new bank had a positive effect on subsequent population growth in the Northeastern
United States over the period 1830-1870. Another paper in this area is Atack et al. (2014),
which looks at the relationship between banking and railroads in the U.S. before the Civil
War. More recently, Feigenbaum et al. (2018) documents the long-run impact of the
destruction caused by Sherman's March to the Sea during the U.S. Civil War. They argue
that underdeveloped financial markets played an important role in the slow recovery of
counties affected by the capital destruction that occurred during the March.

3.6    Structural transformation
A relatively new line of urban studies using historical data have focused on linking struc-
tural transformation and urban growth. For example, Michaels et al. (2012) study the
impact of structural transformation on the population density distribution. They begin by
using uniquely detailed data tracking population in the U.S. from 1880-2000 in a consis-
tent way, including both urban and rural areas. Their data show that population growth
is positively related to initial population density at intermediate population densities, a
pattern that is inconsistent with Gibrat's Law. At higher population densities, however,
this positive relationship disappears, a pattern that has been documented in numerous set-
tings. To explain these patterns, they offer a model economy composed of agricultural and
manufacturing sectors. In the model, agriculture concentrates in less dense areas and expe-
riences mean reversion, while manufacturing employment growth is uncorrelated with initial
density. These features, together with structural transformation from agriculture toward
manufacturing across the study period in intermediate locations, can explain the stylized
landownership concentration and the expansion of mass education in nineteenth-century Prussia. The step-
wise abolition of serfdom increased the private demand for education.


                                                  20
facts found in the data. This paper provides an important bridge between research on urban
systems and work on structural transformation which has often been focused on patterns at
the national level. A somewhat different approach is taken by Trew (2014), which calibrates
a model based on Desmet & Rossi-Hansberg (2014) on occupational data for England in
1710 and uses it to predict changes in the spatial distribution of manufacturing and agricul-
tural employment in the mid-19th century. In a follow-up paper, Trew (2020) investigates
the interplay of infrastructure development and economic growth in England across 18th
and 19th centuries. Herrendorf et al. (2012) perform a similar exercise for the U.S. and
show that transport improvements determined where people lived and what industry they
worked in and led to important welfare gains.
    A second paper linking cities and structural change, Michaels et al. (2019), studies
the evolution of the types of tasks done in cities relative to less dense locations. To track
tasks across locations and over the period 1880­2000, they classify the actions (verbs)
associated with each occupation in the Dictionary of Occupational Titles compiled by the
U.S. Department of Labor and then link these to locations using occupation data from the
U.S. Census (via IPUMS). These data show a trend toward what they call "interactive"
occupations ­ those that involve thought, communication, and inter-social activity ­ over
time, and this trend is stronger in cities than in less dense areas. These patterns can be
rationalized by a model in which dense locations have a comparative advantage in interactive
tasks, a finding that is also documented in Bacolod et al. (2009).

3.7   Are cities too large or too small?
Historical data is also being used to improve our understanding of the distribution of city
sizes and whether cities are too larger or too small. For example, two recent papers in this
area look at the timing of the emergence of Zipf's law. Dittmar (2011a) provides evidence
that in Europe, Zipf's Law emerged after 1500. Before that, big cities were too small, which
he attributes to the constraint imposed by land entering as a fixed factor, a constraint
that was relaxed after 1500 by innovations in transportation, technology and agricultural
productivity improvements. In the U.S., Desmet & Rappaport (2017) show that large cities
experienced a gradual transition toward Gibrat's Law (where growth rates are uncorrelated
with initial size) across the 19th and early 20th centuries, which we know from Gabaix
(1999) will lead to the emergence of Zipf's Law. They offer a model which rationalizes
the observed patterns through the entry of new locations on the western frontier of the
country. A useful take-away from this paper is that, because of the open frontier, the U.S.
city system may behave quite differently than other locations until the middle of the 20th
century. This study builds on earlier work tracing long-run city and regional development




                                             21
in the United States, including seminal work by Kim (1995).25 Giesen & S¨      udekum (2014)
take an alternative approach to Zipf's law by focusing on city age. Using data on the
founding date of 10,000 U.S. cities, they show that city age is positively correlated with city
population, a feature that they explain by modeling an urban system with entry of new
cities over time.
    Historical studies can also help improve our understanding of the role of developers,
which play an important role in determining city size in urban models such as Henderson
(1974). As pointed out by Helsley & Strange (1997), one of the key challenges faced by
developers is land assembly. This is an issue studied by several recent papers using historical
data. Libecap & Lueck (2011) consider the impact of two different land demarcation systems
in 19th century Ohio. One of these generated regular rectangular plots while the other
allowed irregular plots that tracked terrain features. They find that rectangular plots had
large long-run net benefits. Similarly, Bleakley & Ferrie (2014) uses exogenous variation in
plot size allocations from land lotteries in Georgia to study the ease with which land can be
assembled into optimal sizes. They find that misallocation initially depressed land values
by 20% and that it took 150 years for these effects to disappear. Another study of the U.S.
frontier, Smith (2020) finds instead that large landholdings resulted in depressed values.
Overall, these studies suggest that there may be substantial barriers to the assembly of
land into parcels of optimal size, as hypothesized by Helsley & Strange (1997).
    The papers reviewed in this section show us that historical studies have a lot to tell us
about why cities exist, how they interact, and how they grow. While many of the studies in
this area address core urban economics questions ­ including the reasons that cities exist,
agglomeration economies, and the causes of Zipf's Law ­ historical work is also creating
bridges between urban economics and topics typically studied by other fields, including
structural change, trade, education and migration. Given the continued growth of rich
long-run historical data sources, we expect that this will continue to be a fertile research
area for years to come.


4        Studies of city structure and neighborhood sorting
The previous section discussed historical reasons for the existence of cities and interactions
between cities. This section shifts from a between-city perspective to a within-city per-
spective. Specifically, we are interested in what history can teach us about determinants
of the equilibrium distribution of residents, workers and land rents across locations within
a city, how major urban infrastructure investments, such as transport networks or sewer
systems, affected the shape and size of cities, and how the organization and segregation of
    25
    Other studies in this area include Eaton & Eckstein (1997), Kim (1998, 2006), Ioannides & Overman
(2003), Cuberes (2011), and Beeson et al. (2001).



                                                 22
cities today is influenced by the past.
    Papers that apply quantitative urban models in combination with historical data (see
Ahlfeldt et al. , 2015; Heblich et al. , 2016) illustrate how a historical perspective can help
us understand to what extent large shocks like the division of Berlin or historical pollution
exposure changed the structure of the city in the long-run. Being able to account for these
changes qualitatively and quantitatively provides a handle to evaluate future changes to e.g.
the transport network. Additionally, a better understanding of path dependencies holds
important policy implications, especially if initial conditions or shocks that determined a
spatial equilibrium in the past are redundant today. Here, policies that promote a movement
to better steady-state could be welfare enhancing (Donaldson & Allen, 2020).

4.1    Transport infrastructure
Before the industrial revolution, walking was the most common way to travel within cities
and people lived close to where they worked (Voth, 2001). Cities were typically organized
around a center where the economic activity took place and they did not stretch out more
than a few miles (this is why the City of London is also colloquially known as square mile).
Urban development was constrained by distance (Duranton, 1999). While the introduction
of horse omnibuses increased travel speed slightly, it was only the introduction of railways
and subways that had a lasting effect on inner-city travel speeds.26
    With the emergence of railways and subways, people started moving to suburbs and
commuting to their place of work in city centers. As a result, employment and residence
locations became increasingly segregated, as shown in (Heblich et al. , 2020b) for the case
of London.27 This gave rise to highly localized production and residential externalities, a
key result in the seminal paper by Ahlfeldt et al. (2015). Outside of metropolises that
invested in the construction of railways and subways, street cars were a less costly but
equally effective way to allow people to commute (Brooks & Lutz, 2019; Xie & Levinson,
2010). Early version of streetcars were horse drawn but this technology was not sustainable
as growing numbers of workhorses lined the streets with piles of manure. The introduction
of electricity in streetcars overcame this problem and was equally beneficial for subways,
since steam driven engines in tunnels posed significant ventilation problems.
    After the introduction of rail technology, cars and trucks were the next big technological
shock, with lasting effects on the internal organization of cities around the world (see Glaeser
& Kohlhase, 2004). The development occurred in two main waves. First, roads and the
introduction of trucks freed up firms' location choice within cities, leading to an emergence
of sub-centers (Moses & Williamson, 1967; Anas et al. , 1998; Glaeser & Kahn, 2001). The
  26
   see Bogart (2014) for a survey of the transportation revolution
  27
   Ahlfeldt & Wendland (2011) and Ahlfeldt & Wendland (2013) use historical land values in Berlin, Ger-
many, from 1890 to 1936 and show a similar impact of the rapid transport system on urban decentralization.



                                                   23
second wave of change was the result of newly built urban highways starting in the 1950s,
which led to a significant reduction in commuting costs and with it a further increase in
urban sprawl as people moved to suburbs. To identify the effects of decreased travel time
on residential choice, Baum-Snow (2007) uses a 1947 highway system plan for the U.S.
as a source of exogenous variation.28 In subsequent research, the 1947-highway-map has
been augmented by two more historical instruments­the 1898 railroad network and maps of
historical routes of exploration­to assess the effect of transport infrastructure on road usage
(Duranton & Turner, 2011), urban growth (Duranton & Turner, 2012), within and between
city trade (Duranton et al. , 2014), driving speed in large U.S. cities (Couture et al. , 2018),
and knowledge flows in support of innovative activities (Agrawal et al. , 2017).29
    Historical evidence tells us that the layout of road infrastructure can have long-lasting
effects on city development. Existing layouts range from the iconic regular grid of midtown
New York to the hub-and-spoke of Washington D.C. and the less regular patterns observed
in the center of many older cities around the world. O'Grady (2014) presents one of the
few quantitative studies on the coordinating effects of rectangular grids in cities.30 The
paper exploits the 1811 adoption of an iconic regular grid in midtown Manhattan while
Lower Manhattan was built on a decentralized grid. These spatial differences in the street
patterns continue to exist today, and it turns out that regular grids increase land values
and land use because irregular property shapes are less common and connectivity is better
(Barr & Ort, 2013). Related to this, using data on Indian cities, Harari (2020) shows that
a more compact city shape due to favorable terrain facilitates transit accessibility. This is
reflected in faster population growth.
    Historical studies of the impact of transportation infrastructure on cities remains one of
the most active areas of historical urban research. As we look ahead at further advances in
transportation technology, whether in the form of self-driving cars, electric scooters for hire,
or package delivery drones, historical studies can offer insights into how we might expect
urban environments to change in response.
  28
     Other research on suburbanization in the U.S. since the 1950s includes Glaeser & Gyourko (2005) and
Glaeser & Kahn (2001). We also refer readers to Crabgrass Frontier, by Jackson (1985), which provides a
comprehensive summary of the factors that promoted suburbanization over the course of history.
  29
     Studies that use historical route instruments outside the U.S. include Garcia-L´  opez et al. (2015) who
employ Roman roads and the 1760 Bourbon roads to instrument the Spanish road infrastructure today;
Hsu & Zhang (2014) who exploit historical Japanese railroad networks; or Baum-Snow et al. (2017) who
rely on the 1962 road and rail network in China. Somewhat related to this strand of research are papers
which exploit the historical layout of the voice telephony infrastructure (Falck et al. , 2014) or cable-TV
infrastructure (Czernich et al. , 2011) to explain the regional diffusion of high-speed internet.
  30
     Ellickson (2012) discusses the economic benefits of a grid pattern but he does not present quantitative
evidence.




                                                     24
4.2    Urban health amenities
Transport infrastructure is an important factor if we think about the internal organization
of cities. An equally important though less visible part of the urban infrastructure is the
network of water and sewer pipes. Its importance for the (healthy) rise of densely popu-
lated cities cannot be overestimated. During the industrialization, more and more people
cramped into cities hoping to earn higher wages. The price they paid was a lower life ex-
pectancy.31 . Water-borne illnesses, like cholera and typhoid, were a main factor underlying
urban mortality before the oral-fecal method of disease transmission was understood and
cities started investing in water and sewerage infrastructure to improve public health.32 An
important line of research, including work such as Cutler & Miller (2005), Ferrie & Troesken
(2008), Troesken (2008), and Kesztenbaum & Rosenthal (2011), documents the importance
of sanitation improvements for urban health and development. This literature has played
an influential role in policy responses in modern developing countries, where cities continue
to struggle with high mortality rates. More recently Alsan & Goldin (2019) highlight the
importance of combining water and sewer infrastructure, while work by Clay et al. (2014)
and Feigenbaum & Muller (2016) on lead pipes shows that mistakes in the provision of
health infrastructure can be costly. Yet despite a substantial body of research on this topic,
reviewed in more detail in Brian Beach's article in this volume, debate remains over the
true effect of public health efforts on urban mortality (Anderson et al. , Forthcoming).
    Another factor underlying urban mortality was air pollution. While coal smoke from
small workshops and heating existed prior to the industrial use of coal, the amount of air
pollution in emerging manufacturing towns was unprecedented. Coal was fueling rising
incomes but workers had to breath its smoke in the notoriously polluted centers of the
industrialization which came at the cost of a lower productivity and poor health (Bailey
et al. , 2018; Barreca et al. , 2014; Beach & Hanlon, 2018). Even more insights into the
health effects of air pollution come from Hanlon (2019) who combines a long time series of
mortality data for London with London fog events where pollution got trapped in the city.
That paper highlights the substantial contribution that pollution made to overall mortality
in the past, as well as documenting interactions between pollution exposure and the presence
of infectious diseases. Clay & Troesken (2011) study the Spanish Influenza Pandemic and
find a similar interaction with pollution. These results indicate that pollution is likely to
be more costly in cities, such as those in modern developing countries, that also struggle
with high infections disease burdens.
    Unlike the case of water supply, cities were less influential in regulating urban air pol-
  31
     Cities were already deadly places before that as discussed in Voigtl¨
                                                                         ander & Voth (2013b) and Jedwab
et al. (2020) but the population growth during the Industrial Revolution brought this to a new level
  32
     The epidemiologist John Snow provided important evidence on the oral-fecal transmission mechanisms
when he detected that one contaminated well in a London parish caused a cholera epidemic Ambrus et al.
(2020).


                                                  25
lution. One potential explanation is that managing air pollution would directly affect the
competitiveness of one location compared to others within the same country. Only a nation-
wide regulation could have prevented this, but nothing substantial had been done before
the lethal London Fog in 1954 led to the 1956 Clean Air Act in England. Subsequently,
other countries followed.
    Despite the fact that cities in modern developed countries are remarkably healthy by
historical standards, the results reviewed in this subsection suggest that urban economists
should not lose sight of the important role that health plays in cities, a role that has been
starkly illustrated by the Covid-19 pandemic. Even after that passes, health concerns will
remain important, particularly in developing cities, though urban health challenges remain
even in developed countries, as the recent experience of Flint, Michigan can attest.33

4.3     Residential amenities
The public sewers and pollution regulations that we have just discussed represent just
two of the many factors that influence the amenity value of neighborhoods and cities.
Other important influences on city amenities that have been studied with historical evidence
include those related to public safety, natural amenities, as well as the many beneficial pieces
of urban infrastructure, ranging from opera houses to iconic buildings, bequeathed to cities
by past generations of residents.
    As protests in U.S. urban cities following the death of George Floyd remind us, how cities
invest in public safety continue to be an important topic for discussion and study. This is a
topic where historical evidence has much to offer, though one where existing work remains
limited. One recent example in this vein is Bindler & Hjalmarsson (2019), which studies the
formation of the world's first professional police force, the London Metropolitan Police, in
1829, as well as the subsequent role-out of a professional police forces across Britain. They
show that this led to an overall reduction in crime, contributing to the declining crime
rates in England and Wales in the second half of the nineteenth century despite a growing
population. That paper highlights two important features that influenced the effectiveness
of the new police force. First, there was a new focus on crime prevention and deterrence
rather than ex-post punishment. Second, there was an emphasis on police quality, a topic
that clearly remains relevant.
    Other historical amenities, to use the term offered by Brueckner et al. (1999), continue
  33
    The 2014 Flint Water Crisis emerged when the city of Flint decided to disconnect from Detroit's drinking
water system that drew water from Lake Huron and set up their own water supply that drew from the Flint
river. Tragically, officials failed to apply corrosion inhibitors to the more corrosive river water, thus causing
lead to leach into the drinking water. Residents noticed health effects but local officials denied anything
wrong for over a year. After that, Flint switched back to Detroit's water system and the state of Michigan
has agreed to compensate the victims.




                                                       26
to influence patterns of urban development today.34 Examples of historical investments
that have lasting effects on the attractiveness of neighborhood include park designations in
expensive downtown locations; opera houses (Falck et al. , 2011); and historical buildings
and cultural landmarks (Koster & Rouwendal, 2017; Ahlfeldt & Holman, 2018). However,
it is worth noting that these amenities can also come with costs, in addition to benefits. For
example, in England, Hilber et al. (2019) highlight the costs of preserving historic build-
ings in terms of lost energy efficiency. Another cost are building height restrictions meant
to preserve skylines with the silhouette of historical buildings, that may limit beneficial
development.
     In addition to historical amenities, exogenous natural amenities can have lasting effects
on the attractiveness of neighborhoods. Looking at the period 1880­2010 in the U.S., Lee
& Lin (2018) uncover an interesting heterogeneity in the spatial distribution of income
within cities; those cities with natural amenities like oceans, mountains, and lakes show a
more persistent spatial distribution of income, while the spatial distribution of income in
cities with few natural amenities churns quickly. This result nicely complements Rosenthal
(2008) who shows that neighborhoods cycle through periods of decline and renewal. As
their housing stock deteriorates, so does the average income until old dwellings are replaced
with newer dwellings which attracts higher income families. Rosenthal argues that local
externalities may amplify these cycles while Lee & Lin point out a countervailing force,
natural amenities.
     economic status follows long-running cycles of decline and renewal in the core areas
of thirty-five U.S. cities between 1950 and 2000. Villarreal (2014) is another paper which
explores how exogenous environmental amenities­undesirable historical marshes­shaped ini-
tial settlement patterns in New York City, as well as the channels through which these initial
conditions influence the long-run distribution of housing prices and household income.
     Historical amenities can have long-run effects on the sorting of population within cities.
These effects are shown in recent work by Heblich et al. (2016), which examines the long-
run effects of historical air pollution as an example of an endogenous man-made disamenity.
They show that coal pollution from industrial chimneys in England had a disproportionately
stronger effect on cities' east side due to the prevailing wind patterns. Interestingly, these
effects persist to this day, even though the initial pollution sources have waned. In a related
paper, Ambrus et al. (2020) show that the cholera epidemic in 19th century London affected
the spatial distribution of poverty within the city until today. One implication of these
results is that the nature and distribution of urban amenities, even those that existed in the
past but disappeared long ago, can continue to exert influence on the urban segregation.
  34
    The value of amenities is often assessed with the help of the hedonic pricing. This approach runs up
against a natural limitation in historical studies.




                                                  27
4.4    Segregation
The lasting pollution effects on the east sides of cities is an example of historically inherited
income segregation. A much larger body of research focuses on the origins and lasting effects
of racial segregation, predominantly in the U.S. Using a new next-door-neighbor measure,
Logan & Parman (2017) show that segregation doubled nationally from 1880 to 1940 and
this was a general trend for rural and urban areas as well as the North and South. This
corroborates earlier work by Cutler et al. (1999) who employ a less disaggregate segregation
index to document the rise (since the 1890s) and decline (since the 1970s) of black ghettos in
urban centers.35 Boustan (2010) focuses on the period between 1940­1970 where segregation
increased faster. An important driver of this trend was the white flight from city centers to
suburbs as black migrants left the rural South to find jobs in the booming industrial centers
in the North, results that are reinforced in recent work by Shertzer & Walsh (2019). These
patterns had important consequences, such as on the provision of (locally financed) public
goods such as education (Boustan, 2013).
    Historical transportation infrastructure has had an important role to play in segregation
within cities. Ananat (2011) shows that historical railroad tracks physically separate neigh-
borhoods, thereby contributing to segregation and black-white income disparities. In the
case of white flight in the U.S., the availability of highways facilitated suburbanization by
white residents. A different aspect of the interplay between transportation infrastructure
and segregation is highlighted by Brinkman & Lin (2017). They show that freeways have
disproportionately negative effects on the predominantly black homeowners in central lo-
cations,36 because accessibility improved relatively little in those areas, which were already
well-connected, while the city freeway network meant increased pollution and noise.
    Another historical factor that fostered racial segregation patterns which continue to exist
today was a practice known as redlining. Redlining prevented African Americans access to
home loans backed by the federal government (Aaronson et al. , 2017). A similar practice
were racial covenants that prohibited the sale or renting of a property to specific races or
religious minorities (Sood et al. , 2020). While these practices have been officially banned
since the middle of the nineteenth century, their influence remains. Moreover, not only
did such practices generate segregated neighborhoods, they also had other impacts, such as
contributing to racial wealth disparities (Akbar et al. , 2020). While redlining is no longer
legal, other less obviously discriminatory policies continue to be in place. For example,
wealthy neighborhoods may deter poorer residents by minimum lot size requirements or
limiting mixed-use or multifamily zoning (Shertzer et al. , 2016).
  35
     Part of the decline might be related to the longer-run success of urban renewal programs (Collins &
Shester, 2013).
  36
     The white flight to suburbs led to a reduction of house prices in the center which benefited black
homeownership (Boustan & Margo, 2013).



                                                  28
   Segregation remains one of the most active research topics at the intersection of history
and urban economics (as well as real estate). Given the prominence of this issue, and the
long reach of history in urban environments, we expect this to continue. While much of the
focus in recent work has been on the U.S., this is a topic where there is ample need, and
opportunity, for evidence from other settings.

4.5   Zoning and other urban policies
Today, how cities are organized depends crucially on urban regulations, which include a
wide range of policies such as zoning, historical designations, etc. In many cases, these
regulations represent historical institutional arrangements that restricted location choices
in the past and, to the extent that they did not adjust to changes in local demand over time,
have grown to be a significant obstacle for urban economic growth today. Understanding
the origin and persistence of these regulatory forces, and the extent to which they influence
modern cities, is important for helping design more effective urban policies.
    One of the most prominent urban policies is zoning (see Fischel (2004) for a comprehen-
sive historical review). A first wave of zoning laws, which originated in the early twentieth
century, were designed to protected home-owners from industrial developments and lower
income apartment when trucks and buses improved mobility across town. A second wave
of zoning restrictions in suburbs was a reaction to the rising demand for suburbanization.
Historical studies have a natural advantage in investigating the impact of zoning because
they can look before and after the introduction of zoning laws. In contrast, modern studies
are often constrained by the fact that most modern zoning laws were enacted many decades
ago and change slowly over time. Two examples of historical work on zoning are McMillen
& McDonald (2002) and Shertzer et al. (2018), both of which study zoning in Chicago
going back to the 1920s.
    While economists agree that zoning laws restrict urban growth, it is important to note
that land development is not necessarily optimal in the absence of regulations. This point
is made by Hornbeck & Keniston (2017), who exploit the 1873 Boston fire as exogenous
shock and test whether the opportunity to simultaneously reconstruct a wide area came
with economic gains. The findings suggest that the simultaneous reconstruction efforts
after the fire helped developers overcome redevelopment frictions and translated into higher
land values. This shows that the durable building stock is a redevelopment burden in itself.
Two other studies, Siodla (2015, 2017), examines similar topics using the effect of the San
Francisco fire of 1906. These studies show the potential for harnessing historical natural
experiments to study urban topics that are often difficult to tackle using modern data.
    Looking beyond the zoning of land for particular uses, other recent work examines topics
such as the impact of historic designations (Waights, 2019). Another class of regulations
have to do with building heights. As urban areas grew in the nineteenth and early twentieth


                                             29
centuries, land prices in the center increased, giving developers an incentive to increasing
building heights. This led to the emergence of skyscrapers at the end of the nineteenth
century, first in Chicago, then in New York, and then around the world. With an increasing
number of skyscrapers and competition over the prize of being tallest Helsley & Strange
(2008), there were rising concerns about negative externalities on surrounding buildings as
a result of sunlight blockage and increased traffic congestion. To address this, U.S. zoning
laws were extended to regulate the vertical expansion of buildings from the early twentieth
century on. Research by Barr (2013) provides an interesting perspective on the effect of
these regulations. Comparing the skyscraper developments in Chicago and New York City,
he shows changing zoning regulations did reduce the height of each city's own skyline while
triggering increased building activity in the other city. Ahlfeldt & McMillen (2018) study
the vertical evolution of Chicago and find evidence that the footprint of taller buildings
cover a smaller fraction of the plot to comply with restrictions on the floor area ratio. To
assess the costs of height restrictions, Koster & Dericks (2020) exploit the Blitz bombings
of London during the Second World War as an exogenous shock to local density restrictions
and show that bombed areas host taller buildings today.
    Zoning and other policies that restrict urban development are sure to remain a core
concern for urban economists for many years. This is because they drive up land prices
and Knoll et al. (2017) have shown that rising land prices are a significant driver of the
global house price boom that has taken place since the Second World War. As the studies
cited above illustrate, history offers numerous natural experiments that can be harnessed
to help us understand the effects of these policies. Just as important, by looking back in
history we can observe a world in which such regulations were largely absent. While much
has changed since zoning laws were introduced, doing so still offers the potential for helping
us understand the consequences of rolling back existing restrictions.


5    Cities and growth
There has been a growing interest in the historical urbanization process from different
subfields within economics. Part of the growing popularity relates to the insight that ur-
banization can proxy for economic prosperity. While it is comparatively hard to compile
reliable data on countries' GDP growth going back in time, data on historical city sizes
are easier to access. Under assumptions that we discuss below, the urbanization rate or
population density can provide suitable proxies for countries' economic growth and devel-
opment over long periods of time. It is worth noting however, that the exact nature of the
relationship between urbanization and development may have changed over time, a point
argued by Jedwab & Vollrath (2015).




                                             30
5.1      Urbanization as an indicator of economic growth
Economists in different fields have approached the relationship between urbanization and
economic growth from different perspectives. Economic historians often focus on the impact
of economic growth on the level of population in a location. In contrast, urban economists
are often more interested in how a given population is spread across space, i.e., the extent
to which a given population agglomerates in urban areas. Below, we briefly describe the
foundations of these two views, discuss the extent to which they complement each other,
and seek to highlight areas where further work is needed to bring them into agreement.
     Urbanization or population density in the past is widely used as a proxy for technological
progress and economic growth. One motivation for this approach emphasizes the impact of
technological progress on population (Kremer, 1993; Galor & Weil, 2000). In particular, the
link between economic growth and population is a key prediction of the Malthusian model,
which is the dominant framework for thinking about economies prior to the Industrial
Revolution, as well as modern developing countries that have not yet passed through the
demographic transition. The basic intuition behind the Malthusian model is that, given
sufficient time, changes in per capita income due, for example, to a technological discovery
or natural fluctuations, will ultimately result in population growth. This will erode the
increase in per capita income. The result is a long-run equilibrium in which per capita
income is determined only by fertility and mortality parameters and technological progress
appears in the form of rising population density.37 While extremely simple, the Malthusian
model has held up well in recent empirical studies (e.g., Ashraf & Galor, 2011). This is
a useful fact for urban economists to consider, because it suggests that city growth can
provide a useful proxy for technological progress before the demographic transition. Note,
however, that in this framework individual income does not provide insight into productivity
changes.
     An alternative view of the relationship between urbanization and technological progress
focuses on the distribution of a given population across space, rather than the sources
of population growth. This view, which is more associated with urban economics than
economic history, emphasizes the key role that local agricultural productivity and the costs
of transporting agricultural goods played in constraining city size in the past (Bairoch, 1988;
Duranton, 1998, 1999; Dittmar, 2011a). The costs of supplying food to cities represent
the key congestion force that balances agglomeration forces in order to determine city
size. In this framework, technological progress, either in the form of improved agricultural
productivity or a fall in transport costs, allows cities to grow in size. Urbanization, therefore,
is a direct reflection of technological progress.
     Thus, both of the approaches described above draw a link between technological progress
and urban growth. On one hand, urban growth is a byproduct of population growth,
 37
      See Voigtl¨
                ander & Voth (2013a) for a useful description of this theoretical framework.


                                                      31
while on the other it is the result of the release of constraints on city size, which causes a
reallocation of population from the countryside to the city. Both frameworks thus provide a
theoretical foundation for the large set of papers using population density or urbanization to
measure the impact of new technologies (Dittmar, 2011b), new crops (Nunn & Qian, 2011;
Chen & Kung, 2016), improved institutions (Acemoglu et al. , 2002), better education
(Cantoni & Yuchtman, 2014), improved trading links (Acemoglu et al. , 2005), etc.
    It seems likely that the two views described above both contribute to the historical
relationship between technology, rising population, and urbanization. Thus, we view these
approaches as complementary, and in particular, we note that it may be beneficial for urban
economists to consider the relationship between urbanization and population growth, not
just how a given population is spread across space.
    However, there are also important difference between these views. For example, in
models of the spatial distribution of population, such as Duranton (1998), the transition
from pre-industry to modern cities is characterized by a shift in the main constraint on city
growth from the ability to access food supplies to the shortage of land and commuting costs.
In contrast, unified growth theories, which model the transition between the Malthusian
world and modern economic growth (Galor & Weil (1999)), emphasize the role of rising
productivity growth coupled with the demographic transition. These differences will matter
when urbanization is used as a proxy for technological progress during the transition from
pre-industrial to modern economic growth. Given this, integrating these views into a unified
framework that explains both the source of population growth and its distribution over space
seems like a useful direction for future work.

5.2   The contribution of cities to growth
Up to now, this section has focused on the impact of productivity growth on population
growth and urbanization. However, it is also likely that cities are central contributors to the
development of new technologies, a view argued forcefully by Jacobs (1969). This possibility
raises both theoretical and empirical considerations. On the empirical side, it means that we
have to worry about the direction of causality when relating urbanization and productivity
growth. One empirical paper that makes progress in disentangling this causality problem is
Cerme~  no & Enflo (2019), which studies the impact of towns founded by Swedish rulers on
local productivity, both before and after the onset of industrialization. On the theoretical
side, it calls for the integration of the causal effect of cities on technological progress into
models of urban growth. Progress has already been made on this front in a series of papers
by (Rossi-Hansberg, 2005; Desmet & Rossi-Hansberg, 2014; Desmet et al. , 2018) but work
in this direction is sure to continue.
    There is also an interesting line of work in this vein that considers the trade-offs between
achieving optimal city size in the short-run and reducing technological progress in the long-


                                              32
run. For example, Duranton (1998) argues that cities may be too large in equilibrium, but
that "large actors" may be able to reduce the city to an optimal size. He suggests that guilds
may have played this role in historical European cities. By limiting entry into specific crafts
within a city, guilds acted as a constraint on city size. In addition, guilds may have provided
other functions, such as acting as an enforcement mechanism that constrained local rulers
and thereby fostered trade (Greif et al. , 1994). However, while guilds may have helped
achieve a more optimal city size in a static sense, there is also evidence that they slowed
down the development and adoption of new technologies (Mokyr, 1990; Desmet & Parente,
2014). This highlights a trade-off that cities may face between static and dynamic gains.
This is a valuable direction for future research, with potentially important implications for
modern policies, such as zoning, that constrain city size.


6    Summary
In our review of research applying historical data to the understanding of urban economics,
four broad themes have emerged. The first is the drastic increase in the quality and richness
of available data over the past decade or so, driven by methodological advances in computing
and digitization. This is an important force behind the large and rapidly growing set of
historical urban papers that we have reviewed. We see no evidence that this trend is likely
to slow in the near future. Rather, technological advances in machine reading and learning
are likely to allow the collection of even more detailed and comprehensive historical data,
at lower cost, in the near future.
    A second broad theme that emerges from our review is the advances made in bringing
the increasingly rich historical data into closer contact with economic theory. This trend
is particularly notable among papers focused on the role of trade and market access, the
spatial allocation of people and firms within cities, and in recent work on cities and growth.
Combining historical data with theory offers a number of advantages, including guiding the
structure of the empirical analysis, making it easier to interpret reduced-form parameter
estimates, and facilitating the construction of counterfactuals. Perhaps most important for
urban economics, theory offers a useful tool for accounting for general equilibrium effects
and spatial spillovers. The increasing use of theory together with historical data is a trend
that we expect to continue, particularly as more detailed historical data become available.
    A third broad theme of our review has to do with the depth and breath of urban topics
being addressed using historical data. Historical settings have played a key role in our un-
derstanding of some core urban questions, such as the nature of agglomeration economies
and congestion forces and the long-run impact of urban infrastructure investments. At the
same time, a number of papers have used historical data to form connections between ur-
ban economics and other topics, including finance, education, health, and structural change.


                                              33
Both of these trends seem likely to continue. Beyond that, one area where we believe histor-
ical studies have the potential to make additional contributions is in connection to factors
that affect contemporary city structure, including zoning laws, local resource endowments,
city shape, and the impact of these factors on long-run city performance.
    Finally, our review suggests that urban economists have been largely successful in inte-
grating the insights and techniques of economic history into their work. The papers we have
reviewed generally show an impressive understanding of the historical context in which they
are embedded as well as care in the use of historical data, two hallmarks of high quality
economic history research. However, there is still scope to bring urban economics into closer
contact with work in economic history. In Section 5, we provide an example focused on
city growth, showing how urban economists and economic historians take differing views on
similar issues. Integrating the lessons of economic history more fully into work on urban
economics, and vice versa, seems like another fruitful direction for future work.




                                             34
References
Aaronson, Daniel, Hartley, Daniel, & Mazumder, Bhashkar. 2017. The Effects of the 1930s
  "HOLC Redlining" Maps. Working Paper Series WP-2017-12. Federal Reserve Bank of
  Chicago.

Abramitzky, Ran, Boustan, Leah Platt, & Eriksson, Katherine. 2012. Europe's Tired, Poor,
 Huddled Masses: Self-selection and Economic Outcomes in the Age of Mass Migration.
 American Economic Review, 102(5), 1832­1856.

Abramitzky, Ran, Boustan, Leah Platt, Eriksson, Katherine, Feigenbaum, James, & Perez,
 Santiago. 2020. Automated Linking of Historical Data. Journal of Economic Literature,
 forthcoming.

Acemoglu, Daron, Johnson, Simon, & Robinson, James A. 2002. Reversal of Fortune:
  Geography and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(4), 1231­1294.

Acemoglu, Daron, Johnson, Simon, & Robinson, James. 2005. The Rise of Europe: Atlantic
  Trade, Institutional Change, and Economic Growth. American Economic Review, 95(3),
  546­579.

Agrawal, Ajay, Galasso, Alberto, & Oettl, Alexander. 2017. Roads and Innovation. Review
  of Economics and Statistics, 99, 417­434.

Ahlfeldt, Gabriel M., & Holman, Nancy. 2018. Distinctively Different: A New Approach to
 Valuing Architectural Amenities. The Economic Journal, 128, 1­33.

Ahlfeldt, Gabriel M., & McMillen, Daniel P. 2018. Tall Buildings and Land Values: Height
 and Construction Cost Elasticities in Chicago, 1870­2010. The Review of Economics and
 Statistics, 100(5), 861­875.

Ahlfeldt, Gabriel M., & Wendland, Nicolai. 2011. Fifty Years of Urban Accessibility: The
 Impact of the Urban Railway Network on the Land Gradient in Berlin 1890 - 1936.
 Regional Science and Urban Economics, 41(2), 77­88.

Ahlfeldt, Gabriel M., & Wendland, Nicolai. 2013. How Polycentric is a Monocentric City?
 Centers, Spillovers and Hysteresis. Journal of Economic Geography, 13(1), 53­83.

Ahlfeldt, Gabriel M., Redding, Stephen J., Sturm, Daniel M., & Wolf, Nikolaus. 2015. The
 Economics of Density: Evidence from the Berlin Wall. Econometrica, 83(6), 2127­2189.

Akbar, Prottoy A, Li, Sijie, Shertzer, Allison, & Walsh, Randall P. 2020 (Jan.). Racial
 Segregation in Housing Markets and the Erosion of Black Wealth. NBER Working Paper
 No. 25805.



                                          35
Alesina, Alberto, & Giuliano, Paola. 2015. Culture and Institutions. Journal of Economic
  Literature, 53(4), 898­944.

Alsan, Marcella, & Goldin, Claudia. 2019. Watersheds in Infant Mortality: The Role of
  Effective Water and Sewerage Infrastructure, 1880-1915. Journal of Political Economy,
  127(2), 586­638.

Ambrus, Attila, Field, Erica, & Gonzalez, Robert. 2020. Loss in the Time of Cholera:
 Long-run Impact of a Disease Epidemic on the Urban Landscape. American Economic
 Review, 110(2), 475­525.

Ananat, Elizabeth Oltmans. 2011. The Wrong Side(s) of the Tracks: The Causal Effects
 of Racial Segregation on Urban Poverty and Inequality. American Economic Journal:
 Applied Economics, 3(2), 34­66.

Anas, Alex, Arnott, Richard, & Small, Kenneth A. 1998. Urban Spatial Structure. Journal
 of Economic Literature, 36(3), 1426­1464.

Anderson, DM, Charles, KK, & Rees, DI. Forthcoming. Re-Examining the Contribution of
 Public Health Efforts to the Decline in Urban Mortality. American Economic Journal:
 Applied Economics.

Andrews, M. 2020. How Do Institutions of Higher Education Affect Local Invention? Evi-
 dence from the Establishment of U.S. Colleges. Mimeo.

Arkolakis, Costas, Lee, Sun Kyoung, & Peters, Michael. 2020. European Immigrants and
  the United States' Rise to the Technological Frontier. mimeo.

Ashraf, Quamrul, & Galor, Oded. 2011. Dynamics and Stagnation in the Malthusian Epoch.
  American Economic Review, 101(5), 2003­2041.

Atack, Jeremy, Bateman, Fred, Haines, Michael, & Margo, Robert A. 2010. Did Rail-
  roads Induce or Follow Economic Growth? Urbanization and Population Growth in the
  American Midwest, 1850-1860. Social Science History, 34(2), 171­197.

Atack, Jeremy, Jaremski, Matthew S., & Rousseau, Peter L. 2014. American Banking and
  the Transportation Revolution before the Civil War. Journal of Economic History, 74(4),
  943­986.

Bacolod, Marigee, Blum, Bernardo S., & Strange, William C. 2009. Skills in the City.
  Journal of Urban Economics, 65(2), 136­153.

Bai, Ying, & Kung, James Kai-sing. 2015. Diffusing Knowledge While Spreading God's
  Message: Protestantism and Economic Prosperity in China, 1840-1920. Journal of the
  European Economic Association, 13(4), 669­698.



                                           36
Bailey, Martha, Cole, Connor, Henderson, Morgan, & Massey, Catherine. 2020. How Well
  Do Automated Linking Methods Perform? Lessons from U.S. Historical Data. Journal
  of Economic Literature, forthcoming.

Bailey, Roy E., Hatton, Timothy J., & Inwood, Kris. 2018. Atmospheric Pollution, Health,
  and Height in Late Nineteenth Century Britain. The Journal of Economic History, 78(4),
  1210---1247.

Bairoch, Paul. 1988. Cities and Economic Development. The University of Chicago Press.

Bairoch, Paul, Batou, Jean, & Ch`
                                evre, Pierre. 1988. La Population Des Villes Europ´
                                                                                  eennes
  de 800-1850: Banque de Donn´  es et Analyse Sommaire des R´   esultats (The Population
  of European Cities, 800-1850: Data Bank and Short Summary of Results). Gen`        eve,
  Switzerland: Librairie Droz.

Bakker, Jan, Maurer, Stephan, Pischke, J¨
                                        orn-Steffen, & Rauch, Ferdinand. 2020. Of Mice
  and Merchants­Trade and Growth in the Iron Age. Review of Economics and Statistics,
  forthcoming.

Barjamovic, Gojko, Chaney, Thomas, Co¸  sar, Kerem, & Horta¸
                                                           csu, Ali. 2019. Trade, Mer-
  chants, and the Lost Cities of the Bronze Age. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  134(3), 1455­1503.

Barr, Jason. 2013. Skyscrapers and Skylines: New York and Chicago, 1885-2007. Journal
  of Regional Science, 53(3), 369­391.

Barr, Jason, & Ort, Teddy. 2013. Population Density across the City: The Case of 1900
  Manhattan. Mimeo.

Barreca, Alan, Clay, Karen, & Tarr, Joel. 2014. Coal, Smoke, and Death: Bituminous Coal
  and American Home Heating. NBER Working Paper No. 19881.

Baum-Snow, Nathaniel. 2007. Did Highways Cause Suburbanization? The Quarterly Jour-
  nal of Economics, 122(2), 775­805.

Baum-Snow, Nathaniel, Brandt, Loren, Henderson, J. Vernon, Turner, Matthew A., &
  Zhang, Qinghua. 2017. Roads, Railroads, and Decentralization of Chinese Cities. The
  Review of Economics and Statistics, 99(3), 435­448.

Beach, Brian, & Hanlon, W. Walker. 2018. Coal Smoke and Mortality in an Early Industrial
  Economy. Economic Journal, 128(615), 2652­2675.

Becker, Sascha O., & Pascali, Luigi. 2019. Religion, Division of Labor and Conflict: Anti-
  Semitism in German Regions over 600 Years. American Economic Review, 109(5), 1764­
  1804.



                                           37
Becker, Sascha O., & Woessmann, Ludger. 2009. Was Weber Wrong? A Human Capital
  Theory of Protestant Economic History. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(2), 531­
  596.

Becker, Sascha O., Hornung, Erik, & Woessmann, Ludger. 2011. Education and Catch-
  Up in the Industrial Revolution. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 3(3),
  92­126.

Becker, Sascha O., Boeckh, Katrin, Hainz, Christa, & Woessmann, Ludger. 2016. The
  Empire Is Dead, Long Live the Empire! Long-Run Persistence of Trust and Corruption
  in the Bureaucracy. The Economic Journal, 126(590), 40­74.

Becker, Sascha O., Heblich, Stephan, & Sturm, Daniel. 2018. The Impact of Public Em-
  ployment: Evidence from Bonn. CEPR DP12565.

Beeson, Patricia E., DeJong, David N., & Troesken, Werner. 2001. Population Growth in
  U.S. Counties, 1840-1990. Regional Science and Urban Economics, 31(6), 669­699.

Belloc, Marianna, Drago, Francesco, & Galbiati, Roberto. 2016. Earthquakes, Religion, and
  Transition to Self-Government in Italian Cities. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(4),
  1875­1926.

Berger, Thor, & Enflo, Kerstin. 2017. Locomotives of Local Growth: The Short- and
  Long-term Impact of Railroads in Sweden. Journal of Urban Economics, 98, 124­138.

Bindler, Anna, & Hjalmarsson, Randi. 2019 (October). The Impact of the First Professional
  Police Forces on Crime. Mimeo.

Bleakley, Hoyt, & Ferrie, Joseph. 2014 (January). Land Opening on the Georgia Frontier:
  The Coase Theorem in the Short and Long-run. Mimeo.

Bleakley, Hoyt, & Lin, Jeffrey. 2012. Portage: Path Dependence and Increasing Returns in
  U.S. History. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(May), 587­644.

Bodenhorn, Howard, & Cuberes, David. 2018. Finance and urbanization in early nineteenth-
  century New York. Journal of Urban Economics, 104, 47­58.

Bogart, D, You, X, Alvarez, E, Satchell, M, & Shaw-Taylor, L. 2019 (July). Railways,
  Endowments, and Population Change in Nineteenth Century England and Wales. Mimeo.

Bogart, Dan. 2014. The Cambridge Economic History of Modern Britain. Vol. Volume 1, In-
  dustrialisation, 1700-1870. Cambridge University Press. Chap. The Transport Revolution
  in Industrialising Britain: A Survey, pages 368­391.

Bogart, Dan, Chaudhary, Latika, & Herranz-Loncan, Alfonso. 2015. The Growth Contribu-
  tion of Colonial Indian Railways in Comparative Perspective. Mimeo.



                                           38
Borowiecki, Karol Jan. 2013. Geographic Clustering and Productivity: An Instrumental
  Variable Approach for Classical Composers. Journal of Urban Economics, 73(1), 94­110.

Bosker, Maarten, & Buringh, Eltjo. 2017. City Seeds: Geography and the Origins of the
  European City System. Journal of Urban Economics, 98, 139 ­ 157.

Bosker, Maarten, Brakman, Steven, Garretsen, Harry, & Schramm, Marc. 2007. Looking
  for Multiple Equilibria When Geography Matters: German City Growth and the WWII
  Shock. Journal of Urban Economics, 61(1), 152­169.

Bosker, Maarten, Brakman, Steven, Garretsen, Harry, & Schramm, Marc. 2008. A Century
  of Shocks: The Evolution of the German City Size Distribution 1925-1999. Regional
  Science and Urban Economics, 38(4), 330­347.

Bosker, Maarten, Buringh, Eltjo, & van Zanden, Jan Luiten. 2013. From Baghdad to
  London: Unraveling Urban Development in Europe, the Middle East, and North Africa,
  800­1800. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(4), 1418­1437.

Boustan, Leah P., & Margo, Robert A. 2013. A silver lining to white flight? White suburban-
  ization and African­American homeownership, 1940­1980. Journal of Urban Economics,
  78, 71­80.

Boustan, Leah Platt. 2010. Was Postwar Suburbanization "White Flight"? Evidence from
  the Black Migration. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(1), 417­443.

Boustan, Leah Platt. 2013. Local Public Goods and the Demand for High-Income Munici-
  palities. Journal of Urban Economics, 76, 71­82.

Brakman, Steven, Garretsen, Harry, & Schramm, Marc. 2004. The Strategic Bombing of
  German Cities During WWII and its Impact on City Growth. Journal of Economic
  Geography, 4, 201­218.

Braun, Sebastian, & Kvasnicka, Michael. 2014. Immigration and Structural Change: Evi-
  dence from Post-war Germany. Journal of International Economics, 93(2), 253­269.

Braun, Sebastian, & Omar Mahmoud, Toman. 2014. The Employment Effects of Immigra-
  tion: Evidence from the Mass Arrival of German Expellees in Postwar Germany. The
  Journal of Economic History, 74(1), 69­108.

Brinkman, Jeffrey, & Lin, Jeffrey. 2017. Freeway Revolts! Mimeo.

Brooks, Leah, & Lutz, Byron. 2019. Vestiges of Transit: Urban Persistence at a Microscale.
  The Review of Economics and Statistics, 101(3), 385­399.

Brooks, Leah, Gendron-Carrier, Nicolas, & Rua, Gisela. 2016. The Local Impact of Con-
  tainerization. Mimeo.



                                            39
Brueckner, Jan K., Thisse, Jacques-Fran¸
                                       cois, & Zenou, Yves. 1999. Why is central Paris
  rich and downtown Detroit poor? An amenity-based theory. European Economic Review,
  43(1), 91­107.

Buenstorf, Guido, & Klepper, Steven. 2009. Heritage and Agglomeration: The Akron Tyre
  Cluster Revisited. Economic Journal, 119(537), 705­733.

Buenstorf, Guido, & Klepper, Steven. 2010. Why Does Entry Cluster Geographically?
  Evidence from the US Tire Industry. Journal of Urban Economics, 68(2), 103­114.

Burchardi, Konrad B., & Hassan, Tarek A. 2013. The Economic Impact of Social Ties:
  Evidence from German Reunification. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(3),
  1219­1271.

Cabral, Luis, Wang, Zhu, & Xu, Daniel Yi. 2018. Competitor, Complementors, Parents
  and Places: Explaining Regional Agglomeration in the U.S. Auto Industry. Review of
  Economic Dynamics, 30(October), 1­29.

Caicedo, Felipe Valencia. 2019. The Mission: Human Capital Transmission, Economic
  Persistence, and Culture in South America. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134(1),
  507---556.

Cantoni, David, & Yuchtman, Noam. 2014. Medieval Universities, Legal Institutions, and
  the Commercial Revolution. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(2), 823­887.

Cerme~no, Alexandra L, & Enflo, Kerstin. 2019. Can kings create towns that thrive? The
  long-term implications of new town foundations. Journal of Urban Economics, 112,
  50­69.

Chen, Shuo, & Kung, James Kai-sing. 2016. Of Maize and Men: The Effect of a New World
  Crop on Population and Economic Growth in China. Journal of Economic Growth, 21(1),
  71­99.

Cinnirella, Francesco, & Hornung, Erik. 2016. Landownership Concentration and the Ex-
  pansion of Education. Journal of Development Economics, 121, 135­152.

Clay, Karen, & Troesken, Werner. 2011. Did Frederick Brodie Discover the World's First
  Environmental Kuznets Curve? Coal Smoke and the Rise and Fall of the London Fog.
  Pages 281­309 of: The Economics of Climate Change: Adaptations Past and Present.
  University of Chicago Press.

Clay, Karen, Troesken, Werner, & Haines, Michael. 2014. Lead and Mortality. Review of
  Economics and Statistics, 96(3), 458­470.

Clay, Karen, Lewis, Joshua, & Severnini, Edson. 2016. Canary in a Coal Mine: Infant Mor-
  tality, Property Values, and Tradeoffs Associated with Mid-20th Century Air Pollution.
  NBER Working Paper No. 22155.

                                          40
Collins, William J., & Shester, Katharine L. 2013. Slum Clearance and Urban Renewal in
  the United States. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5(1), 239­73.

Combes, Pierre-Philippe, Duranton, Gilles, & Gobillon, Laurent. 2011. The Identification
  of Agglomeration Economies. Journal of Economic Geography, 11(2), 253­266.

Combes, Pierre-Philippe, Gobillon, Laurent, & Zylberberg, Yanos. 2020. Urban economics
  in a historical perspective: Recovering data with machine learning. CEPR Working Paper
  15308.

Costinot, Arnaud, & Donaldson, Dave. 2016. How Large Are the Gains from Economic
  Integration? Theory and Evidence from U.S. Agriculture, 1880-1997. NBER Working
  Paper No. 22946.

Couture, Victor, Duranton, Gilles, & Turner, Matthew A. 2018. Speed. The Review of
  Economics and Statistics, 100(4), 725­739.

Crafts, Nicholas, & Mulatu, Abay. 2006. How Did the Location of Industry Respond to
  Falling Transport Costs in Britain before World War I? The Journal of Economic History,
  66(3), 575­607.

Crafts, Nicholas, & Wolf, Nikolaus. 2014. The Location of the UK Cotton Textiles Industry
  in 1838: a Quantitative Analysis. Journal of Economic History, 74(4), 1103­1139.

Cuberes, David. 2011. Sequential City Growth: Empirical Evidence. Journal of Urban
  Economics, 69(2), 229­239.

Cuberes, David, Desmet, Klaus, & Rappaport, Jordan. 2019. Urban Growth Shadows.
 Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Research Working Paper no. 19-08.

Cutler, David M., & Miller, Grant. 2005. The Role of Public Health Improvements in Health
  Advances: The Twentieth-Century United States. Demography, 42(1), 1­22.

Cutler, David M., Glaeser, Edward L., & Vigdor, Jacob L. 1999. The Rise and Decline of
  the American Ghetto. Journal of Political Economy, 107(3), 455­506.

Czernich, Nina, Falck, Oliver, Kretschmer, Tobias, & Woessmann, Ludger. 2011. Broadband
  Infrastructure and Economic Growth. The Economic Journal, 121(552), 505­532.

Dalgaard, Carl-Johan, Kaarsen, Nicolai, Olsson, Ola, & Selaya, Pablo. 2018. Roman Roads
 to Prosperity: The Long-run Impact of Transport Infrastructure. CEPR DP12745.

Davis, Donald R, & Weinstein, David E. 2002. Bones, Bombs, and Break Points: The
  Geography of Economic Activity. American Economic Review, 92(5), 1269­1289.

Davis, Donald R., & Weinstein, David E. 2008. A Search for Multiple Equilibria in Urban
  Industrial Structure. Journal of Regional Science, 48(1), 29­65.


                                           41
Dell, Melissa. 2010. The Persistent Effects of Peru's Mining Mita. Econometrica, 78(6),
  1863­1903.
Desmet, Klaus, & Parente, Stephen L. 2014. Resistence to technology adoption: The rise
  and decline of guilds. Review of Economic Dynamics, 17, 437­458.
Desmet, Klaus, & Rappaport, Jordan. 2017. The Settlement of the United States, 1800-
  2000: The Long Transition Towards Gibrat's Law. Journal of Urban Economics, 98,
  50­68.
Desmet, Klaus, & Rossi-Hansberg, Esteban. 2014. Spatial Development. American Eco-
  nomic Review, 104(4), 1211­43.
Desmet, Klaus, Nagy, David K., & Rossi-Hansberg, Esteban. 2018. The Geography of
  Development. Journal of Political Economy, 126(3), 903­983.
Dincecco, Mark, & Onorato, Massimiliano Gaetano. 2016. Military conflict and the rise of
  urban Europe. Journal Economic Growth, 21, 259­­282.
Dippel, Christian, & Heblich, Stephan. 2020. Leadership and Social Movements: The Forty-
  Eighters in the Civil War. American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Dittmar, Jeremiah, & Seabold, Skipper. 2020. New Media and Competition: Printing and
  Europe's Transformation after Gutenberg. Mimeo.
Dittmar, Jeremiah E. 2011a. The Emergence of Zipf 's Law. Mimeo.
Dittmar, Jeremiah E. 2011b. Information Technology and Economic Change: The Impact
  of the Printing Press. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(3), 1133­1172.
Donaldson, Dave. 2018. Railroads and the Raj: Estimating the Impact of Transportation
 Infrastructure. American Economic Review, 108(4-5), 899­934.
Donaldson, Dave, & Allen, Treb. 2020. The Geography of Path Dependence. mimeo.
Donaldson, Dave, & Hornbeck, Richard. 2016. Railroads and American Economic Growth:
 A "Market Access" Approach. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(2), 799­858.
Duranton, Gilles. 1998. Labor Specialization, Transport Costs, and City Size. Journal of
 Regional Science, 38(4), 553­573.
Duranton, Gilles. 1999. Distance, land, and proximity: economic analysis and the evolution
 of cities. Environment and Planning, 31(12), 2169­2188.
Duranton, Gilles, & Turner, Matthew. 2012. Urban Growth and Transportation. Review of
 Economic Studies, 1, 1­36.
Duranton, Gilles, & Turner, Matthew A. 2011. The Fundamental Law of Road Congestion:
 Evidence from US Cities. American Economic Review, 101(6), 2616­52.

                                           42
Duranton, Gilles, Morrow, Peter M., & Turner, Matthew A. 2014. Roads and Trade:
 Evidence from the US. The Review of Economic Studies, 81(2), 681­724.

Eaton, Jonathan, & Eckstein, Zvi. 1997. Cities and growth: Theory and evidence from
  France and Japan. Regional Science and Urban Economics, 27(4-5), 443­474.

Eckert, Fabian, Gvirtz, Andr´
                            es, Liang, Jack, & Peters, Michael. 2020. A Method to Con-
  struct Geographical Crosswalks with an Application to US Counties since 1790. Working
  Paper 26770. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Ehrlich, Maximilian v., & Seidel, Tobias. 2018. The Persistent Effects of Place-Based
  Policy: Evidence from the West-German Zonenrandgebiet. American Economic Journal:
  Economic Policy, 10(4), 344­74.

Ellickson, Robert C. 2012. The Law and Economics of Street Layouts: How a Grid Pattern
  Benefits a Downtown. Alabama Law Review.

Faber, Benjamin. 2014. Trade Integration, Market Size, and Industrialization: Evidence
  from China's National Trunk Highway System. Review of Economic Studies, 81, 1046­
  1070.

Fajgelbaum, Pablo, & Redding, Stephen J. 2014 (June). External Integration, Structural
  Transformation and Economic Development: Evidence from Argentina 1870-1914. NBER
  Working Paper No. 20217.

Falck, Oliver, Fritsch, Michael, & Heblich, Stephan. 2011. The Phantom of the Opera:
  Cultural Amenities, Human Capital, and Regional Economic Growth. Labour Economics,
  18, 755­766.

Falck, Oliver, Heblich, Stephan, Lameli, Alfred, & S¨
                                                    udekum, Jens. 2012. Dialects, Cultural
  Identity, and Economic Exchange. Journal of Urban Economics, 72(2), 225­239.

Falck, Oliver, Guenther, Christina, Heblich, Stephan, & Kerr, William R. 2013. From
  Russia with Love: The Impact of Relocated Firms on Incumbent Survival. Journal of
  Economic Geography, 13(3), 419­449.

Falck, Oliver, Gold, Robert, & Heblich, Stephan. 2014. E-lections: Voting Behavior and
  the Internet. American Economic Review, 104(7), 2238­2265.

Feigenbaum, James, & Muller, Christopher. 2016. Lead Exposure and Violent Crime in the
  Early Twentieth Century. Explorations in Economic History, 62, 51­86.

Feigenbaum, James, Lee, James, & Mezzanotti, Filippo. 2018. Capital Destruction and
  Economic Growth: The Effects of Sherman's March. NBER Working Paper No. 25392.

Fernihough, Alan, & O'Rourke, Kevin. 2014. Coal and the European Industrial Revolution.
  NBER Working Paper No. 19802.

                                           43
Ferrie, Joseph P., & Troesken, Werner. 2008. Water and Chicago`s mortality transition,
  1850-1925. Explorations in Economic History, 45(1), 1 ­ 16.

Feyrer, James, & Sacerdote, Bruce. 2009. Colonialism and Modern Income: Islands as
  Natural Experiments. Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(2), 245­262.

Fischel, William A. 2004. An Economic History of Zoning and a Cure for its Exclusionary
  Effects. Urban Studies, 41(2), 317­340.

Fl¨
  uckiger, Matthias, Hornung, Erik, Larch, Mario, Ludwig, Markus, & Mees, Allard. 2019
  (July). Roman Transport Network Connectivity and Economic Integration. CEPR Dis-
  cussion Paper No. 13838.

Fujita, Masahisa, & Mori, Tomoya. 1996. The role of ports in the making of major cities:
  Self-agglomeration and hub-effect. Journal of Development Economics, 49(1), 93­120.

Gabaix, Xavier. 1999. Zipf's Law for Cities: An Explanation. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
 nomics, 114(3), 739­767.

Galor, Oded, & Weil, David N. 1999. From Malthusian Stagnation to Modern Growth.
 American Economic Review, 89(2), 150­154.

Galor, Oded, & Weil, David N. 2000. Population, Technology, and Growth: From Malthu-
 sian Stagnation to the Demographic Transition and Beyond. American Economic Review,
 90(4), 806 ­ 828.

Garcia-L´            `
        opez, Miquel-Angel, Holl, Adelheid, & Viladecans-Marsal, Elisabet. 2015. Subur-
 banization and Highways in Spain When the Romans and the Bourbons Still Shape Its
 Cities. Journal of Urban Economics, 85, 52­67.

Gentzkow, Matthew, & Shapiro, Jesse M. 2010. What Drives Media Slant? Evidence from
 U.S. Daily Newspapers. Econometrica, 78(1), 35­71.

Giesen, Kristian, & S¨
                     udekum, Jens. 2014. City Age and City Size. European Economic
  Review, 71(Nov.), 193­208.

Glaeser, Edward L. 2013. A Nation of Gamblers: Real Estate Speculation and American
  History. American Economic Review, 103(3), 1­42.

Glaeser, Edward L., & Gyourko, Joseph. 2005. Urban Decline and Durable Housing. Journal
  of Political Economy, 113(2), 345­375.

Glaeser, Edward L., & Kahn, Matthew E. 2001. Decentralized Employment and the Trans-
  formation of the American City. Brookings-Wharton Papers on Urban Affairs, 1­63.

Glaeser, Edward L., & Kohlhase, Janet E. 2004. Cities, Regions and the Decline of Transport
  Costs. Papers in Regional Science, 83(1), 197­228.


                                            44
Glaeser, Edward L., & Shapiro, Jesse M. 2002. Cities and Warfare: The Impact of Terrorism
  on Urban Form. Journal of Urban Economics, 51(2), 205­224.

Glaeser, Edward L, Kallal, Hedi D, Scheinkman, Jose A, & Shleifer, Andrei. 1992. Growth
  in Cities. Journal of Political Economy, 100(6), 1126­1152.

Greif, Avner, Milgrom, Paul, & Weingast, Barry R. 1994. Coordination, Commitment, and
  Enforcement: The Case of the Merchant Guild. Journal of Political Economy, 102(4),
  745­776.

Guiso, Luigi, Sapienza, Paola, & Zingales, Luigi. 2009. Cultural Biases in Economic Ex-
 change? The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(3), 1095­1131.

Hanlon, W. Walker. 2017. Temporary Shocks and Persistent Effects in the Urban System:
  Evidence from British Cities after the U.S. Civil War. Review of Economics and Statistics,
  99(1), 67­79.

Hanlon, W. Walker. 2019. London Fog: A Century of Pollution and Mortality, 1866-1965.
  NBER Working Paper No. 24488.

Hanlon, W. Walker, & Miscio, Antonio. 2017. Agglomeration: A Long-run Panel Data
  Approach. Journal of Urban Economics, 99, 1­14.

Hanlon, WW. 2020. Coal Smoke and the Costs of the Industrial Revolution. Economic
  Journal, Forthcoming.

Harari, Mariaflavia. 2020. Cities in Bad Shape: Urban Geometry in India. American
  Economic Review, 110(8), 2377­2421.

Heblich, Stephan, & Trew, Alex. 2019. Banking and Industrialization. Journal of the
  European Economic Association, 17(6), 1753­1796.

Heblich, Stephan, Trew, Andrew, & Zylberberg, Yanos. 2016. East Side Story: Historical
  Pollution and Neighborhood Segregation. CESifo Working Paper No. 6166.

Heblich, Stephan, Redding, Stephen, & Zylberberg, Yanos. 2020a. The Distributional Con-
  sequences of Trade: Evidence from the Repeal of the Corn Laws. mimeo.

Heblich, Stephan, Redding, Stephen J., & Sturm, Daniel M. 2020b. The Making of the
  Modern Metropolis: Evidence from London. Quarterly Journal of Economics, Forth-
  coming.

Helsley, Robert W., & Strange, William C. 1997. Limited Developers. The Canadian
  Journal of Economics / Revue canadienne d'Economique, 30(2), 329­348.

Helsley, Robert W., & Strange, William C. 2008. A game-theoretic analysis of skyscrapers.
  Journal of Urban Economics, 64(1), 49­64.


                                            45
Henderson, J. Vernon. 1974. The Sizes and Types of Cities. American Economic Review,
  64(4), 640­656.

Henderson, J. Veron, Kuncoro, Ari, & Turner, Matthew A. 1995. Industrial Development
  in Cities. Journal of Political Economy, 103(5), 1067­1090.

Herrendorf, Berthold, Schmitz, Jr., James A., & Teixeira, Arilton. 2012. The Role of
  Transportation in U.S. Economic Development: 1840­1860*. International Economic
  Review, 53(3), 693­716.

Hilber, Christian, Palmer, Charles, & Pinchbeck, Edward W. 2019. The Energy Costs of
  Historic Preservation. Journal of Urban Economics, 114.

Holmes, Thomas J. 2010. Structural, Experimentalist, and Descriptive Approaches to Em-
  pirical Work in Regional Economics. Journal of Regional Science, 50(1), 5­22.

Hornbeck, Richard. 2010. Barbed Wire: Property Rights and Agricultural Development.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(2), 767­810.

Hornbeck, Richard, & Keniston, Daniel. 2017. Creative Destruction: Barriers to Urban
  Growth and the Great Boston Fire of 1872. American Economic Review, 107(6), 1365­
  1398.

Hornbeck, Richard, & Rotemberg, Martin. 2019. Railroads, Reallocation, and the Rise of
  American Manufacturing. NBER Working Paper No. 26594.

Hornung, Erik. 2014. Immigration and the Diffusion of Technology: The Huguenot Diaspora
  in Prussia. American Economic Review, 104(1), 84­122.

Hornung, Erik. 2015. Railroads and Growth in Prussia. Journal of the European Economic
  Association, 13(4), 699­736.

Hsu, Wen-Tai, & Zhang, Hongliang. 2014. The fundamental law of highway congestion
  revisited: Evidence from national expressways in Japan. Journal of Urban Economics,
  81, 65­76.

Ioannides, Yannis M., & Overman, Henry G. 2003. Zipf's law for cities: an empirical
  examination. Regional Science and Urban Economics, 33(2), 127­137.

Jackson, Kenneth T. 1985. Crabgrass Frontier: The Suburbanization of the United States.
  History/Urban Studies. Oxford University Press, USA.

Jacobs, Jane. 1969. The Economy of Cities. New York: Vintage Books.

Jaworski, Taylor, & Kitchens, Carl T. 2019. National Policy for Regional Development:
  Historical Evidence from Appalachian Highways. The Review of Economics and Statistics,
  101(5), 777­790.


                                          46
Jedwab, Remi, & Vollrath, Dietrich. 2015. Urbanization Without Growth in Historical
  Perspective. Explorations in Economic History, 58, 1­21.

Jedwab, Remi, Kerby, Edward, & Moradi, Alexander. 2017. History, Path Dependence
  and Development: Evidence from Colonial Railways, Settlers and Cities in Kenya. The
  Economic Journal, 127(603), 1467­1494.

Jedwab, Remi, Johnson, Noel, & Koyama, Mark. 2020. The Effects of Historical Pandemics:
  The Black Death. Mimeo.

Jia, Ruixue. 2014. The Legacies of Forced Freedom: China's Treaty Ports. Review of
  Economics and Statistics, 96(4), 596­608.

Johnson, Noel D., & Koyama, Mark. 2017. Jewish Communities and City Growth in Prein-
  dustrial Europe. Journal of Development Economics, 127, 339­354.

Juh´
   asz, R´
         eka. 2018. Temporary Protection and Technology Adoption: Evidence from the
  Napoleonic Blockade. American Economic Review, 108(11), 3339­76.

Kantor, Shawn, & Whalley, Alexander. 2019. Research Proximity and Productivity: Long-
 Term Evidence from Agriculture. Journal of Political Economy, 127(2), 819­854.

Kesztenbaum, Lionel, & Rosenthal, Jean-Laurent. 2011. The Health Cost of Living in a
  City: The Case of France at the End of the 19th Century. Explorations in Economic
  History, 48(2), 207­225.

Kim, Sukkoo. 1995. Expansion of Markets and the Geographic Distribution of Economic
  Activities - The Trends in US Regional Manufacturing Structure, 1860-1987. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics , 110(4), 881­908.

Kim, Sukkoo. 1998. Economic Integration and Convergence: U.S. Regions, 1840-1987.
  Journal of Economic History, 58(3), 659­683.

Kim, Sukkoo. 2006. Division of Labor and the Rise of Cities: Evidence from US Industri-
  alization, 1850-1880. Journal of Economic Geography, 6(4), 469­491.

Kitson, P. M., Shaw-Taylor, L., Wrigley, E. A., Davies, R. S., Newton, G., & Satchell, A.
  E. M. 2012. The Creation of a `Census' of Adult Male Employment for England and
  Wales for 1817. Mimeo.

Klein, Alexander, & Crafts, Nicholas. 2020. Agglomeration externalities and productivity
  growth: US cities, 1880­1930. The Economic History Review, 73(1), 209­232.

Klepper, Steven. 2010. The Origin and Growth of Industry Clusters: The Making of Silicon
  Valley and Detroit. Journal of Urban Economics, 67(1), 15­32.




                                           47
Kline, Patrick, & Moretti, Enrico. 2013. Local Economic Development, Agglomeration
  Economies, and the Big Push: 100 Years of Evidence from the Tennessee Valley Authority.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1), 275­331.

Knoll, Katharina, Schularick, Moritz, & Steger, Thomas. 2017. No Price Like Home: Global
 House Prices, 1870-2012. American Economic Review, 107(2), 331­53.

Koster, Hans R.A., & Dericks, Gerard H. 2020. The Billion Pound Drop: The Blitz and
 Agglomeration Economies in London. Journal of Economic Geography, forthcoming.

Koster, Hans R.A., & Rouwendal, Jan. 2017. Historic Amenities and Housing Externalities:
 Evidence from the Netherlands. Economic Journal, 127(605), 396­420.

Koudijs, Peter. 2015. Those Who Know the Most: Insider Trading in 18th c. Amsterdam.
 Journal of Political Economy, 123(6), 1356­1409.

Kremer, Michael. 1993. Population Growth and Technological Change: One Million B.C.
  to 1990. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108(3), 681---716.

Krugman, Paul. 1991. Increasing Returns and Economic Geography. Journal of Political
  Economy, 99(3), 483­499.

Lee, Jamie. 2015. Measuring Agglomeration: Products, People and Ideas in U.S. Manufac-
  turing, 1880-1990. Mimeo.

Lee, Sanghoon, & Lin, Jeffrey. 2018. Natural Amenities, Neighbourhood Dynamics, and
  Persistence in the Spatial Distribution of Income. Review of Economic Studies, 85(1),
  663­694.

Lewis, Joshua, & Severnini, Edson. 2020. Short- and long-run impacts of rural electrification:
  Evidence from the historical rollout of the U.S. power grid. Journal of Development
  Economics, 143(C).

Libecap, Gary D., & Lueck, Dean. 2011. The Demarcation of Land and the Role of Coor-
  dinating Property Institutions. Journal of Political Economy, 119(3), 426­467.

Logan, Trevon D., & Parman, John M. 2017. The National Rise in Residential Segregation.
  The Journal of Economic History, 77(1), 127­170.

Maloney, William F., & Valencia Caicedo, Felipe. 2016. The Persistence of (Subnational)
 Fortune. The Economic Journal, 126(598), 2363­2401.

McMillen, Daniel P., & McDonald, John F. 2002. Land Values in a Newly Zoned City.
 Review of Economics and Statistics, 84(1), 62­72.

Michaels, Guy, & Rauch, Ferdinand. 2018. Resetting the Urban Network: 117-2012. The
 Economic Journal, 128(608), 378­412.


                                             48
Michaels, Guy, Rauch, Ferdinand, & Redding, Stephen J. 2012. Urbanization and Structural
 Transformation. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(2), 535­586.

Michaels, Guy, Rauch, Ferdinand, & Redding, Stephen J. 2019. Task Specialization in U.S.
 Cities from 1880-2000. Journal of the European Economic Association, 17(3), 754­798.

Michalopoulos, Stelios, & Papaioannou, Elias. 2013. Pre-Colonial Ethnic Institutions and
 Contemporary African Development. Econometrica, 81(1), 113­152.

Miguel, Edward, & Roland, Gerard. 2011. The Long Run Impact of Bombing Vietnam.
 Journal of Development Economics, 96(11954), 1­15.

Mitchell, Sara. 2019. London calling? Agglomeration economies in literature since 1700.
 Journal of Urban Economics, 112, 16­32.

Mitchener, Kris J. 2015. The 4D Future of Economic History: Digitally-Driven Data Design.
 The Journal of Economic History, 75(4), 1234­1239.

Mokyr, Joel. 1990. The Lever of Riches: Technological Creativity and Economic Progress.
 Oxford University Press.

Morten, Melanie, & Oliveira, Jaqueline. 2018. The Effects of Roads on Trade and Migration:
 Evidence from a Planned Capital City. NBER Working Paper No. 22158.

Moses, Leon, & Williamson, Harold F. 1967. The Location of Economic Activity in Cities.
 The American Economic Review, 57(2), 211­222.

Nagy, David K. 2020. Hinterlands, city formation and growth: Evidence from the U.S.
  westward expansion. Mimeo.

Nunn, Nathan. 2014. Chapter 7 - Historical Development. Pages 347­402 of: Aghion,
 Philippe, & Durlauf, Steven N. (eds), Handbook of Economic Growth. Handbook of
 Economic Growth, vol. 2. Elsevier.

Nunn, Nathan, & Qian, Nancy. 2011. The Potato's Contribution to Population and Ur-
 banization: Evidence from a Historical Experiment. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 126(2), 593­650.

O'Grady, Trevor. 2014. Spatial Institutions in Urban Economies: How City Grids Affect
  Density and Development. Mimeo.

Packalen, Mikko, & Bhattacharya, Jay. 2015. Cities and Ideas. NBER Working Paper No.
  20921.

Pascali, Luigi. 2017. The Wind of Change: Maritime Technology, Trade, and Economic
  Development. American Economic Review, 107(9), 2821­54.



                                           49
Perlman, Elisabeth R. 2015. Dense Enough To Be Brilliant: Patents, Urbanization, and
  Transportation in Nineteenth Century America. Mimeo.

Peters, Michael. 2019 (Dec.). Market Size and Spatial Growth - Evidence from Germany's
  Post-War Population Expulsions. Mimeo.

Ploeckl, Florian. 2012. Endowments and Market Access; the Size of Towns in Historical
  Perspective: Saxony, 1550­1834. Regional Science and Urban Economics, 42, 607­618.

Redding, Stephen J., & Rossi-Hansberg, Esteban. 2017. Quantitative Spatial Economics.
  Annual Review of Economics, 9(1), 21­58.

Redding, Stephen J., & Sturm, Daniel A. 2008. The Costs of Remoteness: Evidence from
  German Division and Reunification. American Economic Review, 98(5), 1766­1797.

Redding, Stephen J, Sturm, Daniel M, & Wolf, Nikolaus. 2011. History and Industry
  Location: Evidence from German Airports. Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(3),
  814­831.

Redding, Steven J., & Sturm, Daniel M. 2016. Estimating Neighborhood Effects: Evidence
  from War-time Destruction in London. Mimeo.

Rosenthal, Stuart S. 2008. Old homes, Externalities, and Poor Neighborhoods. A model of
  Urban Decline and Renewal. Journal of Urban Economics, 63(3), 816­840.

Rossi-Hansberg, Esteban. 2005. A Spatial Theory of Trade. American Economic Review,
  95(5), 1464­1491.

Rubin, Jared. 2014. Printing and Protestants: An Empirical Test of the Role of Printing
 in the Reformation. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 96(2), 270­286.

Sarvim¨
      aki, Matti. 2012. Agglomeration in the Periphery. Mimeo.

Schumann, A. 2014. Persistence of Population Shocks: Evidence from the Occupation of
  West Germany after World War II. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
  6(3), 189­205.

Sequeira, Sandra, Nunn, Nathan, & Qian, Nancy. 2020. Immigrants and the Making of
  America. Review of Economic Studies, 87(1), 382­419.

Severnini, Edson. 2014.   The Power of Hydroelectric Dams: Agglomeration Spillovers.
  mimeo.

Shertzer, Allison, & Walsh, Randall P. 2019. Racial Sorting and the Emergence of Segre-
  gation in American Cities. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 101(3), 415­427.

Shertzer, Allison, Twinam, Tate, & Walsh, Randall P. 2016. Race, Ethnicity, and Discrim-
  inatory Zoning. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 8(13), 217­246.

                                          50
Shertzer, Allison, Twinam, Tate, & Walsh, Randall P. 2018. Zoning and the economic
  geography of cities. Journal of Urban Economics, 105(C), 20­39.

Siodla, James. 2015. Razing San Francisco: The 1906 Disaster as a Natural Experiment in
  Urban Redevelopment. Journal of Urban Economics, 89, 48­61.

Siodla, James. 2017. Clean Slate: Land-Use Changes in San Francisco after the 1906
  Disaster. Explorations in Economic History, 65, 1­16.

Smith, Cory. 2020 (Aug.). Land Concentration and Long-Run Development in the Frontier
  United States. Mimeo.

Sood, Aradhya, Speagle, William, & Ehrman-Solberg, Kevin. 2020. Long Shadow of Racial
  Discrimination: Evidence from Housing Covenants of Minneapolis. Mimeo.

Spolaore, Enrico, & Wacziarg, Romain. 2009. The Diffusion of Development. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 124(2), 469­529.

Squicciarini, Mara P., & Voigtl¨
                               ander, Nico. 2015. Human Capital and Industrialization:
  Evidence from the Age of Enlightenment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(4),
  1825­1883.

Steinwender, Claudia. 2018. Real Effects of Information Frictions: When the States and
  the Kingdom Became United. American Economic Review, 108(3), 657­96.

Tabellini, Guido. 2010. Culture and Institutions: Economic Development in the Regions of
  Europe. Journal of the European Economic Association, 8(4), 677­716.

Trew, Alex. 2014. Spatial takeoff in the First industrial revolution. Review of Economic
  Dynamics, 17(4), 707­725.

Trew, Alex. 2020. Endogenous Infrastructure Development and Spatial Takeoff in the First
  Industrial Revolution. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 12(2), 44­93.

Troesken, Werner. 2008. Lead Water Pipes and Infant Mortality in Turn-of-the-Century
  Massachusetts. Journal of Human Resources, 43(3), 553­575.

Villarreal, Carlos. 2014. Where the Other Half Lives: Evidence on the Origin and Persis-
  tence of Poor Neighborhoods from New York City 1830-2012. Mimeo.

Voigtl¨
      ander, Nico, & Voth, Hans-Joachim. 2012. Persecution Perpetuated: The Medieval
  Origins of Anti-Semitic Violence in Nazi Germany. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  127(3), 1339­1392.

Voigtl¨
      ander, Nico, & Voth, Hans-Joachim. 2013a. How the West "Invented" Fertility Re-
  striction. American Economic Review, 103(6), 2227­64.



                                          51
Voigtl¨
      ander, Nico, & Voth, Hans-Joachim. 2013b. The Three Horsemen of Riches: Plague,
  War, and Urbanization in Early Modern Europe. Review of Economic Studies, 80(2),
  774­811.

Voigtl¨
      ander, Nico, & Voth, Hans-Joachim. 2014. Highway to Hitler. NBER Working Paper
  No. 20150.

Volpe Martincus, Christian, Carballo, Jer´
                                         onimo, & Cusolito, Ana. 2017. Roads, exports and
  employment: Evidence from a developing country. Journal of Development Economics,
  125, 21­39.

Voth, Hans-Joachim. 2001. Time and Work in England 1750-1830. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
  versity Press.

Wahl, Fabian. 2016. Does Medieval Trade Still Matter? Historical Trade Centers, Ag-
 glomeration and Contemporary Economic Development. Regional Science and Urban
 Economics, 60, 50­60.

Wahl, Fabian. 2017. Does European Development Have Roman Roots? Evidence from the
 German Limes. Journal of Economic Growth, 22(3), 313­349. Mimeo.

Waights, Sevrin. 2019. The preservation of historic districts - Is it worth it? Journal of
 Economic Geography, 19(2), 433­464.

Xie, Feng, & Levinson, David. 2010. How Streetcars Shaped Suburbanization: a Granger
  Causality Analysis of Land Use and Transit in the Twin Cities. Journal of Economic
  Geography, 10(3), 453­470.

Zedlitz, Jesper. 2017. Web-based Collaborative System for Transcription of Serial Historic
  Sources to Structured Data. Kiel: Universit¨
                                             atsbibliothek Kiel.




                                           52
