                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            INSTITUTIONAL CHANGE AND INSTITUTIONAL PERSISTENCE

                                      Daron Acemoglu
                                       Georgy Egorov
                                      Konstantin Sonin

                                     Working Paper 27852
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27852


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2020




Prepared for Handbook of Historical Economics, Alberto Bisin and Giovanni Federico, eds.,
forthcoming in 2020, North Holland. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Daron Acemoglu, Georgy Egorov, and Konstantin Sonin. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Institutional Change and Institutional Persistence
Daron Acemoglu, Georgy Egorov, and Konstantin Sonin
NBER Working Paper No. 27852
September 2020
JEL No. C73,D72,D74,N10,N40,P16

                                           ABSTRACT

In this essay, we provide a simple conceptual framework to elucidate the forces that lead to
institutional persistence and change. Our framework is based on a dynamic game between
different groups, who care both about current policies and institutions and future policies, which
are themselves determined by current institutional choices, and clarifies the forces that lead to the
most extreme form of institutional persistence ("institutional stasis") and the potential drivers of
institutional change. We further study the strategic stability of institutions, which arises when
institutions persist because of fear of subsequent, less beneficial changes that would follow initial
reforms. More importantly, we emphasize that, despite the popularity of ideas based on
institutional stasis in the economics and political science literatures, most institutions are in a
constant state of flux, but their trajectory may still be shaped by past institutional choices, thus
exhibiting "path-dependent change", so that initial conditions determine both the subsequent
trajectories of institutions and how they respond to shocks. We conclude the essay by discussing
how institutions can be designed to bolster stability, the relationship between social mobility and
institutions, and the interplay between culture and institutions.

Daron Acemoglu                                    Konstantin Sonin
Department of Economics                           Harris School of Public Policy
MIT                                               University of Chicago
50 Memorial Drive                                 1307 E. 60th Street
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347                          Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                          ksonin@uchicago.edu
daron@mit.edu

Georgy Egorov
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2211 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
g-egorov@kellogg.northwestern.edu
1         Introduction
A central question of social science is the way in which history influences current outcomes.
This is doubly true for institutional investigations, since institutions, as constraints on human
behavior and a framework for coordinating expectations, are only meaningful if they are at
least to some degree durable.1 Few commentators or social scientists doubt that the U.S.
Constitution, ratified on June 21, 1788, and its first 10 amendments, the Bill of Rights,
adopted on December 15, 1791, have shaped U.S. institutions and society ever since (Holton,
2008). But why and how have they had this lasting effect? They could have been completely
cast aside or ignored. Indeed, every newly independent South American country also adopted
a constitution, in many cases a few decades after and often modeled on the American one
(Billias, 2009). But all of them have been superseded by new constitutions, in most cases
very different in intent or form than the original one.
        Indeed, change is as much a part of our experience as is persistence. Though the U.S.
is an exemplar of institutional persistence, there is little similarity between how politics
worked in the United States at the end of the 18th century and how it is organized today,
and even the laws look very different. So in what way have U.S. institutions persisted? More
importantly, what determines when institutions persist and when they change?
        This is partly an empirical question. How the U.S. Constitution has persisted has many
peculiarities. It originally specified, among other things, that slavery was legal, and slaves
could be owned and had no rights, certainly no voting rights. And yet they would count as
3/5th of a free person when it came to apportioning voting power and resources across the
13 original colonies. Fortunately, these provisions have since been thrown out, even if we all
think that the Constitution has had a durable impact on our politics. The Constitution has
persisted partly because of the North victory in the Civil War, which in 1865 did fundamen-
tally change some of its provisions (but at the same time also reaffirmed the unity of the
country against the secessionist South). So even in this canonical exemplar of institutional
durability, persistence and change have been interwoven.
        In fact, the story of American institutional persistence is even more complex than that.
The Civil War was fought largely on the question of slavery, and even before the Con-
    1
        See below for the most common definitions of "institutions" in the literature.


                                                         1
federate armies were defeated, on September 22, 1862, President Abraham Lincoln issued
the Emancipation Proclamation, declaring that slavery would end. Following victory, the
Thirteenth, Fourteenth and Fifteenth amendments freed the slaves, granted citizenship and
equal protection to all freedmen, and made the denial of the vote on the basis of "race, color
or previous condition of servitude" illegal -- as radical a change in institutions as one can
imagine. Though these amendments and the stationing of Northern troops in the South ush-
ered in the period of Reconstruction, during which Blacks made important economic, social
and political progress, this was short-lived. Reconstruction was replaced by Redemption, in
which the reactionary forces set about to "redeem" the South. This meant the reimposition
of many of the slavery-era economic practices, forcing Blacks into low-wage, low-skill and
coercive labor relations in large plantations (Wiener, 1978). Redemption turned into Jim
Crow, in which an extreme form of social and economic discrimination was coupled with
systematic economic subjugation and complete political disenfranchisement of Blacks, the
Fifteenth amendment notwithstanding (Woodward, 1955; Wright, 2013).
   The peculiarities of American persistence and change are the subject matter of a volumi-
nous history literature, as are many other questions of institutional persistence. Nevertheless,
a conceptual framework is useful for orienting ourselves. Though no other historical episode
has the same exact features as the circuitous history of slavery in the U.S. South, we can
understand the economic and political reasons for why certain groups wanted to reimpose
coercive labor relations on Southern Blacks and why and how they succeeded (and why and
how, ultimately, their project failed with the sweeping changes of the Civil Rights era).
   The aim of this essay is to provide conceptual tools for clarifying some of the forces that
lead to institutional persistence and institutional change. Our purpose is not to contribute
to the theory of institutional dynamics, but to provide a simple framework that can help
elucidate the channels of persistence and change in institutions across a range of historical
episodes. For this reason, we eschew mathematical formalism and refer the reader to Ace-
moglu, Egorov and Sonin (2015, 2018) for more formal treatments (as well as to Roberts
(2015), Lagunoff (2001), Battaglini and Coate (2007), Acemoglu, Egorov and Sonin (2008)
and Acemoglu and Robinson (2008) for related and complementary frameworks) as back-
ground to the more informal discussion here.
   Our framework is a simple dynamic game-theoretic model, with society consisting of a

                                               2
number of groups of individuals, who have preferences over policy and over institutional
arrangements (which determine what types of economic relations are possible, for example).
Individuals are potentially forward-looking and may care not just about current outcomes
but also the future. Institutions (most closely corresponding to political institutions, though
they may have social elements as well) determine the distribution of political power in society.
This generates another indirect preference over institutions -- individuals would be better
off with institutional arrangements that empower their group in both policy choices and
decisions over future institutional decisions. This desire to influence future institutions is
of course related to the reason why Southern elites in the mid-19th century were willing to
secede from the rest of the U.S. and when that was not possible, fight a major war, in order
to have a say on future institutions (Potter, 1976; Weingast, 1998).
   Using this framework, we first highlight the simplest type of institutional persistence,
which we call "institutional stasis". This is an unchanging institutional equilibrium: the same
institutional arrangement we start with repeats itself over and over again. There are several
reasons for institutional stasis, but the most important one is that power begets power. That
is, groups that are empowered by current institutions benefit from these institutions and
thus use their power in order to maintain them, in the process reproducing their own power
over the future institutions. In the case of the U.S. South, these dynamics were certainly
important. Large plantation owners were the group that held the greatest power in the
antebellum period, and this group was both fairly cohesive and convinced that the political
and economic institutions undergirding slavery were in their best interest new. Their grip
on power and cohesiveness were sufficiently powerful that even after Reconstruction, they
were able to maintain much of their political power (Wiener, 1978).
   Nevertheless, as our discussion so far has already indicated, when people informally talk
of the U.S. Constitution having had a durable effect, this type of stasis is not necessarily what
they have in mind -- the U.S. society has been anything but unchanging, and the institutional
changes in Latin America or the Caribbean have been even more sweeping. Yet, many social
scientists' views of institutional persistence are shaped by this type of institutional stasis and
dynamics of power begetting power. For example, Engerman and Sokoloff's famous thesis
on the institutional problems of Latin America emphasizes how colonial practices created
economic inequality, and this economic inequality empowered the rich segments of society,

                                                3
leading to institutional persistence (Engerman and Sokoloff, 1997). There are certainly
examples of this type of institutional stasis, including some in Latin America (see below our
discussion of Guatemala), in the U.S. South itself before the Civil War, and in North Korea
today. However, as we discuss below, most of institutional persistence in Latin America did
not take this form, and even when inequality was persistent and had institutional roots, this
was neither because the same elites kept power nor because the economic system perpetually
remained the same. In practice, persistence often takes a much richer and varied form than
institutional stasis.
   To understand these richer institutional dynamics, we begin with an evaluation of the
forces that lead to change in the first place. We emphasize two interlinked factors and
how our framework sheds light on their functioning. First, there may be an incongruence
between political and economic arrangements. Stasis does not follow simply from the fact
that power begets power; it also requires that those who are so empowered want to maintain
the current institutional arrangements. But imagine that groups that are empowered under
current institutions prefer a different set of institutional arrangements. This could be, for
example, because of economic reasons: repressive institutions may create major economic
costs, which even the group controlling political power may want to avoid. An example of this
phenomenon from recent history is the (political) elite-driven reform movement that gathered
steam in the 1980s in the Soviet Union. There was no necessity that the Soviet Union would
start unwinding and ultimately collapse in three short years between 1989 and 1991. The
Communist Party certainly had sufficient political control and coercive power to keep things
as they were, and there were many who actually wanted to do so. But sufficiently powerful
constituencies got convinced that the economic costs of this strategy would be prohibitive
and decided to engineer a reform process instead. Their plan was to undertake limited
reform, modernizing the economy but maintaining the communist regime more or less intact
(Roland, 1991). But the reality of institutional change was more complicated, as we discuss
below.
   A classic historical example of this type of institutional reform is North and Weingast's
theory of the Glorious Revolution as an institutional commitment to repaying government
debt, which then unleashed a process of deeper political change (North and Weingast, 1989).
Many Marxist theories of the transition from feudalism to capitalism also fall within this

                                             4
broad category, emphasizing the internal contradictions of the feudal system, especially once
towns and proto-industries started flourishing.2 Yet another example of this logic is the
theory of democracy in Lizzeri and Persico (2004), where the elites may decide to broaden
the franchise because within-elite competition in a regime with the narrow franchise becomes
increasingly costly to themselves.
       Second, even if the politically powerful have no direct economic benefits from initiating
institutional change, the threat of other political reactions from non-elites can induce them
to do so. Economic and political conditions in almost every society are in constant flux.
This is particularly true in nondemocratic political systems, where the control of elites over
the political system depends on the inability of the disempowered majority to organize and
solve their collective action problem. Changes in the de facto power of non-elites occur
from time to time, however, and both such changes themselves and their anticipation can
become powerful drivers of institutional change. For instance, following episodic periods of
unrest or revolutionary fervor, major institutional changes may be imposed upon the elites
(as the imperial aristocracy of Russia experienced in the midst of the Russo-Japanese war
in 1904-05 and even more starkly, after the Bolshevik revolution in 1917, see Service, 2005).
Alternatively, the elites may realize that they need to initiate reform themselves in order
to prevent even worse outcomes. Acemoglu and Robinson (2000, 2006b) argue that the
emergence of democracy in many countries in Europe and some in Latin America during
the 19th and early 20th centuries illustrates this logic. In their theory, when citizens solve
their collective action problem during temporary windows of opportunity, they acquire de
facto power to challenge the prevailing system. Elites may wish to make a commitment
to a political system that will be more responsive to their demands as a way of placating
these actions. Democratization is an effective commitment device of this sort, because it
distributes political power more equally in society (Acemoglu and Robinson, 2006b).
       These sources of incongruence between economic and political considerations do not
always lead to institutional change, however. This is because of the possibility of what we
call "strategic stability": politically powerful groups may refrain from institutional change
   2
     In the Introduction to A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, Marx formulated the theory
of revolutions as follows (Marx, 1911): "At a certain stage of development, the material productive forces of
society come into conflict with [...] the property relations within the framework of which they have operated
hitherto." See also Aston and Philpin (1987).


                                                     5
because they are concerned about subsequent institutional dynamics. This idea has emerged
in the literature in a number of distinct forms. Fernandez and Rodrik (1991) pointed out
that inability to ensure ex post redistribution of gains may induce risk-averse agents to block
reforms that have uncertain returns, thus ensuring institutional stability. Acemoglu and
Robinson (2006a) argued that what they call the "political loser effect" (the fear of losing
political power) can often be a paralyzing force against institutional reform, even when such
reform can bring economic benefits and even military improvements. Acemoglu, Egorov and
Sonin (2012) provide a general theory of "slippery slopes" that formalizes some aspects of this
type of strategic stability. Our framework provides a simple way of thinking about strategic
stability and its implications. Several historical examples, as we discuss in greater detail
below, feature this type of strategic considerations in the institutional calculus of political
powerful groups. An obvious case is the process of reform in the Soviet Union, which we
mentioned above. The reformers' plan was to limit political change, while modernizing the
economy and improving the allocation of resources within the communist system. But once
the process of reform was underway, it went much further and faster than the communist
reformers wished or could have foreseen (Fischer, 1994; Treisman, 2011). Thus, if preserving
the Soviet Union and its political system was an important priority for the reformers, they
might have had reason to strategically block the early reforms, even if these were beneficial,
because they would have been a first step towards a slippery slope. Indeed, many of the
autocratic leaders of the former Soviet republics, such as Azerbaijan, Belarus, Turkmenistan
or Uzbekistan, have been reluctant to embrace deep economic reforms, perhaps learning from
Russia's experience.
   Acemoglu and Robinson (2006a) also emphasized that the unwillingness of many elites in
absolutist Russia and Habsburg Empire in the early 19th century to embrace industrialization
and railroads was related to their concerns about losing political power once the process of
industrialization was underway. Similarly, as argued by Acemoglu, Ticchi and Vindigni
(2010), many African leaders may have refrained from building strong armies, despite their
need for military power against uprisings and internal enemies, because they viewed this as
a first step towards a slippery slope in which the military would become more powerful or
even engineer a coup against them.
   One other interesting set of circumstances that can lead to institutional persistence is

                                              6
miscoordination. Even though institutional change that may be beneficial to many citizens
and organized groups may be possible, it often requires some trust and coordination between
groups, especially trust that nobody will try to hijack the process, and this leads to multiple
equilibria: when trust is missing, the process of institutional change may never get off
the ground, creating a form of institutional stasis. If the different groups trusted each
other, a better institutional arrangement, with power sharing between groups, would be an
equilibrium as well.
   Our discussion so far has followed much of the economics and political science literatures,
focusing on institutional stasis (extreme institutional persistence) as the (typical) conceptual
model for thinking about the durability of institutions. Reality is much more complex,
however. Institutions are subject to continuous change as very few societies experience
immutable conditions for even short periods of time. Thinking of institutional persistence
as stasis is thus unsatisfactory at best and potentially misleading at worst.
   What might institutional persistence mean then? A more general notion of persistence is
proposed in works on path dependence (Pierson, 2000; Mahoney, 2000; Thelen, 1999). We
follow these studies, and especially Acemoglu and Robinson (2012), by using their notion
of "path-dependent change" as another, often more relevant, notion of persistence in insti-
tutions. By path dependence we mean that the process of institutional change is shaped
by historical conditions and initial institutional choices. Thus two societies that start with
somewhat different institutions (potentially similar, but still with small differences), may
end up with very different trajectories. This may entail different institutional dynamics and
possibly very different economic outcomes.
   We distinguish two types of path-dependent change: intrinsic and extrinsic. Intrinsic
path-dependent change results from internal dynamics. Small differences can put a society
in the basin of attraction of very different institutional equilibria. Yet even more interesting
may be extrinsic path-dependent change, whereby small differences are amplified by shocks.
We discuss several examples of path-dependent change, emphasizing how they provide a
more nuanced and useful notion of persistence than the more dominant institutional sta-
sis view in the economics literature. In particular, we illustrate extrinsic path-dependent
change with brief discussions of: Brenner (1976)'s thesis about why the Black Death and the
subsequent population collapse had very different effects on institutions in different parts of

                                               7
Europe (Aston and Philpin, 1987); Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2002)'s discussion of
industrialization opportunities leading to a huge divergence across former European colonies
with different institutional structures in the 19th century; Acemoglu and Robinson (2019)'s
discussion of the divergent trajectories of Guatemala and Costa Rica following improvements
in shipping technology that enabled a coffee boom in both economies; and Putnam (1993)'s
arguments about divergence between the north and the south of Italy.
   We end the paper with a brief discussion of three related major topics, which we cannot
do justice to in this essay, but can briefly touch up on. These are:
   (1) Designing persistence in institutions : Since institutions can be both persistent and
on their way to change, current powerful coalitions could agree on introducing additional
institutional safeguards to slow down or prevent change. We discuss both theoretical ideas
and some applications in this context.
   (2) Social mobility and institutional dynamics : Another force that can either destabilize
institutions or contribute to their stability is the interplay between social mobility and insti-
tutional preferences. When those who do not have political power in an institutional arrange-
ment expect to be upwardly social mobile and benefit from the same institutional structure
that is now keeping them down, they may be less willing to take action against it. This
would be an example of anticipated social mobility further stabilizing existing institutions.
Building on Acemoglu, Egorov and Sonin (2018), we show, however, that anticipated social
mobility may also destabilize certain regimes, in particular democracy. This would happen,
for example, when the current median voter expects to be in a different social position in
the future and may want to start the process of shifting political power towards such roles.
   (3) Culture and institutions : There has been a resurgence in research on the role of
cultural factors in economic and institutional development in recent decades (see Roland,
2004, Alesina and Giuliano, 2015, and Tabellini, 2010, for overviews). The interplay between
culture and institutions is another potent force that can generate both institutional change
and persistence. On the one hand, when cultural change naturally occurs under the auspices
of a given institution, it may be a force towards undermining the same institutions. On the
other hand, culture may adapt to an institutional environment, further cementing its hold
in society. We explain how these ideas can be embedded into our simple framework, which
can then elucidate their operation.

                                               8
       While this essay is not a survey, it is still useful to mention some of the approaches to
institutions we build upon.3 Our work, as well as much of the literature in this area, builds
on Douglass North's seminal work on institutions. North (1990) defined institutions as
"the rules of the game in a society, or more formally, are the humanly devised constraints
that shape human interaction", which is the perspective we also adopt in this essay.4 Also
relevant to our focus here is Ostrom (2005)'s distinction between "operational rules", which
correspond to policy choice in our model, "collective choice rules", which govern the change
of operational rules, and "constitutional rules", which govern the change of collective choice
rules.5
       In adopting a dynamic game-theoretic approach, we do not mean to deny the impor-
tance of other factors, including evolutionary forces and bounded rationality considerations,
in shaping institutions. The evolutionary perspective dates back to Veblen (1899), who
described "the evolution of social structure has been a process of natural selection of in-
stitutions", and is more often associated with Hayek (1973), who argued that institutions
(rules of conduct) "have evolved because the groups who practiced them were more success-
ful and displaced others". Williamson (2000)'s seminal work emphasizes the role of bounded
rationality and the use of simple rules to help in this context. Hodgson (2004) combines
bounded rationality and evolutionary considerations. Though these approaches constitute
important directions for the literature, they significantly multiply the set of institutions that
can be stable, and as such do not provide as natural a starting point for our analysis as fully
game-theoretic models, where individuals and groups can secure institutional change if they
can build a sufficiently powerful coalition to support it.
       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce our general
framework. In Section 3 we discuss institutional stasis through the lenses of our model.
   3
      See, for example, Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2005), Persson and Tabellini (2000), Kingston and
Caballero (2009), Besley and Ghatak (2010), and Brousseau, Garrouste and Raynaud (2011) for overviews
of recent work in this area.
    4
      A more encompassing definition of institutions is provided in Aoki (2001), who defined them as as
systems of beliefs over possible action of others; effectively, an institution is a focal point in a coordination
game. This perspective is also adopted in Greif (2006). Such definitions are less well adapted to formal
game-theoretic analyses and do not make it easy to distinguish the role of institutions as setting rules from
the equilibrium play.
    5
      Other game-theoretic analyses that build on a similar distinction include Acemoglu and Robinson (2001,
2008), Barbera and Jackson (2004), Lizzeri and Persico (2004), and Acemoglu, Egorov and Sonin (2012), all
of which model collective choices on both policies and future institutions.


                                                       9
Section 4 turns to various factors that push towards institutional change and illustrates
these with a variety of historical examples. Section 5 introduces our notion of strategic
stability and explains how such considerations can stem institutional change. Section 6
turns to the issue of path-dependent change, explaining both how institutional stasis is often
an imperfect model of how institutions persist and how and why path-dependent change
takes place in practice. Sections 7, 8, and 9 discuss designing persistence, social mobility,
and culture and institutions, while Section 10 concludes.


2         General Framework
In this section, we present a(n informal) framework that will help us exposit the main ideas of
this essay. The framework draws on our previous work, in particular, Acemoglu, Egorov and
Sonin (2015), but here we suppress all but the most essential technical aspects to simplify
the exposition.
    Consider a society consisting of n groups of individuals such that group i has share i .
We represent economic preferences with a policy space, and preferences of all individuals
within a group are the same and do not change over time, and we assume that they have
bliss point bi and utility function from policy p given by:

                                   ui (p) = -(p - bi )2 + ai ,                             (1)

where ai is a term that depends on the institutional arrangement currently prevailing that
may impact individual payoffs (see below). Later, we will allow these preferences to change
over time, either because the economic structure changes (e.g., what a landowner may think
about industrialization may change over time with developments in agricultural markets and
relative prices) or because of social mobility. We also allow for political shocks that shift
power from one group to another. We do not introduce expectations and stochastic events
explicitly to simplify the notation.
    Total individual payoffs are given by a discounted sum of (1), with discount factor  
[0, 1).
    Suppose that {bi } is increasing in i, which implies that groups are ordered, for example
from left to right or on some other ideological or economic dimension. Our focus is on insti-
tutions that determine decision-making rules and constraints. We denote these institutions

                                               10
by sj , and model them in the simplest possible way, by assuming that under each institution,
different groups receive a certain "weight" in collective decision-making. Namely, under in-
                                   j
stitution sj , group i has weight wi ; we might think of an institution where all weights are
equal as democracy, whereas an institution where only one group, say group i, has positive
weight as the dictatorship of group i. It is often sufficient to look at the case where these
weights are indicators 0 or 1, i.e., some groups are enfranchised and some are not.
    As explained in Acemoglu, Egorov and Sonin (2015), one could look for the Markov
Perfect Equilibria of this game, or more simply (and essentially equivalently), focus on
Markov Voting Equilibria (MVE), which are, loosely speaking, given by effective median
voters' choices over institutions anticipating the decisions of future effective median voters.
In that paper, we showed that such MVE exist and are well-behaved under relatively weak
assumptions, and here we do not get into these technical details.
    Suppose that we start with institution sj in the beginning of period t and that both
policy decisions and institutional choices (for example, whether there will be an institutional
reform) will be determined with the power distribution implied by the institution. We
simplify the discussion here by assuming that both decisions are taken by the "effective
median voter", i.e., by an individual from group k = k (sj ) such that neither the groups to
the left of k nor the groups to its right constitute a weighted majority (with weights given
by the current institution sj ). Observe that because policy is not a state variable, policy
choices will always be dictated by the preferences of the effective median voter. In other
words, given the effective median voter group k , we will have policy given by this group's
bliss point, p = bk . Institutional choice is generally more complicated.
    Institutions matter for individual payoffs through two channels. First, institutions de-
termine the distribution of political power and thus who will set policy today and in the
future. Second, they may also matter directly for payoffs, for example because they set the
rules of economic interactions or enable different types of innovations or investments. This
can be captured in our framework by making the term ai above a function of the current
institution, i.e., ai (sj ).




                                              11
3         Institutional Stasis: Power Begets Power
The simplest form of institutional persistence, and the one that most discussions of per-
sistence gravitate around, is one in which once an institution gets put in place (either by
design or randomly), it self-replicates -- creating a type of stasis, lack of any meaningful
change. The most obvious reason why this would happen in the model is because of a close
congruence between political power and economic interests (combined with a lack of shocks
that disrupts this congruence). The next result informally summarizes this possibility:
        Result 1 (institutional stasis): Suppose that under institution s the effective median
voter is in group i ,6 with bliss point bi and ai (s )  ai (s) for all other s, then we will
have institutional stasis -- group i will always choose to remain with institutions s and
thus continue to be the effective median voter.
        In other words, the group that is in power is happy with the current institutions and
thus uses its power to maintain these institutions. There are certainly examples of such
institutional stasis in history (and these examples and this type of reasoning often shape the
way that many economists think about persistence). For example, the U.S. South before the
Civil War had an institutional structure that both economically and politically empowered
the planter elite, who owned the largest plantations and the greatest number of slaves (Potter,
1976). Until the Civil War (and to some degree thereafter), this elite was able to maintain
the same institutional structure, thus retaining its power (Acemoglu and Robinson, 2008;
Wiener, 1978). As mentioned in the Introduction, this was because the planter elite was
cohesive and well organized, had its political power reinforced by the slavery system, and
had a clear interest in perpetuating that system (Genovese, 1976; Fogel, 1994). The case
of institutional persistence in Guatemala is even more extreme, with the descendents of
the original conquistadors of the area retaining political power and maintaining a similarly
coercion-based economy well into the 20th century (Acemoglu and Robinson, 2012, Chapter
11). Feudal institutions, which lasted well into the 19th century in some parts of Europe,
are another example of an arrangement empowering a narrow elite, which then worked hard
to maintain this system from which it benefited economically and politically (Bloch, 1964).
    6
     More explicitly, s empowers a set of groups I = {i1 , . . . , in }, and the (weighted) median voter within
this set of politically active groups is in group i .



                                                      12
       Result 1 gives the simplest form of stasis -- from the fact that power begets power.
Another reason for this type of institutional persistence would be multiplicity of equilibria
(and miscoordination), which we discuss later.
       Though institutional stasis is simple to understand and may be what many think of when
they start imagining institutional persistence, it is not the most common or most interesting
form of persistence. This is for the obvious reason that institutions, like much else, never
remain completely stationary. This motivates the rest of our inquiry in this essay, attempting
to understand how institutional change and in what ways initial institutional choices shape
later outcomes.
       Before we delve deeper into different types of institutional persistence, we also make an
important observation:
       Observation: Meaningful institutional persistence necessitates multiple steady-state
institutions.
       This observation is very intuitive.7 If there was a unique steady-state institution, meaning
that ultimately all institutional equilibria converge to some unique s , then we would not
have any notion of institutional persistence, because all institutions would converge to s .
This is not a statement about multiple equilibria -- whereby, starting from a given state,
multiple equilibrium paths are possible. There might be multiple steady states, but the
equilibrium path starting from any institution may be unique (Matsuyama, 1991; Krugman,
1991). For example, starting with highly autocratic government forms, there may be a unique
equilibrium in which society converges to an oligarchic institution, while starting with more
participatory institutions, the unique equilibrium may involve convergence to democracy
(Acemoglu, Egorov and Sonin, 2015). Or there may be multiple equilibria as we will see
below. We will return to the importance of multiple steady states below, but it already
highlights an important issue: it is not possible to talk of institutional persistence in models
that do not admit multiple steady states.
       In the next section, we start with a number of departures from the institutional stasis
outcome outlined in Result 1. We then introduce a more subtle form of institutional persis-
   7
    Some care is necessary here. There may also be institutional persistence if the limit of equilibrium
sequence of institutions is a non-steady-state arrangement, such as a limit cycle, fluctuating between different
types of institutions. To keep technicalities to a minimum, in this observation we focus on "multiple steady
states".


                                                      13
tence, based on strategic considerations. We subsequently explore various mechanisms for
institutional change, and then return to "path-dependent" institutional change.


4        Institutional Change
Why would the institutional stasis outcome and Result 1 not apply? We outline two possible
reasons for this in the next two results.
    Result 2 (incongruence between political and economic power): Suppose that
under institution s the effective median voter is in group i , with bliss point bi , but there
exists s such that ai (s ) is sufficiently larger than ai (s ). Suppose in addition that 
is small, so individuals are sufficiently myopic. Then starting from institution i , we will
transition to another institution.
    The reason for institutional change in this case is that the group in power under current
institutions, group i , prefers an alternative institutional arrangement. This could be, for
example, because aristocrats who hold political power in a monarchic regime may realize that
their economic interests will be better served by bringing new groups into political power.
The most famous example of this type of institutional change is discussed in North and
Weingast (1989), who argued that the emergence of parliamentary institutions in England
were in part a commitment to financial markets that government debt would be repaid. A
related example is proposed in Acemoglu and Wolitzky (2020) as an explanation for the
emergence of rule of law. In this account, current elites use the rule of law (in particular,
relinquishing their own above-the-law status) as a commitment that they will themselves
not exploit non-elites and thus encourage greater effort from them. Acemoglu and Wolitzky
(2020) give the example of the Meiji Restoration in Japan to illustrate this possibility (see also
Ravina, 2020). Threatened by foreign forces, especially the American fleet led by Commodore
Perry, Japanese elites decided to defensively modernize their economy. This was deemed
impossible as long as the very unequal treatment of elites and non-elites in Japan remained, so
important steps towards equality before the law were introduced as part of this modernization
drive.
    Yet another set of historical examples illustrating Result 2 would be the instances in which
economic change inexorably (albeit sometimes slowly) shifts political power, thus generating


                                               14
such an incongruence. The early Marxist theories of the collapse of feudalism, and thus rise
of early capitalism, fall within this category. Following some of Marx's comments (Marx,
2019), these theories argued that the development of towns and craft industries slowly shifted
political power away from the feudal hierarchy (see below on this).
   From a theoretical point of view, the two conditions in this result are important. First, we
need the alternative institution to be sufficiently better than the current one in order to make
sure that the potential loss of political power, and together with it the deviation of current
policy from group i 's bliss point, is compensated for. Otherwise, this group may prefer
to stay in the current institutional environment in order to enjoy policy privileges, even if
there are better institutional arrangements for them. Second, the condition that  is small is
important as well. Without this condition group i may worry about subsequent institutional
changes, and this fear main turn lead to what we are going to call "strategic stability".
The requirement that  is small ensures that future, potentially adverse consequences from
current change are not going the dominant factor influencing decisions, and thus the group
that is currently politically powerful will resolve the incongruence between their current
economic and future political interests in favor of their economic interests.
   Lizzeri and Persico (2004)'s theory of democratization provides another illustration of
Result 2. In their theory, with limited suffrage, taxes are low, but intra-elite conflict leads
to wasteful patronage. Franchise extension increases taxes but also leads to the redirection
of spending towards public goods, potentially improving elite welfare. Lizzeri and Persico
(2004) argue that this theory provides a good account of democratization in Britain during
the Age the Reform.
   The next result presents a second, very different reason for institutional change. It shows
how the anticipation of political shocks can be a powerful motive for institutional change.
   Result 3 (threat of revolution): Suppose that under institution s the effective
median voter is group in i , with bliss point bi and ai (s )  ai (s) for all other s. However,
there is a "threat of revolution", meaning that if the current institutions remain at s ,
then with some probability q political power will shift to another group i , who will engineer
a transition to institutions s such that ai (s ) is sufficiently less than ai (s ). Moreover,
there exists another institution sd such that ai (sd ) is sufficiently greater than ai (s ) and



                                              15
institution sd is itself persistent. Then there will be institutional change.8
       From a theoretical point of view, the requirement that sd is itself a persistent state is
again related to issues of strategic stability which we discuss below.
       Intuitively, the threat of a worse institutional outcome, such as a revolution, motivates
the current elite (powerholders) to undertake institutional change as the lesser of two evils.
Such engineered institutional changes may prevent the worse transition from the viewpoint of
the elite (to s ), either because it makes the revolution less likely or because it convinces the
revolutionary groups not to undertake them. One example of this type of institutional change
is the theory of the emergence of democracy proposed in Acemoglu and Robinson (2000,
2006b). Elite-controlled institutions may be destabilized because non-elites may sometimes
solve their collective action problem and acquire de facto power, going so far as credibly
threatening a revolution (even though they do not have de jure or formal power under such
institutions). They will then use this de facto power to force a transition to a revolutionary
state that has disastrous consequences for the elite. To prevent this outcome, the elite
could choose to establish a democracy, as a commitment to better outcomes for non-elites,
thus staving off the revolution. Yet in other circumstances, the same revolutionary threat
could push the elite towards using repression in order to eliminate challenges to their rule.
Acemoglu and Robinson (2000, 2006b) provide detailed historical evidence arguing that the
threat of revolution was one of the most important factors in leading to the emergence
of democracy in 19th-century Europe, while similar social movements have been met by
repression in Central America and Eastern Europe. In the British case, for example, social
unrest and protests convinced part of the elite to choose the path of gradual franchise
extension, with the explicit aim of placating these demands before they turned into more
destabilizing actions, but the response to the revolutions of 1848 differed throughout Europe
and involved a range of repressive measures in France, Germany, Hungary, Italy and Sweden.
Econometric evidence on the role of revolutionary threats in the emergence of democracy is
provided by Aidt and Franck (2015) and Aidt and Jensen (2014).
   8
     Institutions can change towards sd or towards another equally preferable institution supported by a
powerful coalition.
   Also note that in this result, as well as some that follow, stating sufficient conditions using the a terms
is simpler. But similar sufficient conditions can be stated in terms of the political bliss points of different
groups and how distant they are from each other.



                                                      16
    We also note that a third type of institutional change originates from anticipation of
future social mobility. Since this type of institutional change depends on more strategic
considerations, we delay its discussion until later.


5     Strategic Stability
We now discuss the possibility of institutional stability emerging from strategic calculations.
Namely, we say that there is strategic stability when current institutions are made stable
by the calculus of some groups that current institutional changes would later on reduce
their political standing or make them unable to resist adverse institutional changes. One
example of strategic stability is what Acemoglu and Robinson (2006a) refer to as "political
losers" effect: some groups blocking change because they fear losing their political power.
A related but somewhat more general form of this is the "slippery slope" considerations
studied in Acemoglu, Egorov and Sonin (2012). The next result provides one form this
strategic stability.
    Result 4 (strategic stability): Suppose that under institution s the effective median
voter is in group i , with bliss point bi , but ai (s ) is much less than ai (s ) for some s , so
that there is no institutional stasis. There will be strategic stability if for any such s , there
will be a follow-up transition to institutions {s1 = s , s2 , . . .} with limit point s such that
ai (s ) is much less than ai (s ) and the discount factor  is large enough.
    In other words, there is no institutional stasis, and there are some alternative institu-
tional arrangements that would be better for the currently powerful effective median voter.
However, once this change, say to institutions s , occurs, there will be the further rounds of
change, taking us to s , which is disliked by the current effective median voter. This can
be interpreted as a slippery slope as in Acemoglu, Egorov and Sonin (2012), because the
first step of institutional change pushes us towards a sequence of changes that are disliked
by currently powerful groups.
    Notice the importance of the assumption that  is sufficiently large. Strategic stability
comes from forward-looking calculations. If agents did not care about the future (if  were
small), then such considerations would not matter and strategic stability would not arise.
    The most common and straightforward application of these ideas is to repression by auto-


                                               17
crats, often afraid of changes that would follow any political opening. For example, in 2008,
Vladimir Putin, constitutionally barred from running for a third term, handpicked his long-
time aide, Dmitry Medvedev, as his successor. Putin himself became prime-minister, vastly
expanding the power of this office (Black, 2014). Medvedev received permission to initiate
much-needed partial economic and legal reforms and experiment with greater cooperation
with the West in foreign policy. However, even partial reforms soon came to be viewed as
potentially destabilizing of Putin's grip on power. In 2012, Putin returned to presidency,
and "Medvedev's liberalization" was reversed. Reforms were cancelled or scaled back. Since
the return to presidency, "stability" became the paramount concern of Putin's government
(°
 Aslund, 2019).
   A historical example illustrating the same considerations is the resistance of Russian and
Habsburg elites in the early 19th century to railways and industrialization because, even
though these would have had major economic benefits, they were judged to unleash political
forces that would weaken the political standing of the elites (Gershenkron, 1962; Acemoglu
and Robinson, 2006a).
   The next example provides a very simple form of strategic stability, drawing on Acemoglu,
Egorov and Sonin (2012). It also provides more details about why traditional elites may
oppose industrialization, as in the case of Russian and Habsburg Empires , even though
such change would have been economically beneficial.
   Example 1: Suppose there are three groups and that group 1 is the initial elite (monar-
chy or an oligarchy). We start in an initial institution s1 , in which this group is the dictator
and maintains political power by repression. Because of this repression, the payoffs of all
groups are lowered under institution s1 . An alternative institutional arrangement is s2 , where
political power is shared between this initial elite and industrial interests. In this institu-
tional arrangement, repression is reduced, and payoffs for all groups are higher than under
s1 . But political power may now shift to industrial interests. Suppose, for example, that at
each date, with probability q > 0, industrial interests will make the political decisions. What
they want for their economic interests is to undertake rapid industrialization, by building
factories and railways. This however further empowers the third group, the workers, who
make up the majority. Once they are sufficiently powerful, then they are able to force a
transition to democracy, denoted by s3 . Suppose that democracy empowers workers, who

                                               18
make up the majority of the population and are thus the effective median voter. Suppose
also that democracy gives the workers the highest feasible payoff, which makes democracy
a steady-state (stable) institutional arrangement. However, the traditional elite has lower
payoff in democracy than under s1 . This then implies that when the discount factor  is suf-
ficiently large, the initial elite would not like to undertake institutional change starting from
s1 . This implies that there is another steady-state institutional arrangement: s1 . Intuitively,
even though a move from s1 to s2 improves the initial elite's payoffs in the short run, the
power sharing with industrial interests will ultimately pave the way to rapid industrialization
and thus to the emergence of democracy. Because democracy itself is a steady-state insti-
tutional arrangement, the initial elite recognizes that democracy arrives, it will last forever.
When they pay sufficient attention to future payoffs ( sufficiently large), this makes the
initial move unattractive. Notice that it is the combination of strategic reasoning and high
discount factor that makes s1 a steady-state institutional arrangement here. In addition,
we can also observe that even though both institutional arrangements s1 and s3 are steady
states, the equilibrium path is always unique. When we start in one of these institutions, we
stay there (and hence there is institutional stasis).
   Example 1 thus illustrates how strategic stability, or slippery slope concerns, may gen-
erate a very strong form of some optimality -- Pareto inefficiency. Even institutions that
provide higher utility to all groups may not be attractive enough because of (expected)
subsequent changes. Another simple historical illustration of these ideas is the role of the
army in many less developed economies. Despite multiple internal and external security
challenges, many nations, especially those in Africa, have armies that are weak, underpro-
visioned and disarrayed. Acemoglu, Ticchi and Vindigni (2010) suggest that this is because
civilian leaders, who are themselves weak, are afraid that strengthening the military further
would undercut their own power or even leave them exposed to coups. The logic is again
one of strategic stability: the current elite sacrifices the benefits that they can reap from a
stronger army because they do not want to risk the institutional trajectory that would leave
them with lower power or deposed.
   Example 1 is one with multiple steady-state institutions, but a unique equilibrium path
-- meaning that starting from any initial institution, there is a unique equilibrium sequence
of institutions and policies. Strategic stability is not confined to such situations. It can also

                                               19
arise when there are multiple equilibrium paths supporting multiple limiting equilibria. The
next example illustrates this possibility:
       Example 2: Suppose there are n groups, and there are n + 1 institutional arrangements.
One of those corresponds to democracy, which gives the highest utility to all groups. The
other n institutions correspond to the dictatorship of one of the groups. The dictatorship of
group i gives a somewhat lower utility to this group but a very low utility to all other groups.
On the other hand, if society is democratic, then at each date there is a random variable
determining which one of the n groups can undertake a coup and set up its own dictatorship.
It can be verified that there are multiple equilibria in this case. In one equilibrium, the group
that is first picked sets up its dictatorship and maintains it forever, because it is afraid that,
if it chooses to transition to democracy, other groups will undertake a coup, setting up
their own dictatorship. Another equilibrium is one in which all groups trust each other and
nobody attempts a coup, even when they have the chance.
       This example thus provides another form of strategic stability of institutions, but dif-
ferently from the previous example, miscoordination and trust-related issues matter greatly
because there is a multiplicity of equilibria. Consequently, institutions that persist in the
absence of between-group trust may make way to better institutional arrangements if there
is coordination or trust. This example also further qualifies meaning of institutional stasis:
though we may stay in the dictatorship of one of the groups, say group 1, in an equilibrium
in which no group trusts others, it is possible for beliefs to change (for example, because of
an unanticipated exogenous shocks to beliefs or a new vision or rhetoric) and a very different
type of equilibrium behavior to be realized thereafter.
       We end this section with another result, which further clarifies the nature of strategic
stability and will then be useful in our discussion of designing constitutional provisions in
order to increase the stability of institutions.
       Result 5 (more stable institutions): Institutional arrangements that preclude small
changes tend to be more durable.9
       The intuition for this result is an illustration of the general principle highlighted in Ace-
   9
     Formally, we can express this result as follows: Suppose that institution s has the effective median
voter in group i . Suppose, furthermore, that there are institutions s            
                                                                        -1 and s+1 where the effective median
                                                                            
voter is in the neighboring groups i - 1 and i + 1, respectively. Then s is more likely to be stable when
it is not possible to transition to these neighboring institutions, s        
                                                                     -1 and s+1 .



                                                     20
moglu, Egorov and Sonin (2012): institutions are made stable by the absence of alternative
stable institutions that receive sufficient support from powerful constituencies. Hence, sta-
bility is made more likely when forming such a coalition supporting alternative institutions
becomes more difficult. When small institutional reforms are feasible, they are likely to be
less threatening to powerful constituencies, and coalitions in favor of such reforms are more
likely to form. But this in turn makes existing institutions less stable. The alternative is an
institutional framework that can only be changed in more radical directions. In that case,
except under exceptional circumstances, there will be powerful groups trying to block the
change, rendering existing institutions more stable.
       One illustration of these ideas is from the U.S. Constitution, which has changed little after
the Civil War (there have been only a handful of amendments, mostly minor except those
leading to the direct election of Senators and the federal income tax). Mittal and Weingast
(2013) interpret the post-1877 U.S. Constitution as "self-enforcing". In fact, the general
interpretation among constitutional scholars and politicians has been that the overarching
framework imposed by the Constitution is not up for discussion, thus helping with the notion
that any meaningful change in the Constitution will be a relatively major one. As a result,
Elkins, Ginsburg and Melton (2009) state: "The United States presents a constitution with
formal inflexibility but much informal flexibility", and conjecture that ". . . a moderate level
of flexibility seems to be a necessary condition for enduring constitutions."


6        Path-Dependent Change
In contrast to institutional stasis, most institutional persistence does not involve lack of
change, but the possibility that initial institutions shape how that change takes place. This
is what Acemoglu and Robinson (2012) refer to as "path-dependent change". There are
two aspects to this definition. The first is a form of path dependence, meaning that initial
conditions matter (Pierson, 2000; Mahoney, 2000; Thelen, 1999).10 The second is that there is
actual institutional change. In particular, institutional stasis, though it involves dependence
  10
     We refer to this as a simple form of path dependence, because it is distinct from some of the more
intricate possibilities, for example what Page et al. (2006) refers to as "phat dependence", obtained from
path dependence by changing the order of letters to emphasize that the exact sequence of realizations of
random variables matters for long-run outcomes.



                                                   21
on initial conditions, is not path-dependent change.
    To explain these ideas more systematically, let us introduce some notation. Suppose that
starting from some institution s, the equilibrium path of institutions can be represented by
the stochastic sequence {s1 = s, s2 , . . .}. In contrast, suppose that starting from a different
institution s = s, it is {s1 = s , s2 , . . .}. If limt (st - st ) = 0 with probability one, then we
say that there is no path dependence. On the other hand, if this is not the case, then there
is path dependence.
    Clearly, institutional stasis is an example of path dependence. For instance, if st = s and
st = s for all t, we have a simple example of institutional stasis, and by our definition this
is path dependent. But it is not path-dependent change, since there is no change. Hence,
we say that there is path-dependent change so long as st = st-1 and st = st-1 with positive
probability for all t  T for some large T . This does not rule out the possibility that as
t  , there may be convergence to a limiting institutional equilibrium, but it requires
that, with positive probability, institutions change at least along the transition path.
    Why would there be path-dependent change? There are two distinct but related reasons
for this. The first is because of internal dynamics, which create change that intricately
depends on initial conditions. We refer to this as "intrinsic path-dependent change". The
second is because of the arrival of shocks, so we refer to it as "extrinsic path-dependent
change". In this case, it is the differential response of institutions to a common shock
depending on where they currently are that undergirds path-dependence.
    The next result explains one set of conditions under which extrinsic path-dependent
change arises.
    Result 6 (path-dependent change): Suppose that starting from institution s, the
equilibrium path of institutions is given by the deterministic sequence {s1 = s, s2 , . . .} and
starting from s = s, it is given by deterministic sequence {s1 = s , s2 , . . .}. There is intrinsic
path-dependent change if st = st for all t and limt (st - st ) = 0. On the other hand,
there will be extrinsic path-dependent change, under the following circumstances: suppose
that st = st for all t and limt (st - st ) = 0, but at each date t, with probability qt > 0
the environment changes, and following this environment change at time T , the resulting
sequence of institutional equilibria takes the form {s         ~T +1 , . . .} or {s
                                                     ~T = sT , s                            ~T +1 , . . .}.
                                                                                  ~T = sT , s
                                                            sT +t - s
Then there will be extrinsic path-dependent change if limt (~       ~T +t ) = 0.

                                                    22
   In other words, intrinsic path-dependent change leads to a different evolution of institu-
tions starting from different initial conditions. In fact, this is true even though there are no
shocks and thus we are looking at a deterministic sequence of institutional equilibria. Extrin-
sic path-dependent change is defined for the case where there is no intrinsic-path dependent
change and thus without shocks, equilibrium pass starting from different initial conditions
will converge towards the same steady states. Yet, the arrival of some shocks on the way
to institutional convergence may disrupt the convergence and usher in divergence instead,
because the institutional differences at the time the shock hits will fundamentally shape the
response to it.
   One historical illustration of path-dependent change comes from Acemoglu and Robin-
son (2019). Despite the many similarities between Costa Rica and Guatemala in the 19th
century (which used to be part of the same Kingdom of Guatemala), faced with new mar-
itime trade opportunities, especially for coffee, created by advances in shipping technology,
the two countries sharply diverged. When this "shock" took place, there were some small
but relevant differences. Guatemala had a more monolithic elite that was able to dominate
the economy and politics of the country. They were then able to monopolize most of the
coffee-suitable land and set up coercive coffee plantations. In contrast, the somewhat dif-
ferent political equilibrium in Costa Rica, where the landed elite was a little weaker and
different urban centers competed against each other, did not enable this type of elite monop-
olization. Rather than large-scale plantations, in Costa Rica smallholder coffee production
took off (Paige, 1998). These economic institutions in turn generated very different political
institutional paths, with Guatemala becoming more and more repressive and authoritarian,
while Costa Rica developed more participatory institutions, and eventually reached a consol-
idated democracy. The contrast of Guatemala and Costa Rica therefore provides an example
of extrinsic path-dependent change under the presumption that without this major shock,
Costa Rica and Guatemala would have remained similar and perhaps at some point achieved
institutional convergence, but this potential convergence was disrupted, paving the way to
institutional divergence. Acemoglu and Robinson (2012) also interpret the divergent paths
of North and South America following the collapse of colonial empires as another example
of path-dependent change. After independence, in most of Latin America the old colonial
elites and their allies weakened and disappeared (Guatemala and El Salvador are exceptions

                                              23
in this). But their place was not filled by more participatory institutions and more inclu-
sive economic arrangements, but by new elites who took power and set up a different, yet
similarly extractive economics system (Coatsworth, 2008).
   Some of the theories of transition away from feudalism in Europe also fall within this
category. The so-called neo-Malthusian historians (e.g., Postan, 1973; North and Thomas,
1973) emphasized the role of the population declines brought about by the black death and
its aftermath in Europe as a major force destabilizing the feudal regime. These theories
were criticized by Brenner (1976), who pointed out that similar demographic changes led to
different outcomes throughout Europe (Aston and Philpin, 1987). Brenner's thesis can be
interpreted as an example of path-dependence change. Brenner argued that a key variable
was the balance of power between lords and peasants, and the shock created by demo-
graphic change played out very differently depending on this balance of power. In terms
of our framework, this amounts to relatively small differences in the institutional structure
(in particular in terms of the ability of lords to dominate peasants) leading to divergent
institutional trajectories after a major shock, such as the one generated by the black death
episode (see Acemoglu and Wolitzky, 2011 for a formalization of these ideas in the context
of an equilibrium model of labor coercion). Finally, another example is provided by Putnam
(1993)'s account for the further divergence of the south and the north of Italy from the
1970s onwards, based on differences in culture, social capital and institutions in these two
parts of the country reacting differently to the greater autonomy and resources given to local
governments.
   We conclude this section with a brief mention of a complementary result from Acemoglu,
Egorov and Sonin (2010), who study the flexibility advantage of more democratic governance
structures. In particular, in this paper we show that increasing the ability of political insiders
to block change does not necessarily lead to worse static outcomes, but reduces the flexibility
of institutions to adapt to change. As a result of this lack of flexibility, in the presence of
sufficiently frequent shocks, political systems that empower insiders more will significantly
underperform, thus illustrating another facet of path-dependent change -- differences in
initial power distribution can lead to a divergence because it determines whether or not
adaptation to this change is possible. A historical example with this flavor is given by
Runciman (2017), who suggests that the more democratic British government was able to

                                               24
adapt to the changing conditions of World War I better than the more autocratic German
government and military, which found it difficult to switch away from their early strategies
that later proved inadequate.


7     Designing Persistence
Institutional change is often costly for current political incumbents. This raises the possi-
bility that they may try to design new institutional provisions (or attempt "institutional
innovations") in order to create stability, in the process solidifying their privileged position.
History is full of examples of such efforts, though not all of them have succeeded.
    One canonical approach to this problem is Barbera and Jackson (2004), who introduce
(in a two-period setting) the choice of the constitution which determines future voting rules.
They observe that simple and desirable decision-making procedures such as a majority rule
may result in good policy outcomes, but they may be unstable in that a majority may vote
to get rid of a majority rule. On the other hand -- and this is the key idea -- the rules that
determine policy and the rules that determine institutional change may be distinct, and if the
constitutional rules the support of a supermajority for institutional change, they may help
make an institution stable. Indeed, a typical constitution requires a much higher burden
on amendments and constitutional changes than on deciding ordinary policies. Barbera
and Jackson (2004) show that majority rule can be made stable if it is coupled with a
constitutional unanimity requirements to change it, because there will never be unanimous
agreement to change majority rule as there are always some groups that expect to benefit
from this decision-making procedure.
    This idea can be generalized and applied in our dynamic setting. In the extreme, when
there are no constraints on designing constitutional requirements, current incumbents can
always design a constitution that replicates their most preferred outcomes by requiring that
a change of institutions requires unanimity, thereby granting themselves veto power on in-
stitutional change. The next result summarizes one way of formalizing these ideas:
    Result 7 (constitutions): Suppose that group i is the effective median voter under
institution s and prefers some other institution s to s (because ai (s ) is much greater
than ai (s )). Suppose also that s is the most preferred institution for some other group i .


                                               25
Then a constitution consisting of institution s as the decision-making rule, coupled with a
unanimity requirement to change the constitution, is always stable.
   The problem of design of constitutions becomes more realistic and interesting when there
are constraints on what types of super majority or unanimity requirements can be imposed
for constitutional change or when there are changes in the environment for which we cannot
write complete contracts (Aghion and Bolton, 2003). For example, there may be significant
uncertainty about the conditions that will arise in the future. In such situations, full una-
nimity may be prohibitively costly (precluding very beneficial changes necessary to adapt to
new environments), but some amount of institutional stability can be achieved by introduc-
ing constitutional requirements that necessitate the formation of relatively large coalitions
to implement change. One example is provided by the famous Missouri compromise (Wein-
gast, 1997). This compromise tried to create a balance between free and slave states in the
U.S. Senate and a critical component of this balance was that in the future free and slave
states would be admitted in pairs, so that power would not shift in favor of one of the two
constituencies. The breakdown of this compromise, with the admission of Kansas as a free
state into the Union in January 1861, paved the way to the Civil War.
   Similarly, the National Pact of 1943 in Lebanon stipulated that the most important
political positions in the country be held by individuals with certain religious affiliation:
the president would have to be a Maronite Catholic, the prime minister a Sunni Muslim,
and the speaker of the parliament a Shia Muslim. On top of that, 55% of seats in the
parliament would be occupied by Christians and the rest by Muslims. This agreement, even
if highly distortionary for selecting good governments, economic policy-making and public
good provision, was maintained until demographic changes substantially increased the share
of Muslim population. It took a civil war for the factions to renegotiate the pact. The
Taif agreement that ended the civil war in 1989 gave equal representation to Christians and
Muslims in the parliament and curtailed the power of the Maronite president, but did not
dismantle the segmented system that apportions political power across sectarian groups in
Lebanon (Bogaards, 2019).
   These examples highlight the two major problems with designing stable institutions by
increasing the hurdle for changes. The first is that it may make common sense changes
more difficult. These changes may reflect omissions or oversights in the original design of

                                             26
an institution. For example, prior to the Twelfth Amendment the U.S. Constitution all
but guaranteed that the president and the vice president would represent opposing factions,
making effective governance and federal policy much more difficult. Another fallout from
creating hurdles for change is the subsequent difficulties that society will face when confronted
with a changing environment. In addition to the Lebanese case, the structure of the Sejm
(parliament) of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth, which required unanimity for making
decisions, illustrates this problem. This unanimity rule made the oligarchic regime of Poland-
Lithuania highly stable, but also generated a severe political gridlock (Roh´
                                                                            a c, 2008). Even in
less extreme circumstances, the trade-off between flexibility and stability could be a complex
one.
    Finally, we can apply some of the lessons highlighted by Result 5 above. This result
emphasized that institutional arrangements that make small changes infeasible may be more
stable. This suggests that, under certain circumstances, ruling out small changes and only
allowing radical ones could be one way of increasing the stability of institutions. One way of
achieving this may be to create an immutable constitution, so that any significant reforms
in laws will necessitate a new constitutional arrangement, which could then lead to sweeping
changes. Though not as extreme, the U.S. Constitution, which occupies an almost sacred
position in American life and politics, can be considered as an illustration of this principle.


8      Social Mobility and Institutional Change
An interesting set of economic and political forces are rooted in social mobility. In terms
of our framework, social mobility can be thought of as a pattern of individuals changing
their preferences, because their economic station in life is changing. Upward social mobility
of some is typically associated with downward social mobility of others, so forward-looking
players should also anticipate changes in their own preferences and the preferences of others.
These issues are studied in Acemoglu, Egorov and Sonin (2018). Here we provide one result
on how anticipation of social mobility alters the nature of political equilibria and can be a
force towards either institutional change or institutional inertia.
    Suppose, in particular, that individual bliss points, the bi 's, change over time. This could
take the form of each of those following a Markov chain. If the cross-section of preferences


                                               27
starts in the stationary distribution of this Markov chain, then this process of social mobility
would be stationary -- meaning that the stationary distribution would replicate itself, so
for every agent moving up from the bottom to the top, there will be another one that
moves down from the top to the bottom. Alternatively, we could start from an arbitrary
initial condition, so that the entire distribution of economic (and thus political) preferences
would evolve, generating predictable aggregate changes (we may still eventually converge to
a stationary distribution, at least in the absence of other shocks).
   The analysis of political dynamics in the presence of social mobility considerations is
somewhat more intricate, but some of the main ideas can be conveyed with the following
result:
   Result 8 (social mobility): Suppose that group i is the effective median voter under
institution s and their most preferred institutional arrangement is s . Consider social
mobility that will change the economic position of individuals in this society. If social
mobility is such that members of other groups expect to have preferences close to bi in the
future, then it makes institution s more likely to persist (relative to the case of no social
mobility). If, on the other hand, social mobility is such that members of group i expect
their preferences to shift close to the bliss point bi of some other group i (and the discount
factor  is not too large), then social mobility makes institution s less stable.
   The idea that social mobility can help ensure institutional (democratic) stability goes
back to the classic work of de Tocqueville (2000) on U.S. democracy. De Tocqueville argued
that America had greater social mobility than Europe and people expected their children or
grandchildren to be part of the middle class, and singled this out as an important reason
why democracy worked better in America than in his home country, France, where the
democratic governments that emerged after the 1789 revolution was short-lived. In terms of
our Result 8, De Tocqueville's theory makes sense when the rich and the poor find it likely
that their children will be part of a large middle class that will benefit from and will have
political voice in democracy. This idea is also closely related to the role that the perception
of upward social mobility can play in shoring up support for pro-rich or pro-middle-class
policies among the poor (Benabou and Ok, 2001). However, Result 8 also shows that social
mobility can destabilize prevailing institutions. In the context of democracy, for example,
this may happen because the middle class expects to be poorer in the future, making it less

                                              28
willing to support democracy. One application of the ideas in Acemoglu, Egorov and Sonin
(2018) is the disenfranchisement of Blacks after Reconstruction in the U.S. postbellum South,
which was aided by the belief among the poor Whites that they were themselves upwardly
mobile and would benefit from separating their political fortunes from those of Blacks (and
would also benefit from the discrimination against Blacks).
       Of course, institutions also affect social mobility. This two-way interaction between
institutions and social mobility raises many other interesting possibilities. For example,
politically powerful groups may actively try to reduce social mobility not just for economic
reasons (to maintain their economic a privileged position) but also for political reasons
(e.g., if they expect social mobility to destabilize the current institutional arrangement).
Conversely, (capitalist or rich) elites may have an interest in either increasing social mobility
or creating the impression of greater social mobility in order to build support for policies
that favor capital or reduce the taxation of high incomes.


9        Culture and Institutions
There has recently been a resurgence in research on the role of cultural factors in economic
and political development (Roland, 2020, Alesina and Giuliano, 2015, and Tabellini, 2010,
and see Acemoglu and Robinson, 2020 for a critique). Our purpose here is not to review
this literature, but to highlight another set of factors that can contribute to institutional
persistence or institutional change.
       The conceptual framework we have is related to Bisin and Verdier (2017), as well as
Tabellini (2008), who provide models in which both institutions and culture (interpreted as
values children inherit from parents and society) are endogenous and respond to each other.
       For simplicity, let us again focus on the a terms in the payoff functions in (1) (as before,
one could also endogenize the b terms). Suppose that these can change slowly in response to
the political, social and economic incentives generated by institutions.11 Since our purpose
here is to communicate the basic ideas (rather than build a micro-founded framework),
  11
    In the economics literature, most recent research builds on the mechanism proposed in Bisin and Verdier
(2001), which endogenizes culture during the formative years of children, due to parental or societal influences.
Both this mechanism or others that endogenize post-childhood values and norms could be important in the
context of our discussion here.



                                                       29
we summarize these responses by mappings i (ai (·), s) for each i = 1, . . . , n.12 Namely,
these mappings specify how the current preferences of members of group i, given by ai (·),
change as a function of the prevailing institutions, s. We will say that the collection of
mappings {i (·, ·)} is "concordant", if the ai (·)'s change such that each group's utility from
the current state, ai (s), increases relative to payoffs from other institutions. This collection
is "discordant", if on the other hand the direction of cultural change is such that the ai (s)'s
decline relative to payoffs from other institutions.
       The next result summarizes how cultural change can be a force towards stabilizing a
given set of institutions or one that sows the seeds of further institutional evolution.
       Result 9 (change and persistence from culture): If cultural change is concordant,
then existing unstable institutions can be transformed into steady-state institutions. If, on
the other hand, cultural change is discordant, potentially stable institutional arrangements
can be made unstable and initiate a process of institutional change.
       The intuition for this result is simple but important. Let us start with an institutional
arrangement, which as in our Results 2 or 3 above, is unstable and is expected to make way
to different institutions. If this process is slow and culture adapts in the process, it may
stabilize these otherwise unstable institutional arrangements. Consider a very hierarchical
society, such as the one based on the caste system in India (Ghurye, 1969). When lower
castes, which make up the majority of the population, would like to overthrow the rule of
the higher caste groups, long-run stability may be impossible to achieve. But this process
could be very slow, for example, because lower castes are disorganized or are subject to
repression. Nevertheless, without any other adaptations, their political power will grow at
some point and the current institutional arrangements will start unwinding. Now imagine
that these lower cast members can be convinced that such change is not in their interest,
for example, because the hierarchy is divinely ordained or higher castes are better able to
rule and will look after their interests. If they are swayed by these ideas, this would be
an example of concordant cultural change: their preferences may endogenously evolve to be
satisfied with the current configuration, even though they are economically exploited and
politically voiceless under these institutions.
  12
    A major simplification here is to make cultural change a function of current institutions, rather than the
future path of institutions. We adopt this simplification to facilitate our current discussion.


                                                     30
   This example highlights how culture can be a stabilizing force for prevailing institutions.
But this not the only possibility: discordant cultural change could alter values and attitudes
away from those that support existing institutions. An example of this would be women's
liberation movement (Wollstonecraft, 1891; Pankhurst, 2019). Women were in a subservient
economic and political position in almost all of the Western world throughout the Middle
Ages and early modern period. The prevailing cultural values of the time also convinced
many women that this was a tolerable situation (even if many suffered and were unhappy with
material or nonmaterial aspects of their lives). Nevertheless, in the course of the 19th century,
many women (and some men) started to recognize the injustice of these arrangements and
began a campaign of social and political organization for women. This can be interpreted
as an example of discordant cultural change, as people started to view the subjugation of
women as less and less acceptable, triggering a process of major institutional transformation.
   Another interesting example comes from Iraq after the collapse of Saddam Hussein's
regime, which had started as a secular dictatorship but had then heavily exploited religious
themes in order to gain additional legitimacy (see Bacevich, 2016, and the discussion in
Acemoglu and Robinson, 2019). The power vacuum left after Saddam's fall created room
for different types of cultural changes. The early sectarian conflicts under the American-
imposed quasi-democratic system may have strengthened religious commitments, making
the same institutions and cross-community cooperation much harder to maintain. These
factors became more extreme after the rise of the Islamic State, which imposed harsher
religious controls in parts of the country it controlled (and reactions to the presence of
American soldiers may have contributed as well). This example also illustrates an aspect we
have not incorporated into our model: beyond current institutions, the expectations of how
future institutions will evolve may also impact cultural choices. Hence, choices of religious
observance and education may have been influenced by expectations concerning how durable
the rule of the Islamic State and other religious groups would be.


10      Conclusion
Much of social science and historical analysis of social, economic and political arrangements
builds on the idea that institutions persist. But we are far away from a comprehensive


                                               31
framework that elucidates the rich mechanisms for persistence and change in institutions. In
this essay, we provided a simple conceptual framework for clarifying why and how institutions
persist and change. The reasons and pathways via which institutions become durable are
varied and depend on the historical circumstances facing the country or region in question.
Our essay is motivated by the belief that, this richness in detail notwithstanding, there are
certain major commonalities that can be useful to highlight.
   We developed a dynamic game-theoretic model to organize these ideas. Different groups
care both about current policies and institutions and future policies, which are themselves
determined by current institutional choices. The discount rate of different groups is a measure
of how forward-looking they are and how much they care about the future. Equilibria in this
game take the form of (stochastic or deterministic) paths of institutions. Institutional change
can happen because of internal dynamics or because of shocks to the economic environment
or political power of different groups.
   We used this framework first to clarify the simplest form of institutional persistence,
which we called "institutional stasis", whereby a given set of institutions persist over time.
One of the most natural reasons for this is that "power begets power", meaning that existing
institutions reproduce the dominance of currently powerful groups, which could then choose
to keep these institutions in place.
   We emphasized that, though there are examples of this type of stasis and the thinking of
many economists and political scientists is shaped by such dynamics, institutional stasis is
rare; rather, most institutions are in a constant state of flux. A better approach is provided
by the notion of "path-dependent change", whereby current institutions determine the future
trajectory of institutional change, both because of internal dynamics and because even small
differences can cause big divergences in the response to shocks. We provided several historical
examples illustrating the workings of path-dependent change as well.
   We also explored how our framework sheds light on different mechanisms for institu-
tional change, once again illustrating several possibilities through historical examples. But
incumbent political groups are not powerless against such change. One aspect of their ability
to withstand such change comes from our notion of "strategic stability": anticipating the
subsequent institutional changes, which may go in directions that are detrimental to their
interests, can motivate the formation of coalitions opposed to change -- because they are

                                              32
concerned about the "slippery slope" that this will create. This type of strategic reasoning,
clarified by our game-theoretic setup, has also many examples in history.
   Another strategy incumbents can use is to design new institutions in order to bolster
existing arrangements, which we also studied using our framework.
   Our framework provides new perspectives on the rich interactions between social mobility
and institutions as well. The extent of social mobility is determined by prevailing institutions,
but influences the evolution of these institutions, too. For example, expectations of upward
social mobility may motivate disadvantaged groups to put up with current institutions in
the hope that they will be their beneficiaries in the near future. On the other hand, social
mobility can also destabilize current institutions, because people expect to have very different
preferences in the future and thus may not protect current institutions or they may even
actively work to undermine them.
   Finally, we used our framework to discuss the interplay between culture and institutions.
Among the multitudes of such interactions, we focused on one aspect of this relationship
and discussed how different types of cultural change can stabilize or destabilize existing
institutional arrangements.
   We view our essay as a contribution to the growing and flourishing field of institutional
economics. We hope that the general framework we have outlined can be useful to historical
and empirical investigations in specific contexts. Such investigations will undoubtedly reveal
new forces and may highlight the limits of some of the mechanisms we have summarized
here.




                                               33
References
Acemoglu, Daron and Alexander Wolitzky. 2011. "The economics of labor coercion." Econo-
  metrica 79(2):555­600.

Acemoglu, Daron and Alexander Wolitzky. 2020. "A Theory of Equality Before the Law."
  Working paper.

Acemoglu, Daron, Davide Ticchi and Andrea Vindigni. 2010. "A Theory of Military Dicta-
  torships." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2(1):1­42.

Acemoglu, Daron, Georgy Egorov and Konstantin Sonin. 2008. "Coalition formation in
  non-democracies." The Review of Economic Studies 75(4):987­1009.

Acemoglu, Daron, Georgy Egorov and Konstantin Sonin. 2010. "Political selection and
  persistence of bad governments." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 125(4):1511­1575.

Acemoglu, Daron, Georgy Egorov and Konstantin Sonin. 2012. "Dynamics and stability of
  constitutions, coalitions, and clubs." American Economic Review 102(4):1446­76.

Acemoglu, Daron, Georgy Egorov and Konstantin Sonin. 2015. "Political economy in a
  changing world." Journal of Political Economy 123(5):1038­1086.

Acemoglu, Daron, Georgy Egorov and Konstantin Sonin. 2018. "Social mobility and sta-
  bility of democracy: Reevaluating de Tocqueville." The Quarterly Journal of Economics
  133(2):1041­1105.

Acemoglu, Daron and James A Robinson. 2000. "Why did the West extend the franchise?
  Democracy, inequality, and growth in historical perspective." The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 115(4):1167­1199.

Acemoglu, Daron and James A Robinson. 2001. "A Theory of Political Transitions." Amer-
  ican Economic Review 91(4):938­963.

Acemoglu, Daron and James A Robinson. 2006a. "Economic Backwardness in Political
  Perspective." The American Political Science Review 100(1):115.


                                           34
Acemoglu, Daron and James A Robinson. 2006b. Economic Origins of Dictatorship and
  Democracy. Cambridge University Press.

Acemoglu, Daron and James A Robinson. 2008. "Persistence of power, elites, and institu-
  tions." American Economic Review 98(1):267­93.

Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson. 2012. Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power,
  Prosperity, and Poverty. New York: Crown Publishers.

Acemoglu, Daron and James A Robinson. 2019. The narrow corridor: States, societies, and
  the fate of liberty. Penguin.

Acemoglu, Daron and James Robinson. 2020. "Culture, Institutions and Social Equilibria:
  A Framework." Working paper.

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A Robinson. 2002. "Reversal of fortune:
  Geography and institutions in the making of the modern world income distribution."
  The Quarterly journal of economics 117(4):1231­1294.

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A Robinson. 2005. Institutions as a funda-
  mental cause of long-run growth. in Handbook of economic growth, Elsevier pp. 385­472.

Aghion, Philippe and Patrick Bolton. 2003. "Incomplete social contracts." Journal of the
  European Economic Association 1(1):38­67.

Aidt, Toke S and Peter S Jensen. 2014. "Workers of the world, unite! Franchise extensions
  and the threat of revolution in Europe, 1820­1938." European Economic Review 72:52­75.

Aidt, Toke S and Rapha¨
                      el Franck. 2015. "Democratization under the threat of revolution:
  Evidence from the Great Reform Act of 1832." Econometrica 83(2):505­547.

Alesina, Alberto and Paola Giuliano. 2015. "Culture and institutions." Journal of Economic
  Literature 53(4):898­944.

Aoki, Masahiko. 2001. Toward a Comparative Institutional Analysis. Vol. 1 of MIT Press
  Books The MIT Press.


                                           35
°
Aslund, Anders. 2019. Russia's Crony Capitalism: The Path from Market Economy to
  Kleptocracy. Yale University Press.

Aston, T.H. and C.H.E. Philpin. 1987. The Brenner Debate: Agrarian Class Structure and
  Economic Development in Pre-Industrial Europe. Cambridge University Press.

Bacevich, Andrew J. 2016. America's war for the greater Middle East: A military history.
  Random House.

Barbera, Salvador and Matthew O Jackson. 2004. "Choosing how to choose: Self-stable
  majority rules and constitutions." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(3):1011­1048.

Battaglini, Marco and Stephen Coate. 2007. "Inefficiency in legislative policymaking: a
  dynamic analysis." American Economic Review 97(1):118­149.

Benabou, Roland and Efe A Ok. 2001. "Social mobility and the demand for redistribution:
  the POUM hypothesis." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(2):447­487.

Besley, Timothy and Maitreesh Ghatak. 2010. Property rights and economic development.
  In Handbook of development economics. Vol. 5 Elsevier pp. 4525­4595.

Billias, G.A. 2009. American Constitutionalism Heard Round the World, 1776-1989: A
  Global Perspective. NYU Press.

Bisin, Alberto and Thierry Verdier. 2001. "The economics of cultural transmission and the
  dynamics of preferences." Journal of Economic theory 97(2):298­319.

Bisin, Alberto and Thierry Verdier. 2017. On the joint evolution of culture and institutions.
  Technical report National Bureau of Economic Research.

Black, J.L. 2014. The Russian Presidency of Dmitry Medvedev, 2008-2012: The Next Step
  Forward or Merely a Time Out? Taylor & Francis.

Bloch, Marc. 1964. "Feudal Society.".

Bogaards, Matthijs. 2019. "Formal and informal consociational institutions: A comparison
  of the national pact and the Taif agreement in Lebanon." Nationalism and Ethnic Politics
  25(1):27­42.

                                             36
Brenner, Robert. 1976. "Agrarian class structure and economic development in pre-industrial
  Europe." Past & present 70(1):30­75.

Brousseau, Eric, Pierre Garrouste and Emmanuel Raynaud. 2011. "Institutional changes:
  Alternative theories and consequences for institutional design." Journal of Economic Be-
  havior & Organization 79(1-2):3­19.

Coatsworth, John H. 2008. "Inequality, institutions and economic growth in Latin America."
  Journal of Latin American Studies 40(3):545­569.

de Tocqueville, Alexis. 2000. "Democracy in America (HC Mansfield & D. Winthrop,
  Trans.)." Chicago: University of Chicago Press. (Original work published 1835) .

Elkins, Zachary, Tom Ginsburg and James Melton. 2009. The endurance of national consti-
  tutions. Cambridge University Press.

Engerman, Stanley and Kenneth Sokoloff. 1997. Factor Endowments, Institutions, and Dif-
  ferential Paths of Growth Among New World Economics. Stanford, CA: Stanford Univer-
  sity Press pp. 260­304.

Fernandez, Raquel and Dani Rodrik. 1991. "Resistance to reform: Status quo bias in the
  presence of individual-specific uncertainty." The American economic review pp. 1146­1155.

Fischer, Stanley. 1994. Russia and the Soviet Union Then and Now. University of Chicago
  Press pp. 221­258.

Fogel, Robert W. 1994. Without Consent Or Contract: The Rise and Fall of American
  Slavery. American studies collection Norton.

Genovese, Eugene D. 1976. Roll, Jordan, roll: The world the slaves made. Vol. 652 Vintage.

Gershenkron, Alexander. 1962. "Economic backwardness in historical perspective." Belknap,
  Cambridge, MA .

Greif, Avner. 2006. Institutions and the Path to the Modern Economy: Lessons from Medieval
  Trade. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


                                            37
Hayek, Friedrich August. 1973. Economic freedom and representative government. Wincott
  Foundation London.

Hodgson, Geoffrey M. 2004. The evolution of institutional economics. Routledge.

Holton, Woody. 2008. Unruly Americans and the Origins of the Constitution. Hill and Wang.

Kingston, Christopher and Gonzalo Caballero. 2009. "Comparing theories of institutional
  change." Journal of Institutional Economics 5(2):151­180.

Krugman, Paul. 1991. "History versus expectations." The Quarterly Journal of Economics
  106(2):651­667.

Lagunoff, Roger. 2001. "A theory of constitutional standards and civil liberty." The Review
  of Economic Studies 68(1):109­132.

Lizzeri, Alessandro and Nicola Persico. 2004. "Why did the elites extend the suffrage?
  Democracy and the scope of government, with an application to Britain's "Age of Re-
  form"." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(2):707­765.

Mahoney, James. 2000.     "Path dependence in historical sociology." Theory and society
  29(4):507­548.

Marx, Karl. 1911. A contribution to the critique of political economy. CH Kerr.

Marx, Karl. 2019. Capital: Volume One. Dover Publications.

Matsuyama, Kiminori. 1991. "Increasing returns, industrialization, and indeterminacy of
  equilibrium." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 106(2):617­650.

Mittal, Sonia and Barry R Weingast. 2013. "Self-enforcing constitutions: with an application
  to democratic stability in America's first century." The Journal of Law, Economics, &
  Organization 29(2):278­302.

North, Douglass. 1990. Institutions, institutional change and economic performance Cam-
  bridge University Press. Cambridge University Press.



                                            38
North, Douglass C. and Barry Weingast. 1989. "Constitutions and Commitment: The Evo-
  lution of Institutions Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth-Century England." Journal
  of Economic History 49(4):803­832.

North, Douglass C. and Robert Paul Thomas. 1973. The Rise of the Western World: A New
  Economic History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Ostrom, Elinor. 2005. Doing institutional analysis digging deeper than markets and hierar-
  chies. In Handbook of new institutional economics. Springer pp. 819­848.

Page, Scott E et al. 2006. "Path dependence." Quarterly Journal of Political Science 1(1):87­
  115.

Paige, Jeffery M. 1998. Coffee and Power: Revolution and the Rise of Democracy in Central
  America. Harvard University Press.

Pankhurst, E Sylvia. 2019. The suffragette: the history of the women's militant suffrage
  movement, 1905-1910. Good Press.

Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini. 2000. Political Economics: Explaining Economic
  Policy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Pierson, Paul. 2000. "Increasing returns, path dependence, and the study of politics." Amer-
  ican political science review pp. 251­267.

Postan, Michael Mo¨
                  issey. 1973. The medieval economy and society: an economic history of
  Britain, 1100-1500. Vol. 1 Univ of California Press.

Potter, David. 1976. The Impending Crisis, 1848-1861. Harper & Row.

Putnam, Robert D. 1993. Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy.
  Princeton University Press.

Roberts, Kevin. 2015. "Dynamic voting in clubs." Research in Economics 69(3):320­335.

Roh´
   a c, Dalibor. 2008. "The unanimity rule and religious fractionalisation in the Polish-
  Lithuanian Republic." Constitutional Political Economy 19(2):111­128.

                                               39
Roland, Gerard. 1991. "The Political Economy of Transition in the Soviet Union." European
  Economy 49:197­216.

Roland, Gerard. 2020. Culture, Institutions, and Development. Princeton University Press.

Roland, G´
         erard. 2004. "Understanding institutional change: Fast-moving and slow-moving
  institutions." Studies in Comparative International Development (SCID) 38:109­131.

Runciman, David. 2017. The Confidence Trap: A History of Democracy in Crisis from
  World War I to the Present-Revised Edition. Princeton University Press.

Service, Robert. 2005. A History of Modern Russia from Nicholas II to Vladimir Putin.
  Harvard University Press.

Tabellini, Guido. 2008. "Institutions and culture." Journal of the European Economic asso-
  ciation 6(2-3):255­294.

Tabellini, Guido. 2010. "Culture and Institutions: Economic Develompent in the Regions of
  Europe." Journal of the European Economic Association 8(4):677­716.

Thelen, Kathleen. 1999. "Historical institutionalism in comparative politics." Annual review
  of political science 2(1):369­404.

Treisman, Daniel. 2011. The Return: Russia's Journey from Gorbachev to Medvedev. Free
  Press.

Veblen, Thorsten. 1899. "The theory of the leisure class: An economic study of institutions.".

Weingast, Barry. 1998. Political Stability and Civil War: Institutions, Commitment, and
  American Democracy. Princeton University Press pp. 148­193.

Weingast, Barry R. 1997. "The Political Foundations of Democracy and the Rule of Law."
  American Political Science Review 91(2):245­263.

Wiener, Jonathan M. 1978. Social Origins of the New South: Alabama, 1860-1885. Louisiana
  State University Press.



                                             40
Williamson, Oliver E. 2000. "The new institutional economics: taking stock, looking ahead."
  Journal of economic literature 38(3):595­613.

Wollstonecraft, Mary. 1891. A vindication of the rights of woman: With strictures on political
  and moral subjects. Fisher Unwin.

Woodward, C. Vann. 1955. The Strange Career of Jim Crow. Oxford University Press.

Wright, Gavin. 2013. Sharing the Prize. Harvard University Press.




                                             41
