                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                     CRISIS INNOVATION

                                          Tania Babina
                                         Asaf Bernstein
                                       Filippo Mezzanotti

                                       Working Paper 27851
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27851


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2020


The authors would like to thank Brian Beach, Shai Bernstein, Charles Calomiris, Bill Collins,
Pranav Desai, Katherine Eriksson, James Feigenbaum, Michela Giorcelli, James Fenske, Alex
Field, Walker Hanlon, Christian Helmers, Taylor Jaworski, Chad Jones, Pete Klenow, Naomi
Lamoreaux, Gustavo Manso, Kris Mitchener, Petra Moser, Ramana Nanda, Tom Nicholas,
Santiago Perez, Bitsy Perlman, Sarah Quincy, Tom Schmitz, Amit Seru, Chenzi Xu, Ting Xu,
Nicolas Ziebarth, Ariell Zimran and seminar participants at the Amsterdam Business School,
Auburn University, University of Colorado at Boulder, Columbia Business School, Hass School
of Business, 2019 HEC Workshop on Entrepreneurship, Michigan State University, 2019
Minnesota Junior Finance Conference, 2019 Labor and Finance Group, Northwestern University
Economic History Festival, 2020 NBER SI DAE, Owen Graduate School of Management,
Rutgers University, Stanford University, Tuck School of Business, 2019 UT Dallas Finance
Conference, University of Virginia, and 2020 Virtual Economic History Seminar. All errors are
our own. The authors have no relevant funding or competing interests to disclose. Belinda Chen,
Tam Mai, Nicholas Jeanrenaud, and Anna Schetkina provided outstanding research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Tania Babina, Asaf Bernstein, and Filippo Mezzanotti. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Crisis Innovation
Tania Babina, Asaf Bernstein, and Filippo Mezzanotti
NBER Working Paper No. 27851
September 2020
JEL No. G01,G21,N12,N22,N32,O3

                                          ABSTRACT

The effect of financial crises on innovation is an unsettled and important question for economic
growth, but one difficult to answer with modern data. Using a differences-in-differences design
surrounding the Great Depression, we document that local distress caused a sudden and persistent
decline in patenting by the largest organizational form of innovation at this time--technological
entrepreneurs. Parallel trends prior to the shock, evidence of a drop within every major
technology class, and consistent results using distress driven by commodity shocks--all suggest a
causal effect of distress. Despite this, we find that innovation during crises can be more resilient
than it may appear at first glance. First, there is no observable change in the number of future
citations, despite the decline in the number of patents filed. Second, the shock is in part absorbed
through a reallocation of inventors into firms, who over the long-run produce patents with greater
impact. Third, the results reveal no immediate brain drain of inventors from the affected areas.
Overall, we demonstrate that crises can be both destructive and creative forces for innovation,
and provide the first systematic evidence of the role played by the Great Depression in the long-
run organization of innovative activity.

Tania Babina                                     Filippo Mezzanotti
Assistant Professor of Business                  Kellogg School of Management
Columbia Business School                         4389 Global Hub
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 814                     2211 Campus Drive
New York, NY 10027                               Evanston, IL 60201
tania.babina@gsb.columbia.edu                    filippo.mezzanotti@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Asaf Bernstein
Leeds School of Business
University of Colorado at Boulder
Campus Box 401
Boulder, CO 80309
and NBER
asaf.bernstein@colorado.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27851
        "Many firms [of the 1930s] run by inventor-entrepreneurs were either acquired or driven out of business"
                                                 Landes et al. (2012)
"1929-1941 were, in the aggregate, the most technologically progressive of any comparable period in U.S. economic history"
                                                       Field (2003)


How do crises affect innovative activity? Theoretically, a financial crisis may create important setbacks

in the production of innovation and a "missing generation" of highly productive entrants which could

reduce business dynamism and growth (Hall 2015; Gourio et al. 2016). Alternatively, periods of economic

duress may represent an opportunity to reshape innovation efforts towards more efficient organizational

forms and higher-impact projects (Schumpeter, 1942; Caballero et al. 1994; Manso et al., 2019). Existing

empirical evidence so far is mixed. For example, the Great Depression--one of the largest financial crisis

in history--was associated with a large drop in the aggregate number of patents filed (Lamoreaux et al.,

2009). Yet, Field (2003) and Kelly et al. (2018) show evidence of a high average quality of innovations

in this period. In this paper, we show that such findings are not necessarily mutually exclusive. We

document that crises can be persistently devastating for technological entrepreneurship, but at the same

time promote organizational changes that may positively affect the development of new innovation.

   We study this question in the context of the Great Depression. On the one hand, this setting helps re-

solve some of the empirical challenges existing in modern data. Firm dynamics are slow-moving (Luttmer

2012), making it difficult to evaluate a crisis without a sufficiently long time span following the event. The

long post-Depression period not only helps us overcome this challenge, but it also allows us to examine

the persistence of potential changes in innovative activity. Furthermore, current innovative activity, and

especially technological entrepreneurship, is concentrated in just a handful of locations (Jaffe et al., 1993;

Moretti, 2019), making it hard to find meaningful variation that could be used to cleanly identify the

effect of a shock that can account for reallocation. Prior to the 1930s, innovation produced by indepen-

dent inventors--outside of the boundaries of a traditional firm--was the predominant form of patenting,

and pockets of technological entrepreneurship were ubiquitous across the U.S. (Lamoreaux et al. 2009).

On the other hand, the period around the Great Depression is also uniquely interesting for economists.

For instance, historians have written extensively about the deep transformation in the organization of

innovation that has taken place in the U.S. around the 1930s, as firms took over independent inventors

as the main source of patenting. Despite the importance of these changes, the direct empirical evidence

connecting this shift to the Great Depression is lacking (Mowery and Rosenberg 1989; Lamoreaux et al.

2009; Kenney 2011).

                                                            1
   We put together two main datasets to study how the Great Depression affected subsequent short- and

long-run innovative activity. We first develop a new county-level measure of technological entrepreneur-

ship based on independent patenting, spanning more than a century. We document that our county-level

measure of technological entrepreneurship is highly correlated with the U.S. Census-based measures of

entrepreneurship at the local level and in the time-series (in periods when both data are available). There

are several benefits to our data. First, this new measure enables us to study the drivers of entrepreneur-

ship prior to the availability of modern data, which start in the 1980s. Second, the geographic variation

in the data allows us to use spacial variation in economic distress during the Great Depression to exam-

ine the effect of the crisis on county-level technological entrepreneurship, and compare this response to

the behavior of firms during the same period. Third, county-level data let us capture local reallocation

effects, which are missed when using firm-level data and, theoretically, represent an important margin of

adjustment during crises. Finally, we can measure patents' long-run influence on future generations of

innovations that build on past patents though patent citations.

   The second key dataset we construct is longitudinal inventor-level data linking inventors that file

patents in 1905­1945 across four decennial full-count U.S. Censuses. These new data allow us to measure

potential reallocation effects in response to the shock by tracking inventors across different organizations

of innovation and geographic space. Moreover, the comprehensive nature of these patent-Census matched

data allows us to document the differences in personal characteristics and innovation produced by in-

ventors inside firm boundaries (firm patents) as well as outside (independent patents) during the first

half of the 20th century. For example, we show that independent inventors are much more likely to be

immigrants as compared to inventors working within firms, which is consistent with immigrants being

more entrepreneurial (Kerr and Kerr, 2020).

   We then examine whether the crisis affected subsequent innovation based on the number of patents

filed. To identify the effect of the crisis, we use a differences-in-differences design that exploits county-

level variation in bank suspensions during the Great Depression, which proxy for the local severity of the

crisis. Our specification includes state-time fixed effects to flexibly control for contemporaneous changes

in state-level policies and local business cycles, and county fixed effects to control for unobserved time-

invariant heterogeneity across counties. Using this setting, we document that the local disruption from

the crisis predicts a sudden decline in patenting by technological entrepreneurs, but no aggregate local

effects on firm patenting. For instance, counties that experienced bank distress during the Depression

                                                     2
saw patenting by independent inventors decline 13% more than non-affected counties in the same state.

Parallel trends prior to the shock, no reduction in firm patenting, evidence of a drop within every major

technology class, and similar results using alternative shocks to local financial markets--all suggest that

the effects are causal.

   Even though the crisis itself was relatively short-lived, the effects on technological entrepreneurship

appear to be permanent--lasting for every decade for the next 70 years. Overall, these findings of a

substantial and persistent decline in patenting by independent inventors are potentially concerning given

that independent patents were the major source of new technologies in the early 20th century, and were,

on average, of higher quality than firm patents (Lamoreaux et al., 2009; Nicholas 2010). Hence, one

might naturally conclude that crises are purely destructive forces for innovative activity.

   However, despite the negative effects on the quantity of independent patenting, additional analysis

suggests that innovation was more resilient than it might appear at first glance. First, despite the decline

in the number of patents filed, distressed areas do not see any observable change in aggregate (future)

patent citations. Consistent with this finding, we document that the average quality of independent inven-

tors' patents actually increases in distressed areas during the Great Depression and high-quality patents

are mostly unaffected. This evidence suggests that independent inventors with high-quality projects are

still able to obtain financing during the Depression and experience limited disruption. Second, the shock

is in part absorbed through a reallocation of independent inventors into firms, which were less affected

by the shock. Using inventor-level panel data, we find that among serial inventors--individuals that

patented both before and after the Great Depression--independent inventors in counties characterized

by higher bank distress are more likely to patent within firms during the 1930s. This reallocation of

human capital may explain our additional findings that, in the long-run, firms in more affected areas saw

an increase in overall patented innovation as well as in the aggregate quality of innovation. Third, the

results reveal no significant brain drain of inventors via out-migration from the affected areas.

   To conclude, we provide some suggestive evidence on the mechanisms that may explain the relationship

between bank distress and innovation. While evidence on underlying mechanisms is more speculative,

and not critical for our contribution, it may still be of interest since we do find evidence more supportive

of some channels than others. For example, growth in local retail sales during the Great Depression--a

key variable used to proxy for local demand shocks (Fishback et al. 2001)--does not predict significant

changes in local innovation. Instead, the results are more likely explained by the link that bank distress

                                                     3
had to local financing or labor markets for technology entrepreneurs. On the one hand, this channel may

not be surprising, since sources of capital for developing innovation were local, but secondary markets for

technology and patents were national in scope (Lamoreaux and Sokoloff 2001a). On the other hand, this

result may appear puzzling, because bank lending was not the dominant source of capital for independent

inventors (Lamoreaux et al. 2006). One possible explanation is that the contraction in bank activity is

connected to a disruption of the ecosystem providing financing to technology entrepreneurs. As suggested

by (Lamoreaux et al., 2006), and as it is often the case for entrepreneurs today, independent inventors

relied heavily on local wealthy individuals to raise capital for developing or bringing to market their

technology. In that period, distress in the local banking sector was intimately tied to the same factors

that affected the fortunes of local wealthy investors. Hence, bank distress may have been directly or

indirectly related to the ability of these individuals to invest in new risky ideas, perhaps permanently

disrupting these networks.

   Consistent with this narrative, we use a unique data on fundraising by Illinois firms in the pre-

Depression period (Akkoyun, 2018) to show that local investors were indeed a key source of financing for

early-stage tech companies. Furthermore, we provide descriptive evidence that wealthy investors in the

interwar period were generally highly exposed to shocks to local markets, and in particular to real estate.

Consistent with this idea, we show that we can replicate our main findings--on both the quantity and

quality of innovation--using an alternative approach that more directly measures a shock to local real

estate wealth. In particular, following Rajan and Ramcharan (2015) and Jaremski and Wheelock (2018),

we exploit the variation in local property values induced by the commodity price boom and bust related

to World War I (WWI). This evidence is consistent with shocks to local capital playing a critical role

in the shift in innovative activity triggered by the Great Depression. Furthermore, the use of shocks in

commodity prices following WWI, instead of bank distress in the early 1930s, also provides additional

evidence that our overall findings are not driven by reverse causality.

   Overall, our findings suggest that financial crises are both destructive and creative forces for innova-

tion, and we provide the first systematic evidence of the direct role distress from the Great Depression

played as a catalyst for long-term changes in innovative activity. Surprisingly, we document that innova-

tion was resilient in the face of one of the largest financial crises in the U.S. history, suggesting that it is

likely to be even more so during milder economic recessions.



                                                       4
1        Related Literature

This paper makes contributions to several strands of literature. First of all, we contribute to the vast

and still growing literature exploring the determinants of innovation activity. While a complete review

is beyond the scope of this paper, these determinants include the role of immigration (e.g., Kerr and

Lincoln, 2010; Moser et al., 2014), taxation (e.g., Akcigit et al. 2017), intellectual property laws (e.g.,

Moser, 2005), government investments in R&D (e.g., Gross and Sampat, 2020; Moretti et al., 2019), bank

credit (e.g., Bai et al., 2018), vertical and horizontal boundaries of the firm (e.g., Seru, 2014; Frésard et al.,

2020), competition (e.g., Aghion et al., 2005), and exposure to innovation (e.g., Bell et al., 2019), among

other things. Our findings on the dark and bright side of crises add other important factors to consider

in the drivers of innovation. Specifically, our results complement a body of work examining the effects

of large economic shocks on innovation. In the context of a financial crisis, Nanda and Nicholas (2014)

shows that among firms owning R&D labs before the Great Depression, bank distress had negative

effects on their patents in terms of both the quantity and quality of innovation.1 When it comes to

recessions more generally, Manso et al. (2019) builds a model and estimates that economic downturns

can trigger more exploitative innovations. We complement these studies in the following ways. We are

the first to examine how a crisis affects the quality and quantity of innovation produced by technological

entrepreneurs and by all inventors. Second, we examine the long-term effects (10 years or later) of a

crisis on subsequent innovation. Third, our new county-level and individual-level patent data allow us to

document the importance of reallocation effects in response to a crisis.

        Our paper also contributes to the literature studying the organization of innovation. While modern

patenting is dominated by firms, this organizational structure of innovation is neither historically ubiqui-

tous (Nicholas, 2010; Kenney, 2011; Landes et al., 2012) nor clearly theoretically dominant (Aghion and

Tirole 1994; Gromb and Scharfstein 2002; Garcia-Macia et al., 2019). During the period examined, inde-

pendent inventors were at the forefront of the technological frontier and in many dimensions were akin to

technology entrepreneurs today (Lamoreaux and Sokoloff 2001b; Nicholas 2010).2 Within this literature,

our paper adds to our understanding of how economic crises can be a catalyst for the way in which innova-
    1
     This is also related to Huber (2018), which demonstrates similar firm-level effects on patenting rates during the Financial
Crisis by exploiting variation in German firms' exposure to a large bank's lending cut. Huber (2018), however, does not
examine changes in the quality of innovation, which isn't surprising since innovation is not the primary focus of the paper.
   2
     In fact, similar to start-ups today, independent inventors were early-stage organizations that developed new technologies
in order to raise money either from external investors or sell the technologies to larger firms.



                                                               5
tion is organized. Caballero et al. (1994) have formalized and extended a long-argued point that recessions

could have positive effects by fostering "creative destruction" and, therefore, helping the reallocation of

investment towards more productive use. In fact, even more generally than just "liquidationist-style"

arguments, crises could cause an overall shift in the organizational form of innovation or in the incentives

for existing inventors, which alter the impact of surviving patents. Our evidence is consistent with these

types of mechanisms. Our results suggest that while periods of severe and prolonged financial distress

may be followed by declines in the quantity of patents filed by start-up like enterprises, innovation as a

whole appears to be quite resilient. We document a rise in allocative efficiency towards higher quality

inventions and a shift in the organizational form of innovation production. Our analysis suggests that

large economic shocks can facilitate the reallocation of resources across different organizational forms of

innovation. In particular, our evidence suggests that the distress induced by the Depression affected the

way innovation moved from independent inventors to firms.

   Understanding how these transitions may take place can generate important insights into the de-

terminants of business dynamism. In this area, several scholars have recently expressed concern about

declines in new firm entry (Bassetto et al., 2015; Siemer, 2016; Moreira, 2016), slow-downs in techno-

logical advancement (Hall 2015), and declines in productivity (Duval et al., 2020) in the aftermath of

the Great Recession. These sorts of concerns in the fallout from major financial crises are not new,

however. In fact, Schumpeter (1934) considers just such concerns in the aftermath of the Great De-

pression, but also concludes that "depressions are not simply evils, which we might attempt to suppress,

but--perhaps undesirable--­forms of something which has to be done, namely, adjustment to previous

economic change ".

   Our results also contribute to the economic history literature, by helping to reconcile seemingly

contradictory findings of the destructive nature of the Great Depression and the evidence in Field (2003)

and Kelly et al. (2018) that describe the aftermath of the Great Depression as an era of incredible

technological progress and innovation. While we find that the unfolding of the Depression led to a

contraction in the amount of patenting filing by technology entrepreneurs, our results on the quality of

innovation suggest that inventors with high -quality projects were in large part unaffected by the crisis.

Furthermore, our evidence on cross-organizational migration suggests that reallocative forces were critical

in understanding the full response of innovation to the crisis. These findings would not be possible to

achieve without data encompassing the full universe of patents, especially by independent inventors, and

                                                     6
an empirical design that allows for identification of the long-run local general equilibrium effects. Our

results suggest that all these forces are crucial in accurately assessing the effects of such crises on overall

innovative activity.3

        Our work also contributes to an even broader discussion in the economic history literature on the

role that the disruptions to the financial system played in instigating the Great Depression, and its

consequences for economic outcomes. Economists have typically focused on the effects of monetary policy

(Friedman and Schwartz 1963; Richardson and Troost 2009; Gorton and Metrick 2013), demand declines

(Temin et al., 1976; Romer, 1993), international flows (Eichengreen, 2004), shocks to productivity (Cole

and Ohanian, 2007), and bank lending amplifiers (Bernanke, 1983; Gorton et al., 2019; Mitchener and

Richardson, 2019). In many ways, the Great Depression has been extensively used as a laboratory to

examine the real effects of banking shocks, and we add another component to that discussion--the effects

on aggregate local innovation. Recent empirical work has shown that bank failures had large negative

effects on income growth (Calomiris and Mason, 2003), business revenues (Ziebarth, 2013), business

failures (Babina et al., 2017), and employment (Benmelech et al., 2017; Lee and Mezzanotti, 2017). We

document that there were also clear effects from local distress on technological entrepreneurship as well

as the total innovative local activity. Unlike most of the prevailing literature though, we also document

a "bright side" to the Great Depression in the form of creative destruction.



2        Historical and Institutional Background

2.1       The Organization of Innovation in the Early 20th Century

In the early 20th century, U.S. innovation was in large part created within two main organizational

forms: firms (often with R&D labs) and independent inventors. While the boundaries between these two

types of organizations may have been blurry in some dimensions, there are several aspects in which these

two organizational forms differed substantially. First, they financed themselves differently. In general,

independent inventors financed their inventions either using personal resources or raising equity financing

from local wealthy individuals who played a role similar to modern angel investors (Lamoreaux et al.

2009; Nicholas 2010). In the quest for new financing, inventors relied heavily on the connections to local
    3
    In that respect our findings are supported by Lamoreaux et al. (2009) which shows specific instances when distress from
the Great Depression led to shifts of recent potential technological entrepreneurs, graduates of Case Western University, into
firms.


                                                              7
bankers and businessmen (Lamoreaux et al. 2006; Kenney 2011). Importantly, in this market, financing

was inherently linked to a specific project or business idea (Lamoreaux et al. 2006).

       In contrast, the financing of innovation by established firms was less dependent on the local networks

of investors. Similar to most modern corporations, it is generally accepted that a large part of established

firms' R&D investment was covered by internally generated cash flows (Hall and Lerner, 2010). At the

same time, firms raised funding through a variety of mechanisms, such as the sale of equity securities

(Nicholas 2008; Lamoreaux et al. 2009), issuance of bonds (Jacoby and Saulnier 1947) or borrowing

from banks (Nanda and Nicholas, 2014). These sources were generally used to fund more traditional

corporate activities (e.g. working capital, tangible investment), but access to these markets--by affecting

the general financial condition of a company--could have had implications for innovation decisions.

       The second key distinction between the two organizational forms was their business objectives and

strategies. On the one hand, firms operating R&D labs were primarily interested in commercializing the

technology directly, either by creating new products or integrating the new technology into their pre-

existing portfolios. On the other hand, independent inventors developed new technologies or products to

raise financing to start a business or to monetize inventions through the sale or licensing of patents.

       In comparing independent inventors to firms, we also need to understand the dynamic connection

between the two organizations. While not all independent inventors aimed to establish a firm, some of

them did. Hence, patenting activity by independent inventors will always capture innovation happening

outside of the boundaries of traditional firms, but will not always capture patenting made by early-stage

enterprises. We later address this categorization issue by including into independent patents those that

were assigned to firms with eponymous names (e.g., "Edison Electric Company").4

       When discussing independent inventors, it is important to highlight the importance of this organiza-

tional form during the early part of the century. For instance, Nicholas (2010) shows that, in the 1920s,

around 70% of all U.S. patents were attributed to independent inventors. At the same time, independent

inventors were also important from a qualitative standpoint. Historically, some of the most impactful

inventions were initially developed by independent inventors. Lamoreaux et al. (2009) and Nicholas

(2010) find that over the 1900­1929 period, independent patents were, on average, higher quality than

firm patents, as measured by future citations and the number of claims in the patent text. For example,
   4
    Related to this point, we show that our results are robust to counting as independent inventor patents those patents
that are assigned to a firm whose name contains the same name as an inventor(s) (Section 4.2).



                                                           8
Lamoreaux et al. (2009) show that 33% of a random sample of patents filed over 1928­1929 are cited by

patents filed over 1975­2000 in the NBER patent data. This number is higher for independent patents

(36% receive future citations) and lower among patents filed by firms with R&D labs (25 to 30%). This

evidence is consistent with the results in Kelly et al. (2018), who show that in the post Depression period,

independent inventors represented a substantial share of breakthrough patents.

       In light of these distinctions, there is a strong parallel between independent inventors in the early

20th century and technology entrepreneurs or start-ups in modern days. From a financial standpoint,

they both heavily rely on external early-stage local investors as a key source of financing, at least after

an initial phase of self-financing and bootstrapping. In this regard, as in the early 20th century, personal

contacts and local investors' networks are still key for the process of raising funds (Shane 2008; Bernstein

et al. 2016; Gompers et al. 2019).5 Moreover, the core investment thesis for both independent inventors

in the 1920s and modern technology entrepreneurs is fairly similar: both are focused on the development

of new technologies or products with the objective of either selling their innovations to an established

company or raising financing to commercialize the product internally. Lastly, both organizations are

important engines for the development of new ideas and technologies.

       Therefore, while it is undeniable that several aspects of the organization of innovation have dramat-

ically changed over the past century, it is also the case that the key economic features through which

both firms and technology entrepreneurs operate have remained surprisingly stable. This parallel implies

that a study of independent inventors may provide insights that can be useful to understand the process

of innovation today. Furthermore, this parallel also suggests that measuring the activity of independent

inventors at the local level could also proxy for the vitality of the local entrepreneurial environment. In

modern data, the dynamism of local markets is typically measured by quantifying the amount of economic

activity that is undertaken by technology start-ups (e.g. Guzman and Stern, 2016) or young firms more

broadly (e.g. Haltiwanger et al., 2012). Similarly, a measure of technological entrepreneurship based

on independent inventors captures the extent to which technology is developed outside of more mature

firms. As such, the measure allows us to study drivers of local entrepreneurship over a very long time

horizons and uncover the dynamics of entrepreneurial development across U.S. counties before modern

U.S. Census data on new firms became available in the 1980s. Moreover, fine regional variation in patent
   5
    In this regard, the key difference is that the financing of early stage enterprises today is relatively more institutionalized,
because of the creation of organized angel groups (Kerr et al., 2011) and the growth of venture capital (Ante, 2008; Kenney
2011).


                                                                9
data allows us to control for any aggregate or regional changes associated with patenting rules.

    We perform two sets of analysis to examine whether our new measure of entrepreneurial activity

is correlated with entrepreneurship rates in current data when both are available. Figure A.1 shows

that independent innovation rates are correlated with the rates of employment in young (0­3 year old)

firms. Moreover, we find a sizable correlation (0.5) between the county-specific rates of patents produced

by independent inventors and employment in 0­3 year old firms, providing support for this alternative

measure which is available to us during the period we study.


2.2    Innovation during the Great Depression

The Great Depression was one of the largest financial crisis in history, with almost a third of all banks

suspended and a real GDP decline of 26% (Margo 1993; Richardson 2007). The concurrent disruption

of banking activities and real economic growth were more than just coincident. At this time, financing

was a more localized affair because of regulatory and technological constraints (Mitchener and Wheelock

2013). When banks failed, this caused massive disruptions in the ability of local firms to obtain financing.

    In aggregate, the period around the Great Depression was also one of substantial shifts in innovative

activity. For instance, Figure 1 shows that a decline in annual patenting happened within virtually all

major technology classes right around the Great Depression. Furthermore, this decline is almost entirely

driven by a reduction in patenting coming from independent inventors. To start examining this issue,

we plot in Figure 2 the number of patents filed annually by independent and firm inventors in the first

half of the 20th century. This figure shows that, while independent inventors accounted for the majority

of patenting in the 1920s, this changed quickly around the Great Depression. In particular, the number

of patents filed by independent inventors fell by almost 50% during the years of the Depression. As a

result, patents by independent inventors were surpassed by patents filed by companies. This shift was

also persistent, with independent inventors never catching back up to firms, consistent with evidence in

Nicholas (2010).This secular decline seems unlikely to be explained by institutional changes in the patent

system, which was relatively stable over this period.6
   6
     One potential remaining concern is that patent costs may have increased during this period, crowding out independent
inventors more than firms. However, this hypothesis is not supported by data on the actual costs of patenting. As shown in
De Rassenfosse and van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie (2013), the cost of patenting during this period was pretty low (around
$500 in 2005 dollars). Nominal fees are stable during this period, and they only increased after the 1960s. There is only a
small increase in real fees in the early 1930s due to deflation. However, this increase--on top of being relatively small--is
also short-lived and therefore unlikely to explain the long-term persistence of our findings.



                                                             10
       Clearly, there could be several explanations for these trends. One commonly held view is that this shift

reflects a change in the nature of technologies developed during this period (Teece David 1988; Hughes

2004; Lamoreaux and Sokoloff 2005). In particular, as the process of developing and using technologies

became more capital intensive and complex, firms became a relatively more efficient organizational form.

For this argument to hold, the standard assumption is that firms--for both institutional and economic

reasons--are in a better position to finance larger investments over long periods of time. Consistent with

this argument, Figure 2 shows that the decline in independent patents starts before the Great Depression,

even if the larger part of the drop happens exactly during the Depression period.

       However, this simple hypothesis fails to explain the full dynamics of the contraction in independent

inventors' patenting during this period. As pointed out earlier, much of the the decline in patenting

around the Great Depression happened roughly at the same time across all main technologies (Figure 1).

Since it is not likely that technological shocks occurred across all industries nearly simultaneously (and

concurrently with the Great Depression), an explanation that is only technology-based will likely fall

short to rationalize all of the contraction in independent patenting. We are not claiming that technology

considerations were not important to understand the decline. They almost certainly were. Instead, we

are simply highlighting that a more complete theory requires something else to understand the sudden

decline in independent inventing during this period.

       In this context, another view is that the economic distress from the Great Depression contributed to

the demise of independent inventors. In particular, several economic historians have hypothesized that

shocks to local financing brought about by the Depression may have led to disruptions of local investors'

networks and reductions in willingness to supply early-stage financing. For example, Kenney (2011) writes

that "the obstacle to establishing these new firms was a shortage of risk capital, which they believed was

due to the changes caused by the Depression that discouraged wealthy individuals from risking their capital

in untested firms."7 In addition, Lamoreaux et al. (2009) concludes that "the subsequent dominance of

large firms seems to have been propelled by a differential access to capital during the Great Depression."

       Importantly, these two explanations are not mutually exclusive. While we believe that technology

alone cannot explain the sudden decline in independent inventions around this period, this force could very

well play an important role in explaining the persistence of the decline and the speed of transition between
   7
     A Wall Street Journal editorial on January 24th, 1938 also noted that "there is no `venture capital' to speak of [in
the U.S. economy] because there is no venture spirit on the part of capital owners or those who normally would be borrowers
of that capital ."


                                                            11
the two organizational forms. Therefore, our tests are designed to examine whether the disruption brought

about by the Great Depression was a catalyst for the decline in the activity of technology entrepreneurs

and its relative persistence, keeping constant overall trends in technology. As a result, despite the evidence

of shifts in aggregate statistics and relatively localized financing at this time, it is theoretically possible

that there may have been no national aggregate effects of the Great Depression on innovation relative to

the long-run changes that would have happened solely because of the technology shift. However, even if

this were the case, our findings would have important implications. First, the shock would influence the

timing and the speed of the transformation, which is crucial for understanding the welfare impact of the

structural change. Second, the crisis may also affect the distributional effect of the shock. In particular,

to the extent that we might find persistent differences in the county-level analysis, this will suggest that

the way the Depression unfolded had a persistent impact in determining the regions where technological

entrepreneurship persisted and the way innovation was organized locally in these areas.


2.3      Bank Distress and Technology Entrepreneurs

While the notion that bank distress could affect the innovative process is intuitive, the exact mechanism

through which this phenomenon could take place is more ambiguous. Previous research has established

that bank lending was not a major source of financing for independent inventors. One exception may

be the innovation activity that was undertaken within established firms (Nanda and Nicholas, 2014).8

However, distress in the banking sector may still have affected the funding of technology entrepreneurs

via more indirect channels. One hypothesis is a distress-driven decline in demand: as local firms suffer

because of the contraction in lending, the demand for technologies developed locally may decline. While

this is not an unreasonable hypothesis, it seems likely that this demand-driven explanation will fall short

in explaining our results, since the market for technologies at the time was already quite developed and

demand was in large part national or regional (Lamoreaux et al. 2006, 2009). Despite this fact, we will

explore directly this hypothesis in our empirical analysis.

       Alternatively, we hypothesize that bank distress could impair the supply of financing coming from

wealthy individuals acting like "angel investors" in the local market.9 This disruption of local "angel
   8
     In Nanda and Nicholas (2014), the concentration of effects in industries more dependent on external finance are consistent
withMowery and Rosenberg (1989), who document that firm investments in R&D facilities and personnel actually rose during
the Depression.
   9
     In our setting, bank distress is not used because of the direct effect that banks can have, but because bank distress can
proxy for several sources of distress to local wealth. As a result, we do not think that our setting is likely to contribute


                                                              12
financing" could happen for several reasons. First, banks were known to be central nodes of information

transmission between local inventors that needed financing and wealthy individuals, such as bank clients,

local businessmen, landowners, and banks' officers and directors themselves, who were willing to back the

inventors (Lamoreaux et al., 2006). Hence, failures of local banks can sever information flows and destroy

relationship capital, which are important pieces of the local innovation ecosystem. This effect in principle

could affect any type of organization, but it should have a larger impact on independent inventors, since

this type of organization has fewer financing alternatives, receives financing on a project-by-project basis,

and is more dependent on local networks to secure financing.

   Second, local bank distress could be linked to the reduced ability or willingness of local wealthy

individuals to invest in risky technological projects. This second mechanism requires two assumptions to

be economically relevant. The first assumption is that the wealth of local investors needs to be exposed to

local bank distress. Many financial-backers were business owners of established companies in the area, and

therefore their fortunes were directly tied to those of local banks. At the same time, wealthy individuals

were likely to have a relatively substantial part of their wealth invested in real estate, which was also

sensitive to many of the same conditions which could affect the local banking sector. To provide evidence

for this hypothesis, we examine the Study of Consumer Purchases in the United States (1935­1936),

which provides a partial but unique outlook on the portfolio of individuals during this era. Using these

data, we provide several stylized facts that are in line with our narrative. In particular, we find that even

among business owners, the exposure to stocks and bonds--as examples of assets that are not local and

therefore less affected by the local distress--is relatively small. Only 10% of business owners obtain any

income from these securities. Furthermore, exposure to real estate is much larger in magnitude: overall,

42% of business owners report owning at least 50 acres of land during this time.

   The second assumption is that investors in technology entrepreneurs need to be local, and, therefore,

affected by the same economic shocks as the inventors. While direct evidence of this hypothesis is hard

to find, a large body of historical work suggests that many financial-backers of technology entrepreneurs

were business owners of other companies in the area (e.g. Lamoreaux et al., 2006). To examine this

hypothesis, we digitized investment prospectuses of about one hundred early-state technology firms that

were planning to sell securities in Illinois between 1919 and 1924, as discussed in Akkoyun (2018).10 In
substantially to the debate characterized by Bernanke (1983) and Friedman and Schwartz (1963) on the direct role of
disruptions of intermediation in explaining the depth of the recession in 1929-1933.
  10
     We kindly thank Cagri Akkoyun for sharing with us the original copies of the documents he has collected from the


                                                         13
large part, these firms are early-stage technology companies, and, therefore, the investors reported at

this point are likely to reflect those individuals that invested in the business at its infancy. We identify

potential investors by looking at firms' directors that are also not officers of the company.11 Of the 114

individuals that we identify as early investors, and for which we have information of the city of residence,

we find that in 66% of cases these individuals live in the same city in which the company's headquarters

are located, supporting the hypothesis that most of the investors in early-stage innovation were local.

    The wide prevalence of early-stage investors who could support technological entrepreneurs in these

areas might partly explain why during the 1910s and the 1920s independent inventors were responsible

for the majority of patents in Illinois' major innovation hub--Cook County, and, in particular, Chicago.

As shown by Mitchener and Richardson (2019), almost 25% of all banks outside Chicago deposited funds

in Chicago's reserve city banks, due to the pyramiding structure of bank reserves which was leftover from

the national banking period. With the onset of the Great Depression, many banks felt liquidity pressures

and withdrew their funds from Chicago's banks causing a massive strain on their local financial system.

In fact, Chicago had the highest bank failure rate of any urban area in the U.S. (Guglielmo 1998), with

82% of banks in mid-1929 gone by mid-1933 and more than 60% of deposits withdrawn (Calomiris and

Mason 1997; Postel-Vinay 2016). The result was a severe financial crisis in Chicago and the surrounding

areas. What started with banks going under quickly spilled over more broadly into overall economic

turmoil (Bernanke 1983). In our data, we find that innovation also changed dramatically in Cook County

during this period of economic distress. Despite an increase in patents filed by independent inventors in

Cook County in each of the two decades preceding the Great Depression, independent patents filed would

plummet by 47% in the 1930s, while those by firms would fall only 9%. Independent patenting would

continue to fall in each of the following three decades, while firm patenting largely recovered to pre-crisis

levels.12 Despite the large decline (29%) in total patenting in the 1930s relative to 1920, total future

citations over the next 70 years from patents filed during this period would actually rise 34%. While a

single county is obviously insufficient evidence on its own, it is certainly consistent with better identified

evidence we will provide on the effects of economic distress on innovative activity in the aftermath of the
Illinois Securities Division.
   11
      We exclude officers because we believe these individuals are more likely to be founders, rather than early investors. This
exclusion actually works against us, since officers tend to reside in the same location as the firm.
   12
      This appears to occur for both--the entry and exit of inventors and among inventors patenting in both decades. Among
all U.S. counties in our sample, Cook County actually has the most serial inventors who patent independently before the
Great Depression, but in firms after.



                                                              14
Great Depression and the importance of disruptions to local investor capital as a driver of that shift in

patenting patterns.



3        Data and Descriptive Statistics

3.1      Historical Patent Data

We use data on the near universe of United States Patent Office (USPTO) patents, representing over 9

million patents from 1836­2016, which include filing and grant date, inventors' and assignees' names (if

assigned), and their locations. These input data are provided to us by Berkes (2016), and we perform

extensive cleaning and standardization of these patent data.13 Throughout the analysis, we use a patent's

filing year because this date is closer to the actual date of invention as compared to the grant year. For all

patents, we obtain patents' technology classification (e.g., "Electricity") from the USPTO's Cooperative

Patent Classification (CPC). For patents filed in 1910­2016, we also have information on citations coming

from patents filed during the same period.14 Restricting attention to U.S. inventors or assignees in our

main sample period of 1910 to 1949 gives us 1.4 million patents. Among these patents, 98% have the

inventor's city and state information (which are crucial to aggregate to county-level data), 99% have

patent technology classification, and 73% are cited at least once. The resulting dataset compares in its

comprehensiveness to the data in Akcigit et al. (2017) and Sarada et al. (2019), who characterize inventors

in historical patent data.15 Relative to Nanda and Nicholas (2014) who looked specifically at the impact

of the Great Depression on innovation by firms with R&D labs, our dataset incorporates patents produced

by independent inventors (who produced 55% of patents in our sample) and patents produced by firms

without R&D labs.16
    13
      We are incredibly grateful to Enrico Berkes for sharing this data with us. For more details on the impressive construction
of these data please see Berkes (2016). The extensive report on the patent data cleaning, standardization, and matching to
county-level data is available in Online Appendix A on Tania Babina's website.
   14
      As discussed in Berkes (2016), while the quality of the reporting of cited patents improves over time (in particular after
1947), we are still able to obtain some information on cited patents in the early part of the sample by extracting patent
numbers mentioned in the patent text. Furthermore, it is important to point out that our baseline analysis uses all future
citations by patents filed through 2016 (i.e., not only citations from patents published during the Great Depression)--this
long window allows us to capture important innovations on which the future generations of patents are built. In our baseline
analysis, we do not scale a patent's citations count by the number of citations in its technology class and filing time for a
number of reasons. First, the interpretation of the summary statistics of unscaled patents is more intuitive. Second, the
results are the same when we do scale, as discussed in Sections 4.2 and 5.2. Finally, the inclusion of state-by-time fixed
effects in the main analysis essentially scales the citations by the timing of filling, as discussed in Hall et al. (2001).
   15
      See Andrews 2019 for the discussion and comparison of historical patent data produced by different teams of researchers.
   16
      Unfortunately, we do not have access to the data on firms with R&D labs and hence unable to estimate the marginal
increase in the sample due to the inclusion of patents by firms without R&D labs.



                                                              15
    We separate U.S. patents in two groups: independent patents and U.S. firm patents. The independent

inventors' patents are usually either unassigned, assigned to the inventor, or assigned to other individuals

(e.g., angel investors); while patents assigned to firms are usually produced by inventors employed by

firms with in-house R&D labs who would have been contractually obliged to assign their inventions to

their employers (Lamoreaux and Sokoloff 2001b; Lamoreaux et al. 2009; Nicholas 2010). Thus, we define

independent patents as those granted to inventors residing in the U.S. that were either unassigned or

assigned to individuals at the time of the patent grant date; and we define U.S. firm patents as those that

were assigned to a U.S. company at the time of the patent grant date.17 Figure A.2 shows an example of

an independent patent--the famous light-bulb invention by Thomas Edison; while Figure A.3 shows an

example of a patent assigned to a U.S. firm (i.g., "General Electric") at the time of the patent grant.

    Since the financial markets for funding early-stage innovations were highly localized, a county-level

geography roughly identifies the physical proximity of innovators and local investors. We match county-

level information to inventors' city-state locations. We are able to match 98% of patents with city-state

information. We then create panel data by aggregating patents at each county-period for all U.S. patents,

independent U.S. patents, and U.S. firm patents. For all three patent categories, we calculate county-

level measures of the number of patents, the number of future citations citing those patents, and the

average number of future citations measured as total citations over the number of patents, which are all

log-transformed in our regression analysis.


3.2    Bank Distress Data

Our measure of bank distress follows much of the literature (e.g., Calomiris and Mason 2003) in using

Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) county-level annual reports on active and suspended

banks and their deposits from 1920­1936. These data are unavailable in the states of Wyoming, Hawaii,

and Alaska, and in the District of Columbia, and do not distinguish bank failures from bank suspensions.
   17
      To identify firm patents, we build a long list of search words that are associated with firm patents and use this list in a
regex approach to identify firm names. For example, we mark a patent as assigned to a firm if the assignee's name includes
either of these types of words: a) company abbreviations (e.g., "corp" or "corporation"); b) words related to industries (e.g.,
"agricultural" or "automotive"); c) words related to geography (e.g., "american" or "east"). Using random sampling, we
manually verified that: a) these search words produce the desired outcomes and identify patents assigned to firms; and b)
among patents that are assigned, but not assigned to firms, 99% are assigned to an individual. Moreover, using a regex
approach, we also identify patents that are assigned to universities or the U.S. government. Consistent with Fleming et al.
(2019), these categories represent a small fraction of total patents over our sample period (university patents comprise less
than 0.1% patents and U.S. government-assigned patents represent less than 0.2% of patents, most of which are filed during
WWII). Including or excluding these categories in either independent or firm patent counts have no measurable effect on
our findings.


                                                               16
However, Calomiris and Mason (2003) argue that these shortcomings do not interfere with identifying

bank distress empirically. We use 1930 as the starting year for our banking sector distress indicator since

it was not until at least 1930 that banks began to fail in large numbers, destroying relationship capital

and access to finance (Bernanke 1983; Calomiris and Mason 2003).

    Suspensions and failures of banks from 1930 through 1933 proxy for the local severity of the Great

Depression. We indicate that a county is in distress during the Great Depression if there is at least

one bank suspended in that county from 1930­1933, which represents 71% of all counties. This measure

provides a relatively simple intuition for the interpretation of any observed treatment effects and is our

primary measure of distress throughout the paper.18 However, our results are robust to alternative

definitions of the treatment, as discussed later on. Building on Akcigit et al. (2017), we match bank

distress data to the county-level panel data using the location of the first inventor. During this match, we

lose two percent of U.S. patents because not all counties have bank distress data. After all these steps,

our data contain about 94% of the 1.4 million patents in the initial sample. Table 1 presents summary

statistics for the county-level data used in the analysis and shows that counties with bank suspensions

during the Great Depression are somewhat larger than an average county, but have similar rates of the

retail sales decline during the Great Depression and 1937 unemployment rates.


3.3    Inventor Panel Data

While county-level patent data is well-suited to measure how local distress affects aggregate local innova-

tion, this level of analysis cannot speak to the micro-mechanisms driving aggregate changes in patenting.

For example, aggregate changes can be driven through either migration of inventors across different

organizational forms of innovation (e.g., from patenting independently to working for firms) or across ge-

ographic space (e.g., move from more distressed to less distressed areas). To examine such mechanisms,

researchers would need access to longitudinal data on inventors and their place of inventing. However, the

USPTO does not assign inventors a unique identifier, and linking inventors by name across patents is not

sufficient to match individual inventors across time: some common names are recurrent across decades

and counties, and potentially refer to different people who held the same name. Moreover, the commonly

used modern methods of inventor disambiguation (e.g., Li et al., 2014) using additional variables such
  18
     Furthermore, this measure helps assuage concerns of data quality in the measurement of bank distress, as it is very
unlikely that misreporting would affect the classification of bank distress in counties. While misreporting could affect the
exact number of banks experiencing distress, it is unlikely that errors will completely miss all reports from distressed areas.


                                                              17
as inventor's address and co-inventors, assignee name and patent technology class, are not practical for

our setting. First, one of our key interests is measuring the potential migration of independent inven-

tors into firms and across geographic space. Hence, we cannot use the address or assignee name to link

inventors across patents. Second, since 90% of patents filed in the first half of the century are single-

inventor patents, co-inventor networks also provide limited variation for matching. Finally, important

technological advancements in the 1920s and the 1930s might create biased matches if we use technology

classification in the linking process. We overcome this linking challenge in two steps.

      In the first step, we match inventors in patents filed from 1905­1949 to the complete count U.S. Census

(1910, 1920, 1930, or 1940) that is the closest to their patent filing year (e.g., 1905-1914 to 1910 Census).

Similar to Akcigit et al. (2017), we use inventor names and county of residence on the patent text to match

to individuals in Census, and filter duplicate matches based on middle initials and age (individuals from

17 to 66 years old in the Census). To increase the potential rate of matching, we introduce two additional

steps: a) perform 12 different rounds of matching from most to least precise--with exact matching in

the first round to partial name matching in later rounds; and b) create an "inventor-like-job" filter to

identify likely inventors in duplicate matches. For example, there could be two possible census records

for "Thomas Edison"--one is a laborer, and the other is an inventor. The inventor census record is most

likely to be the correct Edison.

      The detailed process of matching and the full set of matching statistics can be found in Online

Appendix B.19 At each stage, we discard non-unique matches. We performed an extensive examination

of the matched data to determine that matches in rounds 1 through 9 provide high-quality matches on

the order of accuracy of 85­95%, while rounds 10­12 did not offer improvements. Hence, we only consider

matches in rounds 1­9 in all further analyses. Overall, we are able to match at least 65% of inventors to

each Census. At the strictest round of matching that resembles that in Akcigit et al. (2017), we uniquely

match 45% of inventors, which is similar to the 39% match rate in Akcigit et al. (2017). The additional

rounds of matches as well as the new filtering method bring the percent of unique matches to about

65%. Following much of the literature, we examine whether inventors matched to the Censuses indeed

look like inventors, as compared to the general population, and resemble characteristics identified in prior

matching efforts. Similar to prior work in Akcigit et al. (2017) and Sarada et al. (2019), we find that

inventors tend to be older, male, and married. We also find that the inventors tend to be much more
 19
      Online Appendix B is available on Tania Babina's website.


                                                            18
highly educated and earn much more than an average person, which is similar to Akcigit et al. (2017).

Intuitively, we find that inventors have a different distribution of occupations than the general population

(this is true whether we limit to the sample of inventors not filtered by occupation or not). For example,

inventors are 3 to 4 times more likely to be managers, and 3 to 4 times less likely to be farmers. For

brevity, we only report the distribution of occupations for inventors vs. non-inventors for the 1930 Census

matched sample in Figure A.6, but all statistics for each decade are available in Online Appendix B.

       In the second step, we longitudinally link uniquely-matched inventor-Census individuals to three other

Censuses (e.g., inventors matched to 1910 Census are then matched to 1920, 1930, and 1940 Censuses

using time-invariant individual-level information in 1910 and other Censuses). We follow leading work on

linking individuals across Censuses (e.g., Long and Ferrie 2013) by matching individuals based on their

year and place of birth, which are both well-populated in all Censuses of interest. We match between

25 to 55% of records, depending on how far apart Censuses are, which are similar rates to those in

prior research efforts. Online Appendix B provides a detailed description of the methodology and the

statistics on match rates for each decade-pair. These two steps produce a longitudinal sample of patenting

individuals across four decades, allowing us to track inventors across different organizations of innovation

and geographic space.


3.4      Descriptive Analysis

The comprehensive nature of our patent data allows us to provide some key descriptive evidence on the

population of patents by the two key innovation-producing groups in the first half of the 20th century:

independent and firm patents. This descriptive evidence builds on prior pioneering studies (e.g., Lam-

oreaux and Sokoloff, 1999; Nicholas, 2010) that examine the differences between firm and independent

patents using subsamples of patents over 1830­1930.20 Our extended sample allows us to characterize

those differences for the 1930­1949 period. We find a stark decline in independent patents over our key

sample period of 1910­1949, consistent with prior work. In particular, the share of independent patents

declines from 72% in 1910s to 59% in the 1920s, 44% in the 1930s, and 39% in the 1940s.

       When it comes to the importance of patents, panel A of Table 2 shows that, on average, independent

patents received a similar number of citations both before and after the Great Depression.21 This is
  20
     For example, Lamoreaux and Sokoloff (1999) draws on 6,600 patents filed in 1870­71, 1890­91 and 1910­1911, and
Nicholas (2010) examines a sample of approximately 24,000 patents filed between 1830 and 1930.
  21
     The distributions look similar when we adjust the count of citations by the number of citations in each major technology


                                                             19
interesting because both Lamoreaux and Sokoloff (1999) and Nicholas (2010) find that independent

patents were more highly-cited than firm patents in samples that include earlier sub-periods not included

in our analysis. Independent patents also have similar odds of being cited. When it comes to team

patenting, 8% of independent and 11% of firm patents filed over 1910­1929 have more than one inventor

and both groups had 1.1 inventors per patent on average, which matches the statistics in Nicholas (2010).

However, the team-patenting gap increases substantially during the 1930­1949 period where the percent

of independent team patenting remains the same, but the percent of firm patents with at least two

inventors almost doubles to 17%. Finally, we provide new evidence on the distribution of patents by

eight technology classes (outer slices) and the distribution of independent and firm patents within each

technology class (inner slices within each outer slice) in panel A of Figure A.5. The figure shows that

there is substantial heterogeneity across classes in terms of the share of independent vs. firm patents,

which is consistent with Nicholas (2010) who argues that independent inventors tended to specialize in

certain technologies. Moreover, the figure also shows that some technologies declined in prominence (e.g.,

"Performing Operations; Transporting") and some increased in importance (e.g., "Electricity") following

the Great Depression, which is consistent with prior literature.

    Using inventor characteristics obtained from the Census data, we also document that independent

inventors are much more likely to be entrepreneurs as compared to firm inventors, which is, of course,

intuitive, suggesting that independent inventors were not only "garage inventors", but also pursued

commercialization of their ideas. Online Appendix B shows this to be the case in every decade from

1910­1940. In Figures A.7 and A.8, we also document that, as of the 1930 Census, independent inventors

(as compared to inventors producing patents within firms) are: (i) more likely to be female; (ii) are, on

average, 2 years older; (iii) 4% more likely to be immigrants (compared to 16% of immigrants among firm

inventors); and (iv) 5% less likely to be married (compared to 80% married firm inventors). The differences

in immigration rates are particularly interesting because immigrants tend to be more entrepreneurial

currently (see Kerr and Kerr (2020) for review), and our evidence suggests that this was true even a

hundred years ago. When it comes to socioeconomic status, our data show that independent and firm

inventors are equally likely to own a house, with their house ownership rates equal to 56% , which is

8% higher than that of an average male (48% of males own a house). Figures A.9 and A.10 also show

that, compared to other males, inventors earn more and own more valuable houses, with more variance
class and filing decade.


                                                    20
in home values and earnings for independent inventors as compared to firm inventors. These patterns

also hold in the samples of inventors matched to the 1910, 1920, and 1940 complete-count Censuses.

         Aggregating firm and independent patents at the county-decade level, shows that the number of firm

and independent patents are highly correlated (correlation of 82%). Panel B of Table 2 contains statis-

tics on the distribution of firm and independent patents at the county-decade level data, and shows a

wide distribution of patents across U.S. counties--consistent with the idea that innovation activity was

far less concentrated than at present. Similarly, Figure A.4 shows the ubiquity of independent inven-

tions across U.S. counties during the 1920s, which supports our arguments that pockets of technological

entrepreneurship were wide-spread across the U.S. prior to the 1930s.



4         The Great Depression and the Quantity of Innovation

In this section, we examine changes in the quantity of patent filings following the Great Depression across

locations produced by independent inventors, firms, and the overall innovative activity. We initially

examine the short- and medium-run impact of the shock by focusing on the 1910­1940 period, and later

examine the (very) long-run effects by extending the patent data through 1999.


4.1        Empirical Strategy

The key objective of this section is to describe how we identify the impact of the Great Depression

on patent filing activity. Specifically, we use a differences-in-differences specification which compares

innovation activity across counties that had differential severity of bank distress during the Depression

period. To remove the effect of regional business cycles and changes in state-level regulation, all our

specifications include state-by-time fixed effects.22 We also include county fixed effects to control for

time-invariant differences in innovation across counties. Our primary specification is:



                 Ln(Innovation)cst = c + st +  BankDistresscs × Af ter1929t + Xcst  +                   cst          (1)
    22
    This approach allows us to net out any aggregate changes in the legal or innovation environment around this period.
For instance, Beauchamp (2015) documents a rise in patent litigation in the late 1930s, which may affect the incentive to
innovate (e.g. Mezzanotti, 2020; Mezzanotti and Simcoe, 2019).




                                                           21
where c denotes a county, s ­ a state, and t ­ time (defined in decades if not specified otherwise)23 .

Ln(Innovation)cst is the natural logarithm of either number of patents, total future patent citations, or

average citations per patent24 ; c are county fixed effects; st are state-time fixed effects; BankDistresscs

denotes the degree of bank distress in county c in state s during the Great Depression and equals 1 if

the county had at least one bank suspended over 1930­1933, and 0 otherwise; Af ter1929t equals 1 for

observations starting in 1930, and 0 otherwise. Xcst includes county-specific controls discussed later;

these controls are usually measured before the time of the Great Depression and interacted with the

post-dummy, Af ter1929t . The estimate of the effect of local bank distress on innovation is given by  ,

which measures the differences in patenting in counties with higher bank distress compared to counties

with lower bank distress. We cluster standard errors by county, which is the level of our treatment

(Bertrand et al., 2004).

    There are several potential threats to identification. One issue may be reverse causality. In particular,

it could be that the weakness of the innovative sector led to bank failure, and not vice-versa. To under-

stand whether this is a valid concern, it is important to examine the causes of bank distress during the

Depression. To the extent that failures were driven by panics rather than weakness in the fundamentals

(e.g. Friedman and Schwartz, 1963), reverse causality may not be a concern. However, if distress is

driven by a deterioration of the demand for certain technologies, then reverse causality could be a more

serious concern. That concern may be fairly minor though in our setting. For instance, Calomiris and

Mason (2003) find that lagged liabilities of failed companies do not explain bank failures. Furthermore,

this hypothesis is likely to be even less plausible for the innovative sector, which had minimal exposure to

banks' loans. In this context, Nanda and Nicholas (2014) argue that publicly traded R&D firms--which

are likely the R&D firms with a higher share of assets funded by bank loans--only accounted for a mini-

mal share of banks' outstanding loans. Moreover, some of our robustness tests provide further evidence

against this concern.

    Alternatively, the presence of omitted variable bias is a serious concern in this analysis since bank
  23
     The higher level of aggregation, as compared to annual, allows us to reduce noise due to some counties not having
patents filed each year. As we show later, we find consistent results with 5 or 10 years of aggregation and our findings are
not influenced by counties with zero patents (about 10% of observations in the decennial panel), suggesting robustness to
the particular aggregation choice.
  24
     As is standard practice, we add one to the number of patents before taking logs in order to avoid dropping counties
without any patents over a given period. This data transformation turns out to be unimportant for our results because about
90% of counties have at least one patent filed each decade. As detailed later on, the results are not sensitive to different
transformations of the dependent variables nor to a particular treatment of counties without patents in a given decade.



                                                            22
distress was clearly not randomly assigned. While it will not be possible to present one single test that can

rule out this hypothesis, we present a battery of analyses to help assuage concerns along this dimension.


4.2   Results and Robustness

In Table 3, we show initial evidence that county-level variation in exposure to the financial crisis, proxied

by bank suspensions, is associated with a reduction in the quantity of total patenting (column 3), driven

by a decline in independent patents (column 1) and no change in firm patenting (column 2). We focus

on the significant result for the independent innovation and revisit firm innovation later in the paper.

Our estimates suggest that counties that experienced bank distress saw a drop in independent patenting

around the Depression that was 13% higher than counties in the same state without bank distress. This

effect does not depend on the way we measure bank distress. Indeed, Table A.1 shows that the results

hold using alternative measures. For instance, the effects are consistent when splitting the sample at

the median of distress--measured as the share of deposits at suspended banks--or defined as distressed

counties that are not in the bottom tercile in terms of distress.

   By the same token, we also show in Table A.2 that our findings are unchanged if we conduct alternative

transformations of the innovation outcomes. One, relatively minor concern in our setting is related to

the presence of zeros in the data, which led us to add a unit to the traditional log-transformation. In

column 2, we construct the outcome without adding the unit, therefore dropping the zero observations

and focusing on a purely intensive margin. We find that our estimates are very similar to the main one

(reported in column 1), and the drop in sample size is only about 10%. We also provide two alternatives to

our approach. First, our preferred alternative is to use the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation, which

provides a smoother transformation around zero and still allows a similar interpretation of the results

(column 3). Second, we also check our results adding a smaller base (0.5) to our outcome (column 4). In

both cases, we find almost identical results to our baseline. Furthermore, in column 5, we use the same

transformation as in the rest of the paper, but include as part of independent patents also those patents

that are assigned to a firm whose name contains the inventors' last or first name (i.g., eponymous firm

names, which are likely founded by the inventors or their family members). This test examines whether

there might have been some relabeling from independent to firm patents by inventors-entrepreneur in

more distressed areas. We find exactly the same estimate when we only include independent patents,

suggesting that the relabeling is an unlikely mechanism to explain the decline in independent patents.

                                                     23
Lastly, Table A.3 shows that the regions with bank distress have substantial reductions in independent

patenting even weighting our regression by the size of the county in 1920.25

       However, before we can causally interpret the results in this direction, we need to provide more

evidence that can help us to rule out confounding factors discussed earlier. To start, we examine the

dynamics of the effects using a longer panel (1900--1950) organized over five-year windows. If our results

are explained by an omitted variable that is unrelated to bank distress, we might expect to find differential

innovation patterns also before the Depression. In other words, we should find that high distress counties

were already experiencing different trends in innovation activities before the shock. Figure 4 provides

evidence that is inconsistent with this concern. In general, we find that until the 1930s counties that

experienced distress during the Depression did not differ in their relative trends in independent inventors'

activity. This changed sharply during the 1930­1934 period when we document a sudden reduction in

innovation activity by technology entrepreneurs in the more severely affected areas.

       Given the lack of differential trends, the main remaining concern for our analysis is that bank distress

at the county level may be correlated with some other shock that was contemporaneous to the Depression

that was correlated with local economic distress and innovation (but not through economic distress). One

possibility is that bank distress could capture heterogeneity in demand for technologies across counties,

which in turn may affect the production of technologies in the area. To the extent that this shift in demand

happens roughly at the same time as the Depression or as a result of it, its effect may be undetectable

in the pre-trend analysis. Regarding this concern, there are a few important things to consider. First,

from a theoretical standpoint, a demand-side explanation would require that, in some way, the decision

of an inventor to develop a technology is influenced by the demand for that technology in the local area.

However, this hypothesis goes against a large body of work in economic history (e.g., Lamoreaux and

Sokoloff 2001b), which has shown that the market for technology during this period was either national

or--at the very least--regional. Therefore, variation in demand should not be captured in our analysis,

particularly after the inclusion of state-by-time fixed effects.

       Second, to the extent that firms and technology entrepreneurs produce a similar type of innovation,

a demand explanation would also predict a decline in firm innovation in distress areas. However, as

we show in Table 3, we find that bank distress does not seem to predict any short-run changes in
  25
    As discussed more later, we also find that our results are robust to the exclusion of patents without any citations (Table
A.8). In other words, the decline is not simply driven by inventors who stopped producing patents of absolutely no value.



                                                             24
aggregate patenting by firms at the county level. This firm-level result helps more broadly to address other

alternative explanations, which would generally predict a similar response between firm and independent

inventors. For instance, one special case is the reverse causality hypothesis discussed earlier. If the decline

in banks was caused by the reduction in innovation and not vice-versa, the contraction should also be

observed in firms. If anything, the effect on firms should be larger, since banks and firms are more likely

to be connected through direct lending relationships.

    These arguments suggest that demand-side explanations are unlikely drivers of our results. However,

we also want to provide further direct evidence against this hypothesis. In general, if local demand shocks

are important to explain our results, we should also expect to find a null result for technologies in which

local demand is likely not important. To examine this issue, in Table 4 we reshape our data at county-

by-time-by-technology class level.26 Since it is hard to categorize ex-ante which technology is more likely

to be affected by local demand, we take two approaches that do not require any ex-ante categorization.

To start, we augment our main specification by including technology-by-time fixed effects. To the extent

that demand explains our results and this is heterogeneous across technologies, we should expect our

main effect to go away. Instead, we find that the result with this new set of fixed effects is still large and

significant (column 2) and not different from the estimates at this level of aggregation without any of

these additional fixed effects (column 1). As a second test, we repeat the main specification separately

for each of the top five largest independent inventor technology classes, as measured by the number of

independent patents filed in the 1920s. Across all five, we find sizable, significant and similar results

(columns 3 to 7).

    While these results provide strong evidence against the role of demand for technologies in explaining

our results, there is still a potential concern that the response to the Depression may in part reflect other

differences across distressed and non-distressed areas that might lead to differential trends in innovation

following the Great Depression. To visualize this idea, in the first panel of Figure 3 we plot the esti-

mated differences in county-level characteristics between areas with and without bank distress during the

Depression. This analysis is conducted adjusting for differences across states by including state fixed ef-

fects.27 On average, we find that counties experiencing bank distress are significantly different than areas
  26
     In particular, these technology classes are human necessities, performing operations or transporting, fixed constructions,
mechanical engineering, lighting, heating, weapons, blasting engines or pumps, and physics.
  27
     The analysis reports the betas and the 95% confidence intervals for the coefficients that are estimated running a simple
regression of the reported outcomes, which are standardized to mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1 to make variables
more comparable (i.e. z-score), on an indicator variable for the counties with bank distress, while also controlling for state


                                                              25
that did not experience bank failures. For instance, our treated areas tend to produce more patenting

and have more banks in the 1920s. Not surprisingly, the areas that experienced bank distress also end up

with higher unemployment in 1937.28 However, most of these differences between treatment and control

are really explained by the fact that counties experiencing distress are on average larger than counties

that did not experience distress. Consistent with this hypothesis, in the second panel of Figure 3, we

repeat the same analysis as before now also controlling for the log of population in the county in 1920.

Strikingly, this extra control absorbs a significant portion of the variation in county-level characteristics

between those with and without bank distress. In particular, we no longer find any significant differences

across county characteristics. Also, as we show in Figure A.4, while there is certainly some geographic

concentrations in bank distress in the early 1930s and patenting activity in the 1920s, much of that

variation is explained by state-level variation and differences in county population--both of which are

absorbed with our fine fixed effects.

    In light of this evidence, in Table 5, we examine empirically whether our findings could be explained by

observable differences in pre-shock characteristics that might send those counties on differential innovation

trends following the Great Depression. In column 1, we show that the results go through once we also

control for the size of the population in 1920 interacted with a post-1929 dummy. Similarly, the results

are robust to controlling for a measure of the size of the banking sector at the county level (column 2).

    Building on this idea, we present two additional tests. First, in column 3, we control for the importance

of manufacturing in 1929 and, again, find that it does not significantly affect our results. Second, we

control for two variables that should, in part, also capture the negative effect of the Great Depression,

but do not directly proxy for the health of the local financial system. We control for the unemployment

rate in 1937 in column 4, and the change in county-level sales between 1929--1933 in column 5. The

logic behind this test is simple: an omitted variable would be a concern only if this variable is correlated

with the level of bank distress in the local area and also drives the results. In general, the same factors

that may have been correlated with one dimension of the Great Depression--bank failure--may be also

be correlated with other dimensions, such as the contraction in retail sales or unemployment rates.

Therefore, controlling for these alternative proxies for the depth of the Depression can help to gauge the

extent to which our result may be capturing other economic forces. However, it is also important to
fixed effects.
   28
      We use 1937 because county-level unemployment data was not available for 1929­1933.



                                                          26
keep in mind that these variables may also be endogenously driven by bank distress, and, therefore, may

partially capture the impact of bank failure and the overall funding shocks in which we are interested. We

find that the addition of these controls does not significantly affect our estimates, providing reassuring

evidence for our analysis. Furthermore, the results also hold when we add all control variables together

(column 6). Lastly, our results are also robust to controlling for the importance of New Deal funding,

therefore, suggesting that this government intervention--­which likely favored incumbent firms--does

not appear to explain our results (Table A.4).29

       As an alternative way to deal with the heterogeneity between treatment and control, we also implement

a matching estimator using a nearest-neighbor matching approach. This approach allows us to deal with

concerns about non-linear effects of co-variates acting as possible confounds. In particular, we start

by considering all counties that did not experience distress during the Depression. For each of these

counties, we check whether we can find any other county that experienced bank distress, where the

following conditions also hold: (a) the county is in the same state; (b) population is within a 25%

bandwidth around the unaffected county; (c) independent ' innovation in the pre-period (the 1920s) is

similar.30 Since we only analyze counties that are selected using these criteria, the sample of counties

in this analysis is only about a third of the original sample, but, on average, counties in treatment and

control groups are much more homogeneous. In Table A.5, we re-estimate our main specification using

this matched sample for independent patents (columns 1 and 2) and firm patents (columns 3 and 4).

Overall, we replicate our key findings, in terms of economic and statistical significance: negative effects

on independent patenting and a failure to reject no effect on firm patenting.


4.3      Wealth Shocks and Independent Inventors

Altogether, the findings suggest that local economic distress from the Great Depression was an important

force explaining some of the decline in independent inventions in the aftermath of this crisis. However,

banks may matter for technological entrepreneurs for different reasons. While including or excluding
  29
     We follow Fishback et al. (2006) and proxy for the size of New Deal by measuring the total amount of relief grants in
a given county. The data on relief grants come from Fishback et al. (2003). Using this raw data, we construct two proxies.
First, in columns 1 and 2, we control for the amount of relief funds divided by the population in 1920. Second, in columns
3 and 4, we control for the absolute size of the relief grants (log-transformed). In both cases, we find little difference in our
inference.
  30
     We divide counties into three groups: (a) no independent innovation (zero patents before); (b) moderate independent
innovation (between zero and fifty patents); (c) high independent innovation (above fifty patents). We then use this definition
to match counties.



                                                               27
all possible mechanisms is outside the scope of this paper, we can provide evidence that may shed light

on the plausibility of some channels. One hypothesis is that bank shocks were linked to a reduction in

the wealth of local investors, therefore limiting their ability or willingness to fund risky projects. This

idea is consistent with most of the literature on the history of early-stage technological innovation in

the pre-Depression era as well as inline with the novel stylized facts presented in Section 2. If this is an

important channel to explain our result, then we should find comparable results even using proxies for

shocks to local wealth.

    Indeed, we find that the drop in independent inventions can be observed using a wealth local shock

measure. In particular, we identify counties experiencing variation in agricultural land values using

heterogeneity in the exposure to the 1920 farming crisis, as discussed in Rajan and Ramcharan (2015).

In Rajan and Ramcharan (2015), the authors argue that the boom in the U.S. agricultural sector in the

late 1910s--which was a consequence of the disruption in European and Russian food production due to

WWI and a sharp increase in the U.S. world exports--led to a large decline in real estate values in the

1920s. Banks loaded with loans underwritten to finance the boom were particularly vulnerable during the

Great Depression (Jaremski and Wheelock, 2018). Following these papers, we construct a county-level

measure of exposure to the farming shock by looking at the increase in revenue that is induced by the

changes in prices in global commodity markets (Haines et al., 2010).31

    To start, we validate this measure relative to the previous literature: we show that counties that

experienced a larger farming boom during 1917--1920 also experienced higher bank distress during the

Depression (in column 1 of Table 6). In line with the discussion in Jaremski and Wheelock (2018), this

result confirms that the shock to real estate in the 1920s explains part of the weakness of American banks

at the onset of the Depression. Then we replicate the same differences-in-differences model presented

previously, but now using this alternative treatment in Table 6. Columns 2 and 3 show that the results are

consistent with those using bank distress as a treatment: the boom-driven increase in the farmland prices

predicts a reduction in patenting by independent inventors following the beginning of the Depression.32
  31
     To be specific, our treatment is the county-level change from 1917 to 1920 in the international commodity price index
calculated for each county, where weights are the crop share of a given farm product out of total county farm output and
prices are international farm product prices, as in Rajan and Ramcharan (2015).
  32
     It is important to be clear that agricultural land price shocks are not being used as an instrumental variable for bank
distress, but rather both bank distress and agricultural land price shocks are likely to be different measures associated with
wealth shocks to available local capital for financing technological entrepreneurs. Direct systematic measures of the wealth
of these investors is difficult to obtain, but, as we showed previously, local investors in technological ventures were also often
holders of substantial local real estate, making this a plausible proxy for a substantial portion of investors' wealth.



                                                               28
Importantly, our results are similar even when adjusting for differences in size by controlling for the

population in 1920 (Table A.11). Overall, these findings provide some suggestive evidence about the

importance of wealth shocks in explaining the contraction in independent inventors documented before.

Furthermore, this result helps address reverse causality concerns mentioned earlier, since we exploit

variation determined long before the Great Depression.


4.4   The Effects over the Long-run

The evidence presented so far has confirmed that bank distress during the Great Depression predicted an

economically large contraction in patenting activity by independent inventors. Before moving forward,

it is important to understand to what extent this effect was temporary or persistent. This question is

particularly important given the context of these results. As Figure 4 shows, the aggregate decline in

independent inventors was not a transient phenomenon. While our results confirm that the shock caused

by the Depression was a significant factor in triggering this decline, this does not necessarily imply that

the effect of our main shock persisted in the long-run.

   To examine this question, we repeat our main analyses using a sample that covers patenting activity by

independent inventors up to 1999. One important caveat in this type of analysis is that we are not going

to be able to prove that the Depression caused a long-term decline in independent patenting. Instead,

we can simply make a statement about whether the short-term effects of the banking shock persisted

over time. Despite this limitation, which is common in these types of studies, understanding whether the

decline persisted is still important, since it may help in clarifying whether the effect of the Depression

may still explain a large share of changes in the innovation ecosystem decades later.

   We turn to the data with this limitation in mind. In the pre-trend analysis (Figure 4), we have

already shown that the contraction in independent inventor patenting occurred not only in the 1930s, but

also persisted in the 1940s. In Table 7, we extend this analysis further. In particular, using data at the

county-by-decade level, we separately estimate a parameter of bank distress for the 1930s that captures

short-term response, and then, on top of that, for the 1940­1990 decades, which captures long-term

responses. The estimate in column 1 suggests that counties that experienced bank distress during the

Great Depression appears to be characterized by persistently lower patenting by independent inventors

long after the Depression.

   In fact, in Figure 5, we re-run our primary specification using a much longer panel, covering patents

                                                    29
filed between 1890 and 1999. We find that the county-level bank distress from the Great Depression has no

relationship with changes in independent patenting in the decades prior to the 1930s, but it is associated

with a sudden decline in independent patenting in the 1930s, which persisted in every decade for the next

70 years. Therefore, even if distress from the Great Depression were only a catalyst for changes already

on the horizon, this lack of "catching-up" by distressed counties suggests that the shock had important

distributional effects. This evidence is consistent with the idea that large shocks can lead to equilibria

shift in the organization of innovation: the reduction in activity by technology entrepreneurs may have led

to a dissolution of other important aspects of the local ecosystems, such as funding networks or patents

agents, that help facilitate the innovation process (Lamoreaux et al., 2006) leading to hysteresis. Such an

ecosystem can exist as an equilibrium, but also devolve into equilibria where patenting moves into firms

when faced with disruptions to entrepreneurial activity (Aghion and Tirole 1994, Gromb and Scharfstein

2002, Hellmann 2007). For example, while many regions in the U.S. would love to develop into Silicon

Valley, perhaps not surprisingly, moving to an equilibrium where the local environment supports that

sort of technological entrepreneurial activity is not trivial (Kerr and Robert-Nicoud, 2020).



5     The Great Depression and the Innovation Ecosystem

5.1   Discussion

So far, we have shown that the Great Depression was followed by a contraction of innovation by indepen-

dent inventors. Importantly, these effects are persistent over time. There are several ways to interpret

this evidence. On the one hand, this result may be consistent with the idea that the financial contraction

brought about by the Depression negatively affected the level of dynamism in the economy. In fact,

our tests show that the financing contraction led to a sizable reduction in innovation activity that is

undertaken outside of firm boundaries. In turn, this may suggest the presence of a "missing generation"

of highly productive entrants (Gourio et al., 2016).

    On the other hand, a reduction in the amount of innovation that is undertaken by technology en-

trepreneurs does not necessarily imply a reduction in the overall dynamism of the economy. First, the

long-run implications of the shock not only depend on its quantity effect, but also on the quality adjust-

ment that this may generate. As discussed by Caballero et al. (1994), a negative shock may also represent

an economic opportunity to the extent that this event also triggers cleansing dynamics in the economy.


                                                    30
Second, the actual impact of the shock for the economy also depends on the ability of innovation to shift

across different types of organizations. Altogether, a crisis period may also be an opportunity to reshape

innovation efforts towards more efficient organizational forms and impactful projects (Manso et al., 2019).

   In order to explore these dimensions, we increase the breadth of our analysis to the overall ecosystem

of innovation at the local level. In particular, we present three sets of tests to help us understand the

economic interpretation of our initial findings. First, we examine whether the decline in the quantity

of innovation was also accompanied by a decrease in the overall quality of local innovation. Studying

innovation quality in this context is particularly interesting because the quality of historic patents can

be evaluated based on their long-run influence on future generations of innovations through citations.

Second, we examine whether the drop in the quantity of independent innovation also led to a decrease in

overall local innovation activity, looking more closely at the role played by firms during this period. In

this setting, our longitudinally-matched inventor data allow us to examine individual inventor migration

across organizational forms of innovation. Third, we examine whether the shock led to a reduction in the

stock of human capital in distressed areas.


5.2   Results and Robustness

In Table 8, we examine potential changes in the quality of innovation by using our previously employed

differences-in-differences design. In particular, we look at the total number of future citations received by

patents filed in each county-decade as the outcome of interest (columns 1 and 2). In stark contrast to our

quantity results, we find essentially no differential changes in the future citations given to independent

inventor patents that are filed in more distressed counties (column 1). The same holds for the sample

of all U.S.patents: firm plus independent (column 2). We can also see this result in Figure A.11, which

replicates the design of Figure 4, but takes total citations given to independent inventions as the dependent

variable. As before, we find no evidence of pre-trends, but this time we also do not find any changes after

the shock.

   How do we reconcile these findings of no changes in the number of future citations with the previous

finding of a large drop in the number of patents filed in the same counties? In columns 3 and 4 of

Table 8, we show that the divergent results are driven by a significant increase in the average quality of

patents filed. As can be seen in Figure A.12, the average citations per independent patent rise suddenly

in 1930­1934 in counties that experience more severe economic distress, despite no evidence of differential

                                                     31
trends prior to the Depression. In particular, based on Table 8, in distressed counties average citations

increase by about 13% more than non-distressed counties in the same state.

       This evidence--combined with the decline in the quantity of innovation--potentially suggests that the

drop in patenting by independent inventors might be driven by lower-quality projects that are no longer

patented. Therefore, while technology entrepreneurs were forced to reduce their activity in response

to the shock, inventors with high-quality technologies were still able to succeed in the marketplace.

Consistent with this hypothesis, we find that the drop in the quantity of patents is driven by a drop

in the number of low-citation patents, rather than a relative increase in highly-cited patents. In Table

9, we split patents based on the number of citations within the same cohort period (1910-1940) and

technology class. In particular, we split patents into those that belong to the top 1% and the bottom

99% by the number of future citations, as well as top and bottom 10%/90% and 25%/75%. We then

count the number of patents in each group at the county-decade level and log-transform these dependent

variables. Across these groups, we consistently find that the decline is mostly explained by a decrease

in the number of patents that are of lower quality, while highly-cited patents remain roughly constant.33

Therefore, while technology entrepreneurs were forced to reduce their activity in response to the shock,

inventors with high-quality technologies were still able to produce their inventions. More broadly, this

is consistent with the evidence in Babina (2020) who find that valuable entrepreneurial ideas get funded

even in recessions. Importantly, this pattern is not simply driven by the decline in patents that are

characterized by extremely low quality, such as those inventors engaged in patenting purely for personal

enjoyment/non-pecuniary benefits. In Appendix Table A.8, we show this by replicating our result showing

the decline in independent patenting by using only patents that have received at least one citation.

       Taken all together, we find that the average quality of innovation increases during the Depression, as

inventors become less likely to patent lower-quality ideas. This result on the increased average quality is

robust along several important dimensions. First, following the previous discussion on alternative ways to

measure the wealth shock, we replicate these findings using the land value shock discussed in the previous

section (Table A.10). Second, controlling for county size does not significantly change the results (Table
  33
    As we make the definition of high-quality broader (i.e., top 25%), we tend to find some effect in that group. However,
even under that definition, the effect is much larger (roughly double in size) in the lower quality category. Furthermore,
these results are presented controlling for population consistent with the robustness tests in the rest of the analyses. It is
important to point out that our findings also hold without this control--we find a larger effect for lower quality patents.
However, without the control, the effect is also significant for the top patents, suggesting that, at the margin, high-quality
patents may have also suffered, though this bank distress driven decline cannot be separated from the differential trends in
larger and smaller counties.


                                                             32
A.6). Third, the results are unchanged when we adjust citations following Hall et al. (2001) and absorb

variation in citation patterns across technologies (column 1 of Table A.7).34 Finally, we find consistent

results using average citations without log-transforming it as an outcome (column 2 of Table A.7).

       In the second set of our analysis, we find that, in contrast to technological entrepreneurs, the aggregate

local innovation activity by firms did not seem to be impaired, as shown in column 2 of Table 3. If

anything, patenting by firms actually increases relatively more in distressed areas over the longer-run, as

shown in column 2 of Table 7.35 Despite the limitations of analyses that look at long-term responses, this

evidence may suggest that the shock leads to some substitution in the production of innovation between

independent inventors and firms. While evidence on the increase in the quality of firm patents in the

short-run is limited,36 we do find more consistent evidence of the increased quality of firm patents in the

long-run (coefficient on "BankDistress X After1939" in column 2 of Table A.12).

       To understand what can explain this shift in the quality of firm patents at the county-level, we turn to

our longitudinal individual inventor-level data to examine whether there are any changes in the probability

that, in distressed regions, pre-shock independent inventors work for firms in the post-Depression period.

To run this test, we restrict the sample to the subset of inventors who: a) are found in the 1920 Census,

b) patent as independents prior to the Great Depression (i.e., decades of the 1910s and the 1920s);

and c) have at least one patent in the 1930s.37 Using this cross-section, we test whether independent

inventors within a state were more likely to patent within firms if they lived in counties that experienced

high bank distress.38 With this test, we want to understand whether financial distress associated with

the Depression predicted a reallocation of inventors into firms. In Table 10, we show that independent

inventors operating in high-distress areas were more likely to patent within firms in the following decade
  34
      In particular, we scale citations by the average number of citations in each major CPC technology class over the window
of time considered in the analysis (1910­1940).
   35
      Interestingly, we also do not find any changes in the distribution of high- vs. low-quality patents for firms (Table A.9).
   36
      See, for example, the marginally insignificant coefficient on "BankDistress X After1929" that measures changes in total
citations given to firm patents filed in the 1930s, as compared to those in 1910­1929 in column 2 of Table A.12.
   37
      To assign the inventor's location during the Depression, we use the location in the 1930 Census and, when this is not
available, the location in the 1920 Census. We condition on inventors matched to the 1920 Census, since this Census year
is used to construct controls.
   38
      For this analysis, we use a dummy version of the treatment, that splits the sample distribution at the median. Our
main county-level results also work using a consistent split at the median (Table A.1). We switch to the median because
the previous version of the treatment (bank distress equals one when there is some distress event) does not have enough
variation using individual-level data, as more than 90% of the sample resides in the distressed areas. Indeed, in unreported
analysis, we find that the individual- level analysis using the main treatment definition produces results that are close to
zero. However, negative effects for individual-level results occur for any reasonable alternative measure of the treatment
that generates a more meaningful variation in the treatment that provides sufficient power. For instance, in Table A.13, we
obtain similar and consistent results when we use a continuous bank distress treatment (columns 2 and 4).



                                                              33
(column 1), and this holds also when we add county-level controls (column 2) and individual- and county-

level controls (column 3).39 The consistency of results across all specifications is suggestive of the effects

likely being primarily driven by changes in the local market support for innovation, rather than its direct

impact on individual productivity (Bernstein et al., 2017).40

       To bolster our interpretation of these findings, we present two robustness tests. First, in Table A.13

we repeat the same analysis using a sub-sample of inventors who are less likely to be matched to wrong

individuals in the Census datasets (columns 3 and 4).41 Despite a significant decrease in sample size, the

result remains significant and qualitatively consistent with our main effects. If anything, the magnitude

of the coefficients increases, as we would expect in response to a reduction of measurement error in

this sample. Second, in Table A.14, we conduct a placebo analysis by examining whether independent

inventors in distressed counties also moved into firms more often before the 1930s. In columns 1 and

2, we examine a sample of independent inventors that were active in the 1910s and check whether they

were more likely to move into firms in the 1920s if they were in counties that experienced more distress

during the Great Depression, and in columns 3 and 4, we repeat the same analysis focusing on the 1900s

inventors moving into firms in the 1910s. Across all these analyses, we consistently find no evidence of a

differential likelihood to move into a firm prior to the 1930s.

       This cross-organizational migration is consistent with the more muted observed response of the county-

level quantity of firm patents filed to bank distress: innovative workers are re-allocated from more to less

external-finance dependent firms in affected areas. Going back to our original county-level data in Table

6, we show long-run reductions in independent patenting in these distressed counties--the reductions

lasting till the present day. By contrast, firm patenting in distressed counties appears to see a resurgence

in the long-run, compensating for the long-run decline in independent patenting. Overall, the movement

of inventors across organizational forms might explain why the aggregate county-level firm patenting

appears to have been somewhat insulated from bank distress, despite the declines observed for some
  39
     In terms of individual-level controls, we control for an inventor's (log of) age, sex, status of self-employment status, and
home ownership. At the county-level, we control for log-population in 1920.
  40
     Bernstein et al. (2017) examine the partial equilibrium effects of economic distress on the productivity of inventor-
employees and found a decline in the innovation of employees exposed to housing shocks.
  41
     We thank Nicolas Ziebarth for suggesting this robustness test. We only consider inventors if their patent (to be matched
to Census) was applied for within a two-year window around the Census year (two year before or two year after). This filter
increases the likelihood that the inventor is not matched to a wrong person in Census because that inventor moved across
county lines 5 to 3 years apart from Census and there is another person living in that county with the same name. We
think this approach decreases the probability of false positives, but we also feel confident that our full sample is likely of a
sufficient quality to undertake our inference.



                                                               34
more affected firms in Nanda and Nicholas (2014).

         An alternative mechanism is that the shock may have affected the local economy in part because

of a reduction in the local availability of human capital. This would have been the case if inventors

responded to the shock by moving outside of distressed counties. Indeed, the recent literature in economic

history highlights the importance of migration to understand the effect of the Depression in the American

economy (Feigenbaum 2015). Since we matched our inventor data to the Censuses, we can use location

data provided by the Censuses to test this hypothesis.42 In particular, we construct a dummy variable for

mobility equal to one if an inventor is located in 1940 in a different county than in 1920.43 In Table 11,

we show that data are not consistent with this hypothesis: we find no evidence that inventors were more

keen to migrate out of highly distressed areas. In unreported results, we find that this fact is true for

both inventors working for firms and independently. This result suggests that the shock--while it affected

the way innovation was organized--did not significantly impact the stock of human capital in the area,

at least in the short run.44 This is a surprising finding, given some evidence of relatively high mobility

among inventors in this time period (Akcigit et al. 2017 and Sarada et al. 2019). However, the null result

of distress on inventor geographic mobility coupled with the increased mobility of independent inventors

into firms suggests that obtaining paid employment was preferable to bearing the costs of geographic

reallocation.



6         Conclusion

Using a differences-in-differences design comparing counties that were more exposed to bank distress

during the Great Depression to counties less affected, we document the important role of the Great

Depression in triggering a large reduction in the quantity of patents filed by the largest group of innovators

of that period--independent inventors. However, this sudden and persistent decline in the activity of

technology entrepreneurs is only one side of the story. First, despite the decline in the quantity of patents
    42
     To run this test, we use all inventors (either firm or independent) that patented in the 1920s, and we do not impose
any condition on the post-Depression patenting, since we can follow their geographic movement using the Census datasets.
This lighter filter explains why this sample is much larger than the one used for the previous analysis on cross-organization
migration, which requires inventors to patent following the Depression.
  43
     The analysis covers all individuals that were active inventors (either in firms or as independents) in 1920. Since we use
the location as defined in the Census, we also require that the person has been listed in the 1920 and 1940 Censuses with a
known county.
  44
     Migration in these regions by inventors could have risen after 1940, but this is the last date at which we have full count
censuses that allow us to observe individual-level migration patterns.



                                                              35
filed, we find no measurable negative effects on the overall impact of surviving patents, because the shock

did not affect high-quality innovations on which future generations of inventions are built. Second, the

shock on its own did not affect firms negatively. If anything, firms seem to have benefited in the long-run,

in part because of a reallocation of inventors into firms. Third, the shock did not reduce the amount of

human capital in the area, because inventors did not leave the distressed areas in response to the shock.

   This evidence on the Great Depression can be thought of as a cautionary tale when examining the

impact of shocks on innovative activity. Our findings highlight that, to truly understand the impact of

the shock, it is crucial to examine the effect on the overall innovation ecosystem. In general, sufficiently

large shocks to financing--on top of having a direct effect on one group of innovators--can also lead to

a reallocation across more and less affected organizational forms. At the same time, to the extent that

the shock actually induces a cleansing effect (Caballero et al., 1994), the overall effect on technological

progress could be substantially lower, or might even be positive.

   These results are particularly useful in the context of the contemporaneous debate regarding a re-

duction in dynamism in the economy. For instance, these results are consistent with Guzman and Stern

(2016) and Babina et al. (2019) who highlight the importance of adjusting for the quality of start-ups

and the quality of their human capital in order to study dynamism. Clearly, our results, which cover

a different historical period, cannot directly speak to whether dynamism declined following the Great

Recession. However, as it is said, history may not repeat, but it often rhymes. For example, while the

Financial Crisis caused a large and persistent drop in newly-created firms, the aftermath saw incredible

technological advances coming from incumbents and startups alike. These included the births of fintech,

cloud storage/computing, and the sharing economy, as well as significant advances in artificial intelligence

(AI) that drove a boom in AI investments (Babina et al. 2020)-- all consistent with the broad patterns

we observe following the Great Depression. Our finding of a surprising resilience of the highest impact

innovations, even in the face of one of the largest exoduses of technological entrepreneurship in the U.S.

history in the aftermath of the Great Depression, is certainly suggestive that dynamism may also be more

resilient in the face of distress than it may appear at first glance. Our findings suggest that accounting

for redistribution, especially cross-organizationally, is likely to be critical in understanding the overall

effects on innovation and growth in the aftermath of an economic crisis.




                                                    36
References
Aghion, P., Bloom, N., Blundell, R., Griffith, R., Howitt, P., 2005. Competition and innovation: An
 inverted-u relationship. The quarterly journal of economics 120, 701­728.

Aghion, P., Tirole, J., 1994. The management of innovation. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 109,
 1185­1209.

Akcigit, U., Grigsby, J., Nicholas, T., 2017. The Rise of American Ingenuity: Innovation and Inventors
 of the Golden Age. Working Paper 23047, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Akkoyun, H. C., 2018. Investor protection and financing innovation: Evidence from blue sky laws .

Andrews, M., 2019. Comparing historical patent datasets. Available at SSRN 3415318 .

Ante, S. E., 2008. Creative capital: Georges Doriot and the birth of venture capital. Harvard Business
 Press.

Babina, T., 2020. Destructive creation at work: How financial distress spurs entrepreneurship. The Review
  of Financial Studies 33, 4061­4101.

Babina, T., Fedyk, A., He, A. X., Hodson, J., 2020. Artificial intelligence, firm growth, and industry
  concentration. Firm Growth, and Industry Concentration (July 14, 2020) .

Babina, T., Garcia, D., Tate, G. A., 2017. Friends during hard times: evidence from the great depression.
  Columbia Business School Research Paper .

Babina, T., Ma, W., Moser, C., Ouimet, P., Zarutskie, R., 2019. Pay, employment, and dynamics of
  young firms. Employment, and Dynamics of Young Firms (July 23, 2019) .

Bai, J., Carvalho, D., Phillips, G. M., 2018. The impact of bank credit on labor reallocation and aggregate
  industry productivity. The Journal of Finance 73, 2787­2836.

Bassetto, M., Cagetti, M., De Nardi, M., 2015. Credit crunches and credit allocation in a model of
  entrepreneurship. Review of Economic Dynamics 18, 53­76.

Beauchamp, C., 2015. The first patent litigation explosion. Yale LJ 125, 848.

Bell, A., Chetty, R., Jaravel, X., Petkova, N., Van Reenen, J., 2019. Who becomes an inventor in america?
  the importance of exposure to innovation. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 134, 647­713.

Benmelech, E., Frydman, C., Papanikolaou, D., 2017. Financial Frictions and Employment during the
  Great Depression. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Berkes, E., 2016. Comprehensive Universe of U.S. Patents (CUSP): Data and Facts. Working Paper.

Bernanke, B. S., 1983. Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the Great
  Depression. The American Economic Review 73, 257­276.

Bernstein, S., Giroud, X., Townsend, R. R., 2016. The impact of venture capital monitoring. The Journal
  of Finance 71, 1591­1622.

Bernstein, S., McQuade, T., Townsend, R. R., 2017. Do household wealth shocks affect productivity?
  evidence from innovative workers during the great recession. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

                                                    37
Bertrand, M., Duflo, E., Mullainathan, S., 2004. How Much Should We Trust Differences-In-Differences
  Estimates? The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 249­275.

Caballero, R. J., Hammour, M. L., others, 1994. The Cleansing Effect of Recessions. American Economic
  Review 84, 1350­1368.

Calomiris, C. W., Mason, J., 1997. Contagion and bank failures during the great depression: The june
  1932 chicago banking panic. American Economic Review 87, 863­83.

Calomiris, C. W., Mason, J. R., 2003. Fundamentals, Panics, and Bank Distress During the Depression.
  American Economic Review 93, 1615­1647.

Cole, H. L., Ohanian, L. E., 2007. A second look at the us great depression from a neoclassical perspective.
  Great depressions of the twentieth century. Minneapolis: Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis pp. 21­
  58.

De Rassenfosse, G., van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie, B., 2013. The role of fees in patent systems: Theory
  and evidence. Journal of Economic Surveys 27, 696­716.

Duval, R., Hong, G. H., Timmer, Y., 2020. Financial frictions and the great productivity slowdown. The
 Review of Financial Studies 33, 475­503.

Eichengreen, B., 2004. Understanding the great depression. The Canadian Journal of Economics/Revue
  canadienne d'Economique 37, 1­27.

Feigenbaum, J. J., 2015. Intergenerational mobility during the great depression .

Field, A. J., 2003. The most technologically progressive decade of the century. American Economic Review
  93, 1399­1413.

Fishback, P. V., Horrace, W. C., Kantor, S., 2001. The impact of new deal expenditures on local economic
  activity: An examination of retail sales, 1929-1939. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Fishback, P. V., Horrace, W. C., Kantor, S., 2006. The impact of new deal expenditures on mobility
  during the great depression. Explorations in Economic History 43, 179­222.

Fishback, P. V., Kantor, S., Wallis, J. J., 2003. Can the new deal's three rs be rehabilitated? a program-
  by-program, county-by-county analysis. Explorations in Economic History 40, 278­307.

Fleming, L., Greene, H., Li, G., Marx, M., Yao, D., 2019. Government-funded research increasingly fuels
  innovation. Science 364, 1139­1141.

Frésard, L., Hoberg, G., Phillips, G. M., 2020. Innovation activities and integration through vertical
  acquisitions. The Review of Financial Studies 33, 2937­2976.

Friedman, M., Schwartz, A. J., 1963. A Monetary history of the US 1867-1960. Princeton University
  Press.

Garcia-Macia, D., Hsieh, C.-T., Klenow, P. J., 2019. How destructive is innovation? Econometrica 87,
 1507­1541.

Gompers, P. A., Gornall, W., Kaplan, S. N., Strebulaev, I. A., 2019. How do venture capitalists make
 decisions? Journal of Financial Economics .


                                                    38
Gorton, G., Laarits, T., Muir, T., 2019. 1930: First modern crisis. Tech. rep., National Bureau of
 Economic Research.

Gorton, G., Metrick, A., 2013. The federal reserve and panic prevention: The roles of financial regulation
 and lender of last resort. Journal of Economic Perspectives 27, 45­64.

Gourio, F., Messer, T., Siemer, M., 2016. Firm Entry and Macroeconomic Dynamics: A State-Level
 Analysis. American Economic Review 106, 214­218.

Gromb, D., Scharfstein, D., 2002. Entrepreneurship in equilibrium. Tech. rep., National bureau of eco-
  nomic research.

Gross, D. P., Sampat, B. N., 2020. Inventing the endless frontier: The effects of the world war ii research
  effort on post-war innovation. Harvard Business School Strategy Unit Working Paper .

Guglielmo, M., 1998. What caused chicago bank failures in the great depression? a look at the 1920s.
 PhD Thesis .

Guzman, J., Stern, S., 2016. The State of American Entrepreneurship: New Estimates of the Quantity
 and Quality of Entrepreneurship for 15 US States, 1988-2014. Working Paper 22095, National Bureau
 of Economic Research.

Haines, M. R., et al., 2010. Historical, demographic, economic, and social data: the united states, 1790­
 2002. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research .

Hall, B. H., Jaffe, A. B., Trajtenberg, M., 2001. The nber patent citation data file: Lessons, insights and
 methodological tools. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hall, B. H., Lerner, J., 2010. The financing of r&d and innovation. In: Handbook of the Economics of
 Innovation , Elsevier, vol. 1, pp. 609­639.

Hall, R. E., 2015. Quantifying the lasting harm to the us economy from the financial crisis. NBER
 Macroeconomics Annual 29, 71­128.

Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R. S., Miranda, J., 2012. Who Creates Jobs? Small versus Large versus Young.
 The Review of Economics and Statistics 95, 347­361.

Hellmann, T., 2007. When do employees become entrepreneurs? Management science 53, 919­933.

Huber, K., 2018. Disentangling the effects of a banking crisis: evidence from german firms and counties.
 American Economic Review 108, 868­98.

Hughes, T. P., 2004. American genesis: a century of invention and technological enthusiasm, 1870-1970.
 University of Chicago Press.

Jacoby, N. H., Saulnier, R. J., 1947. Business finance and banking. In: Business Finance and Banking ,
  NBER, pp. 221­230.

Jaffe, A. B., Trajtenberg, M., Henderson, R., 1993. Geographic localization of knowledge spillovers as
  evidenced by patent citations. the Quarterly journal of Economics 108, 577­598.

Jaremski, M. S., Wheelock, D. C., 2018. Banking on the Boom, Tripped by the Bust: Banks and the
  World War I Agricultural Price Shock. Working Paper 25159, National Bureau of Economic Research.


                                                    39
Kelly, B., Papanikolaou, D., Seru, A., Taddy, M., 2018. Measuring technological innovation over the long
 run. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Kenney, M., 2011. How venture capital became a component of the us national system of innovation.
 Industrial and Corporate Change 20, 1677­1723.

Kerr, S. P., Kerr, W. R., 2020. Immigration policy levers for us innovation and startups. Tech. rep.,
 National Bureau of Economic Research.

Kerr, W. R., Lerner, J., Schoar, A., 2011. The consequences of entrepreneurial finance: Evidence from
 angel financings. The Review of Financial Studies 27, 20­55.

Kerr, W. R., Lincoln, W. F., 2010. The supply side of innovation: H-1b visa reforms and us ethnic
 invention. Journal of Labor Economics 28, 473­508.

Kerr, W. R., Robert-Nicoud, F., 2020. Tech clusters. Journal of Economic Perspectives 34, 50­76.

Lamoreaux, N. R., Levenstein, M., Sokoloff, K. L., 2006. Mobilizing venture capital during the second
  industrial revolution: Cleveland, ohio, 1870-1920. Capitalism and Society 1.

Lamoreaux, N. R., Sokoloff, K. L., 1999. Inventors, firms, and the market for technology in the late
  nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. In: Learning by doing in markets, firms, and countries ,
  University of Chicago Press, pp. 19­60.

Lamoreaux, N. R., Sokoloff, K. L., 2001a. Market trade in patents and the rise of a class of specialized
  inventors in the 19th-century united states. American Economic Review 91, 39­44.

Lamoreaux, N. R., Sokoloff, K. L., 2001b. Market Trade in Patents and the Rise of a Class of Specialized
  Inventors in the 19th-Century United States. American Economic Review 91, 39­44.

Lamoreaux, N. R., Sokoloff, K. L., 2005. The Decline of the Independent Inventor: A Schumpterian
  Story? Working Paper 11654, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Lamoreaux, N. R., Sokoloff, K. L., Sutthiphisal, D., 2009. The Reorganization of Inventive Activity in
  the United States during the Early Twentieth Century. Working Paper 15440, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Landes, D. S., Mokyr, J., Baumol, W. J., 2012. The invention of enterprise: Entrepreneurship from
  ancient Mesopotamia to modern times. Princeton University Press.

Lee, J., Mezzanotti, F., 2017. Bank Distress and Manufacturing: Evidence from the Great Depression.
  Tech. rep.

Li, G.-C., Lai, R., D'Amour, A., Doolin, D. M., Sun, Y., Torvik, V. I., Amy, Z. Y., Fleming, L., 2014.
  Disambiguation and co-authorship networks of the us patent inventor database (1975­2010). Research
  Policy 43, 941­955.

Long, J., Ferrie, J., 2013. Intergenerational occupational mobility in great britain and the united states
  since 1850. American Economic Review 103, 1109­37.

Luttmer, E. G. J., 2012. Technology diffusion and growth. Journal of Economic Theory 147, 602­622.

Manso, G., Balsmeier, B., Fleming, L., 2019. Heterogeneous innovation and the antifragile economy .


                                                   40
Margo, R. A., 1993. Employment and unemployment in the 1930s. Journal of Economic Perspectives 7,
 41­59.

Mezzanotti, F., 2020. Roadblock to innovation: The role of patent litigation in corporate r&d. Manage-
 ment Science .

Mezzanotti, F., Simcoe, T., 2019. Patent policy and american innovation after ebay: An empirical exam-
 ination. Research Policy 48, 1271­1281.

Mitchener, K., Richardson, G., 2019. Network contagion and interbank amplification during the great
 depression. Journal of Political Economy 127.

Mitchener, K., Wheelock, D., 2013. Does the structure of banking matter for economic growth? evidence
 from u.s. state banking markets. Explorations in Economic History 50, 161­178.

Moreira, S., 2016. Firm dynamics, persistent effects of entry conditions, and business cycles. Persistent
 Effects of Entry Conditions, and Business Cycles (October 1, 2016) .

Moretti, E., 2019. The effect of high-tech clusters on the productivity of top inventors. Tech. rep., National
 Bureau of Economic Research.

Moretti, E., Steinwender, C., Van Reenen, J., 2019. The intellectual spoils of war? defense r&d, produc-
 tivity and international spillovers. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Moser, P., 2005. How do patent laws influence innovation? evidence from nineteenth-century world's
 fairs. American economic review 95, 1214­1236.

Moser, P., Voena, A., Waldinger, F., 2014. German jewish émigrés and us invention. American Economic
 Review 104, 3222­55.

Mowery, D., Rosenberg, N., 1989. Technology and the Pursuit of Economic Growth.

Nanda, R., Nicholas, T., 2014. Did bank distress stifle innovation during the Great Depression? Journal
 of Financial Economics 114, 273­292.

Nicholas, T., 2008. Does innovation cause stock market runups? evidence from the great crash. American
  Economic Review 98, 1370­96.

Nicholas, T., 2010. The role of independent invention in US technological development, 1880-1930. The
  Journal of Economic History 70, 57­82.

Postel-Vinay, N., 2016. What caused chicago bank failures in the great depression? a look at the 1920s.
  Journal of Economic History 76, 478­519.

Rajan, R., Ramcharan, R., 2015. The Anatomy of a Credit Crisis: The Boom and Bust in Farm Land
 Prices in the United States in the 1920s. American Economic Review 105, 1439­1477.

Richardson, G., 2007. Categories and causes of bank distress during the great depression, 1929­1933:
  The illiquidity versus insolvency debate revisited. Explorations in Economic History 44, 588­607.

Richardson, G., Troost, W., 2009. Monetary intervention mitigated banking panics during the great
  depression: quasi-experimental evidence from a federal reserve district border, 1929­1933. Journal of
  Political Economy 117, 1031­1073.


                                                     41
Romer, C. D., 1993. The nation in depression. Journal of Economic Perspectives 7, 19­39.

Sarada, S., Andrews, M. J., Ziebarth, N. L., 2019. Changes in the demographics of american inventors,
  1870­1940. Explorations in Economic History 74, 101275.

Schumpeter, J. A., 1934. Depressions. Can We Learn from Past Experience.

Schumpeter, J. A., 1942. Capitalism, socialism, and democracy.

Seru, A., 2014. Firm boundaries matter: Evidence from conglomerates and r&d activity. Journal of
  Financial Economics 111, 381­405.

Shane, S., 2008. Fool's Gold?: The truth behind angel investing in America. Oxford University Press.

Siemer, M., 2016. Firm entry and employment dynamics in the great recession. Available at SSRN 2172594
  .

Teece David, J., 1988. Technological change and the nature of the firm. Giovanni Dosi .

Temin, P., et al., 1976. Did monetary forces cause the Great Depression? Norton.

Ziebarth, N., 2013. Identifying the Effects of Bank Failures from a Natural Experiment in Mississippi
  during the Great Depression. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 5, 81­101.




                                                  42
                                              Figure 1: Patents Filed by Technology Class

The figure shows the annual number of patents filed by patent technology class. The technology classes
correspond to the highest level of Cooperative Patent Classification (CPC) classifications by the U.S.
Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO). The sample is the universe of all patents granted by the USPTO
to U.S. inventors or firms.



                                                                             '
                                 15 ,000                                         1929


                                 12 ,500
        Count of Patents Filed




                                 10 ,000


                                  7,500


                                  5,000


                                  2,500


                                      0
                                       1900      1910            1920               1930            1940            1950
                                                                        Filing Year

                                                               Technology Class
                                               Chemistry; Metallurgy               Electricity
                                               Engineering                         Fixed Constructions
                                               Human Necessities                   Performing Operations; Transporting
                                               Physics                             Textiles; Paper




                                                                       43
                                        Figure 2: Aggregate Number of Patents by Patent Type

The figure shows the annual number of patents filed by patent type. The sample is the universe of
all patents granted by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO). "Independent" are patents by
inventors residing in the U.S. that were either unassigned or assigned to individuals at the time of the
patent grant date. "Firm" are patents that were assigned to a U.S. company at the time of the patent
grant date.




                           30 ,000                                          1929



                           25 ,000



                           20 ,000
        Count of Patents




                           15 ,000



                           10 ,000



                            5,000



                                0
                                 1900            1910          1920             1930     1940     1950
                                                                      Filing Year

                                             Patent Category               Independent     Firm




                                                                 44
                 Figure 3: Covariates Across Counties With and Without Bank Distress

The figures report the balance of covariates across two specifications: (1) controlling for state fixed-effects
in sub-figure (a); (2) controlling for both state fixed-effect and (log) population in 1920 sub-figure (b).
Specifically, the figures report the plot of the coefficients from a regression where our main treatment
variable--dummy equal to one for a county with bank distress during the Great Depression--is regressed
on the variable reported in the legend. Each variable is standardized to mean of 0 and standard deviation
of 1 (i.e., z-score) to facilitate the comparison between variables. For patent count variables, we also
apply a log transformation, consistent with the analyses in the main tables. Coefficient estimates and
95% confidence interval are displayed as well. Independent are patents by inventors residing in the U.S.
that were either unassigned or assigned to individuals at the time of the patent grant date.
                                                 (a) Difference within-state

                                                                     Covariates Balance

                           Total Number Patents

                          Total Number Citations

                       Total Avg. Citations/Patent

                             Ind. Number Patents

                           Ind. Number Citations

                        Ind. Avg. Citations/Patent

                            Number Banks, 1929

                       Unemployment Rate, 1937

                                                     -1        -.5           0            .5   1



                                (b) Difference within-state and adjusting for population

                                                                     Covariates Balance

                           Total Number Patents

                          Total Number Citations

                       Total Avg. Citations/Patent

                             Ind. Number Patents

                           Ind. Number Citations

                        Ind. Avg. Citations/Patent

                            Number Banks, 1929

                       Unemployment Rate, 1937

                                                     -1        -.5           0            .5   1




                                                             45
     Figure 4: Bank Distress During the Great Depression and Independent Innovation Quantity

The figure shows estimates from a differences-in-differences regression of the number of independent
patents on bank distress during the Great Depression. The estimation strategy relies on cross-sectional
variation in bank distress across U.S. counties within a state. The sample is the near universe of all
independent patents granted by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO). Independents are
patents by inventors residing in the U.S. that were either unassigned or assigned to individuals at the
time of the patent grant date. The unit of observation is county-time, where time is five years. The
dependent variable is the logarithm of one plus the number of independent patents filed over five-year
periods within each county. Bank Distress is an indicator variable equal to 1 for counties with at least
one bank suspension during the Great Depression years of 1930 through 1933, inclusive. The estimates
of the effect of bank distress on independent innovations are the coefficients on the interaction between
Bank Distress and five-year indicators that measure the relative change in patenting in areas with high
bank distress relative to the reference period of 1925­1929. Specifically, we plot betas and 95% confidence
intervals from a differences-in-differences regression:

                                         Ln(N umberP atents + 1)cst = c + st +            t 1t BankDistresscs +     cst      (2)
where c denotes county, s ­ state, and t ­ five-year period. c is county fixed effects; st is state-time fixed
effects; five-year indicators equal 1 for a given time period (e.g., 1900-04), and 0 otherwise. Standard
errors are clustered at the county level.
                                    .1
                                    .05
             Diff-in-Diff Coefficient 
                                    0
                                    -.05
                                    -.1
                                    -.15




                                           1900-04 1905-09 1910-14 1915-19 1920-24 1925-29 1930-34 1935-39 1940-44 1945-49




                                                                              46
      Figure 5: Bank Distress During the Great Depression and Long-Run Independent Patenting

The figure shows estimates from a differences-in-differences regression of the number of independent
patents on bank distress during the Great Depression looking over more than a century from 1890 to
1999. The estimation strategy relies on cross-sectional variation in bank distress across U.S. counties
within a state. The sample is the near universe of all independent patents granted by the U.S. Patent
and Trademark Office (USPTO). Independent are patents by inventors residing in the U.S. that were
either unassigned or assigned to individuals at the time of the patent grant date. The unit of observation
is county-time, where time is a decade. The dependent variable is the logarithm of one plus the number
of independent patents filed over ten-year periods within each county. Bank Distress is an indicator
variable equal to 1 for counties with at least one bank suspension during the Great Depression years of
1930 through 1933, inclusive. The estimates of the effect of bank distress on independent innovations
are the coefficients on the interaction between Bank Distress and five-year indicators that measure the
relative change in patenting in areas with high bank distress relative to the reference period of 1920­1929.
Specifically, we plot betas and 95% confidence intervals from a differences-in-differences regression:


   Ln(N umberP atents + 1)cst = c + st +            t 1t BankDistresscs +        t 1t P op1920cs +   cst   (3)

where c denotes county, s ­ state, and t ­ decade; c is county fixed effects; st is state-time fixed effects;
ten-year indicators equal 1 for a given time period (e.g., 1890-1899), and 0 otherwise; Pop1920 is the
natural logarithm of a county's population in the 1920s. Standard errors are clustered at the county level.




                                                     47
            Table 1: County-Level Summary Statistics for All and for Distressed Counties

The table shows summary statistics across all counties and only counties distressed during the Great
Depression--counties with at least one bank suspension over 1930­1933 (Bank Distress equals one). For
patent count variables, we also apply a log transformation, consistent with the analyses in the main
tables. Bank Distress % is calculated as the cumulative number of bank suspensions from 1930 through
1933 as a share of total banks in 1929. Independent are patents by inventors residing in the U.S. that
were either unassigned or assigned to individuals at the time of the patent grant date. Firm are patents
that were assigned to a U.S. company at the time of the patent grant date.

                                                All Counties             Counties w/ Suspensions
                                        Mean     Std.Dev.   NumObs      Mean   Std.Dev.   NumObs
 1920s Patenting per county (log):
 Number Patents                         2.72       1.63       2975       3.04      1.62        2129
 Number Citations                       3.24       1.96       2975       3.60      1.92        2129
 Average Citations/Patent               1.00       0.47       2975       1.04      0.41        2129
 Independent:
 Number Patents                         2.60       1.50       2975       2.90      1.48        2129
 Number Citations                       3.10       1.84       2975       3.45      1.79        2129
 Average Citations/Patent               0.99       0.48       2975       1.03      0.42        2129
 US Firms:
 Number Patents                         1.05       1.65       2975       1.25      1.78        2129
 Number Citations                       1.29       2.01       2975       1.52      2.15        2129
 Average Citations/Patent               0.49       0.66       2975       0.56      0.67        2129
 Banking County-level Variables:
 Bank Distress                          0.72       0.45       2975       1.00     0.00         2129
 Bank Distress %                        0.30      0.28        2975       0.42     0.24         2129
 Number Banks, 1929                     8.12      10.28       2975       9.88     11.54        2129
 Misc. County-level Variables:
 Population, 1920 (log)                  9.81      0.98       2948       9.99      0.94        2116
 CngCommPrice, 1917-1920                3.58       2.51       2829       3.90      2.58        2055
 Cng Agric. Debt, 1910-1920              2.89      0.74       2418       2.80      0.70        1798
 Unemployment Rate, 1937                 0.01      0.01       2973       0.01      0.01        2127
 Value Crops, 1910 (log)                14.09      1.06       2812      14.29      0.95        2051
 Chg Retail Sales, 1929-1933            -0.48      0.23       2941      -0.49      0.21        2105




                                                  48
                Table 2: Summary Statistics for Independent Inventor and Firm Patents

The table shows summary statistics across independent inventor patents and patents assigned to firms.
Independent are patents by inventors residing in the U.S. that were either unassigned or assigned to
individuals at the time of the patent grant date. Firm are patents that were assigned to a U.S. company
at the time of the patent grant date. Panel A shows statistics for patent-level data, and Panel B--for
county-decade level data. Each panel shows statistics for patents filed during 20 years before and 20 years
since the start of the Great Depression. For county-level data, Number Patents refers to total number of
patents within each county-decade; Number Citations is the sum of citations given to patents filed within
each county-decade; Independent Average Citations is calculated as number of county-decade citations
divided by the number of county-decade patents (it is set to zero when there are no patents).

                                          Number of        Mean   Std     50th   75th   90th   95th   99th
                                         Observations             Dev     Pctl   Pctl   Pctl   Pctl   Pctl
 Panel A: Patent-level Data

 Patents filed in 1910­1929
 Independent Number Citations               469,000        2.1     4.1     1      3      6      8      16
 Firm Number Citations                      251,000        2.1     3.8     1      3      6      8      16
 Patents filed in 1930­1949
 Independent Number Citations               246,000        5.4     7.7     3      7     12     17      31
 Firm Number Citations                      343,000        5.7     7.7     4      7     13     18      33

 Panel B: County-decade-level Data

 Patents filed in 1910­1929
 Independent Number Patents                  5,950         78.8    546    13     34     99.5   217    1245
 Firm Number Patents                         5,950         42.2    381     0      3     25.5    92     885
 Independent Number Citations                5,950         166    1,286   21     59     196    441    2,689
 Firm Number Citations                       5,950         90.2    831     0      5     50.5   193    2,063
 Independent Average Citations               5,950          1.7    1.4    1.5    2.2      3    3.6     6.1
 Firm Average Citations                      5,950          0.9    2.3     0     1.4     2.7   3.7      7
 Patents filed in 1930­1949
 Independent Number Patents                  5,950         41.3    304     4     13     46     107     715
 Firm Number Patents                         5,950         57.6    420     1      5     39     147    1,435
 Independent Number Citations                5,950         224    1,752   17     62     241    556    3,928
 Firm Number Citations                       5,950         329    2,389    0     26     219    784    8,269
 Independent Average Citations               5,950          3.9    3.6    3.8    5.5    7.3     9      14.4
 Firm Average Citations                      5,950          2.9    4.4     0      5     7.6     10      20




                                                      49
             Table 3: Bank Distress During the Great Depression and Innovation Quantity

The table shows estimates from a differences-in-differences regression of the number of patents by patent
type on bank distress during the Great Depression. The estimation strategy relies on cross-sectional
variation in bank distress across U.S. counties within a state. The sample is the near universe of all
patents granted by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) to either U.S. inventors or U.S. firms.
The unit of observation is county-decade, for the period 1910­1940. In column 1, we limit the sample
to independent patents and define the dependent variable as the logarithm of one plus the number of
independent patents filed over ten-year periods within each county. Independent are patents by inventors
residing in the U.S. that were either unassigned or assigned to individuals at the time of the patent
grant date. In column 2, we limit the sample to patents assigned to U.S. firms and define the dependent
variable as the logarithm of one plus the number of U.S. firm patents filed over ten-year periods within
each county. Firm patents are those that were assigned to a U.S. company at the time of the patent
grant date. In column 3, the dependent variable is the logarithm of one plus the number of all U.S.
patents filed over ten-year periods within each county. Bank Distress is an indicator variable equal to 1
for counties with at least one bank suspension during the Great Depression years of 1930 through 1933,
inclusive. The estimates of the effect of bank distress on patents are the coefficients on the interaction
between Bank Distress and the After1929 indicator, which equals one for the observations starting from
the 1930s decade. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. *, **, and *** indicate significance
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                     (1)                         (2)                      (3)
                             Ln(# Ind. Patents+1)        Ln(# Firm Patents+1)    Ln(# Total Patents+1)
 BankDistress X After1929            -0.127***                  0.016                   -0.105***
                                     (-4.47)                    (0.60)                  (-3.42)
 StateXTime FE                          Y                          Y                        Y
 County FE                              Y                          Y                        Y
 Start Decade                         1910                       1910                     1910
 End Decade                           1940                       1940                     1940
 Adj R-Sq                             0.895                      0.896                    0.903
 Obs                                 11,900                     11,900                   11,900




                                                    50
Table 4: Bank Distress During the Great Depression and Independent Innovation Across Technology
Classes

The table shows estimates from a differences-in-differences regression of the number of independent
patents across technology classes on bank distress during the Great Depression. The estimation strategy
relies on cross-sectional variation in bank distress across U.S. counties within a state. The sample is the
near universe of all independent patents granted by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO).
Independent are patents by inventors residing in the U.S. that were either unassigned or assigned to in-
dividuals at the time of the patent grant date. The unit of observation is county-decade-technology class
in columns 1 and 2, and county-decade in columns 3 through 7, for the period 1910­1940. In columns
1 through 7, the dependent variable is the logarithm of one plus the number of independent patents. In
columns 1 and 2, we count patents within each county-decade-technology class. In columns 3 through 7,
we limit the sample to 5 most frequent patented technology classes by independent inventors in the 1920s:
column 3 ­ human necessities (CPC class A); column 4 ­ performing operations or transporting (CPC
class B); column 5 ­ fixed constructions (CPC class E); column 6 ­ mechanical engineering, lighting,
heating, weapons, blasting engines or pumps (CPC class F); column 7 ­ physics (CPC class G). Bank
Distress is an indicator variable equal to 1 for counties with at least one bank suspension during the Great
Depression years of 1930 through 1933, inclusive. The estimates of the effect of bank distress on patents
are the coefficients on the interaction between Bank Distress and the After1929 indicator, which equals
one for the observations starting from the 1930s decade and onwards. Standard errors are clustered at
the county level. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                          Ln(# Independent Patents+1)
                                   (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)
 BankDistress X After1929        -0.140*** -0.140*** -0.142*** -0.156*** -0.151*** -0.148*** -0.101***
                                 (-8.78)   (-8.72)   (-5.63)   (-5.79)   (-6.65)   (-6.01)   (-5.30)
 StateXTime FE                     Y          Y             Y         Y          Y         Y          Y
 County FE                         Y          Y             Y         Y          Y         Y          Y
 TechnologyXStateXTime FE          N          Y             N         N          N         N          N
 Technology                        All        All           A         B          E         F          G
 Start Decade                     1910       1910          1910      1910       1910      1910       1910
 End Decade                       1940       1940          1940      1940       1940      1940       1940
 Adj R-Sq                        0.733      0.830         0.842     0.859      0.789     0.823      0.804
 Obs                             59,500     59,500        11,900    11,900     11,900    11,900     11,900




                                                     51
Table 5: Bank Distress, Other Economic Shocks, and Independent Innovation during the Great Depression

The table shows that the results on lower independent patenting in high bank distress counties during the
Great Depression remain robust to controlling for the potential differential trends due to ex-ante county
characteristics or other economic shocks during the Great Depression. The sample is the near universe of
independent patents granted by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) to either U.S. inventors
or U.S. firms. Independent are patents by inventors residing in the U.S. that were either unassigned or
assigned to individuals at the time of the patent grant date. The unit of observation is county-decade,
for the period 1910­1940. In columns 1 through 6, the dependent variable is the logarithm of one plus
the number of independent patents filed over ten-year periods within each county. Bank Distress is an
indicator variable equal to 1 for counties with at least one bank suspension during the Great Depression
years of 1930 through 1933, inclusive. The estimates of the effect of bank distress on patents are the
coefficients on the interaction between Bank Distress and After1929 indicator, which equals one for the
observations starting from the 1930s decade and onwards. In columns 1 and 2, respectively, we control
for the size of counties, as proxied by the logarithm of county's population as of 1920 U.S. Census, and
a dummy for counties with less than six banks as of 1929. In column 3, we control for the importance of
manufacturing proxied by the share of population in manufacturing over total population (times 100). In
columns 4 and 5, we control for the county-level demand shocks to make sure the results are not driven
by changes in local demand. Unemployment, 1937 is the county-level unemployment rate during the 1937
recession. Chg Retail Sales, 1929-33 is the county-level change in retail sales, defined as log difference
in retail sales between 1933 and 1929. All these controls are interacted with the After1929 indicator.
Finally, in column 6 we control for all of these variables together. Standard errors are clustered at the
county level. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                              Ln(# Independent Patents+1)
                                            (1)         (2)          (3)       (4)          (5)    (6)
 BankDistress X After1929                 -0.082*** -0.089*** -0.125*** -0.126*** -0.125***       -0.065**
                                          (-2.78)   (-3.04)   (-4.35)   (-4.40)   (-4.34)         (-2.22)
 Ln(Population, 1920) X After1929         -0.092***                                               -0.110***
                                          (-6.00)                                                 (-5.74)
 < 6 Banks, 1929 X After1929                         0.134***                                      0.040
                                                    (4.92)                                        (1.30)
 Manuf./Pop., 1929 X After1929                                 0.002                               0.006***
                                                              (1.09)                              (3.61)
 Unemployment, 1937 X After1929                                         -0.498                     1.531
                                                                        (-0.31)                   (0.80)
 Chg Retail Sales, 1929-33, X After1929                                           -0.041          -0.010
                                                                                  (-0.64)         (-0.16)
 StateXTime FE                               Y          Y             Y         Y          Y         Y
 County FE                                   Y          Y             Y         Y          Y         Y
 Start Decade                              1910       1910          1910      1910       1910      1910
 End Decade                                1940       1940          1940      1940       1940      1940
 Adj R-Sq                                  0.896      0.895         0.892     0.895      0.892     0.894
 Obs                                      11,792     11,900        11,768    11,892     11,764    11,676




                                                   52
        Table 6: The 1917-1920 Agricultural Shock and Innovation during the Great Depression

The table presents estimates from a differences-in-differences regression and shows the relationship be-
tween the 1917-1920 agricultural shock and subsequent innovation following the Great Depression. The
estimation strategy relies on cross-sectional variation in the shock across U.S. counties within a state. The
sample is the near universe of all patents granted by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) to
either U.S. inventors or U.S. firms. The unit of observation is county-decade, for the period 1910­1940.
In all columns, the independent variable, CngCommPrice, 1917-1920 X After 1929, is the interaction
between After1929 indicator and CngCommPrice, 1917-1920, which is the county-level change from 1917
to 1920 in the international commodity price index calculated for each county, where weights are the crop
share of a given farm product out of total county farm output and prices are international farm product
prices (Rajan and Ramcharan 2015). In column 1, the dependent variable is the interaction between the
After1929 indicator, which equals one for the observations starting from the 1930s decade and onwards,
and the Bank Distress indicator, which equals 1 for counties with at least one bank suspension during the
Great Depression years of 1930 through 1933, inclusive. In column 2, we limit the sample to independent
patents and define the dependent variable as the logarithm of one plus the number of independent patents
filed over ten-year periods within each county. Independent are patents by inventors residing in the U.S.
that were either unassigned or assigned to individuals at the time of the patent grant date. In columns 3,
the dependent variable is the logarithm of one plus the number of all patents filed over ten-year periods
within each county. The estimates of the effect of the agricultural shock on patents are the coefficients
on the interaction between CngCommPrice, 1917-1920 and After1929. Standard errors are clustered at
the county level. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                 (1)                      (2)                     (3)
                                       BankDistress X After1929   Ln(# Ind. Patents+1)   Ln(# Total Patents+1)
 CngCommPrice, 1917-1920 X After1929            0.029***                 -0.050***              -0.043***
                                                (6.53)                   (-7.79)                (-6.26)
 StateXTime FE                                    Y                        Y                      Y
 County FE                                        Y                        Y                      Y
 Start Decade                                    1910                     1910                   1910
 End Decade                                      1940                     1940                   1940
 Adj R-Sq                                       0.767                    0.897                  0.905
 Obs                                            11,316                   11,316                 11,316




                                                     53
    Table 7: Bank Distress During the Great Depression and Innovation Quantity in the Long Run

The table shows estimates from a differences-in-differences regression of the number of patents on bank
distress during the Great Depression in the long-run. The estimation strategy relies on cross-sectional
variation in bank distress across U.S. counties within a state. The sample is the near universe of all
patents granted by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) to either U.S. inventors or U.S.
firms. The unit of observation is county-decade, where decades include 1910 through 1990. In column
1, we limit the sample to independent patents and define the dependent variable as the logarithm of one
plus the number of independent patents filed over ten-year periods within each county. Independent are
patents by inventors residing in the U.S. that were either unassigned or assigned to individuals at the
time of the patent grant date. In column 2, we limit the sample to patents assigned to U.S. firms and
define the dependent variable as the logarithm of one plus the number of U.S. firm patents filed over
ten-year periods within each county. In column 3, the dependent variable is the logarithm of one plus the
number of all U.S. patents filed over ten-year periods within each county. Bank Distress is an indicator
variable equal to 1 for counties with at least one bank suspension during the Great Depression years of
1930 through 1933, inclusive. In the short run, the estimates of the effect of bank distress on patents
are the coefficients on the interaction between Bank Distress and the After1929 indicator, which equals
one for the observations starting from the 1930s decade and onwards. In the long run, the estimates
of the effect of bank distress on patents are the coefficients on the interaction between Bank Distress
and After1939 indicator, which equals one for observations starting with the 1940 decade and onwards.
Standard errors are clustered at the county level. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%,
and 1% levels, respectively.

                                        (1)                       (2)                      (3)
                                 Ln(# Ind. Pat.+1)         Ln(# Firm Pat.+1)         Ln(# Tot. Pat.+1)
 BankDistress X After1929              -0.116***                 0.014                     -0.101***
                                       (-3.70)                   (0.50)                    (-3.07)
 BankDistress X After1939              -0.094***                 0.129***                  -0.023
                                       (-3.05)                   (3.39)                    (-0.66)
 StateXTime FE                           Y                         Y                         Y
 County FE                               Y                         Y                         Y
 Start Decade                           1910                      1910                      1910
 End Decade                             1990                      1990                      1990
 Adj R-Sq                              0.863                     0.857                     0.875
 Obs                                   26,775                    26,775                    26,775




                                                     54
              Table 8: Bank Distress During the Great Depression and Innovation Quality

The table shows estimates from a differences-in-differences regression looking at changes in patent quality
metrics following the Great Depression. The estimation strategy relies on cross-sectional variation in bank
distress across U.S. counties within a state. The sample is the near universe of all patents granted by
the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) to either U.S. inventors or U.S. firms. The sample of
future patent citations includes all patents granted by the USPTO, including independent, U.S firm and
non-U.S. patents. The unit of observation is county-decade, for the period 1910­1940. In column 1,
the dependent variable is the logarithm of one plus the total number of future patent citations citing all
independent patents filed over each ten-year period within a county. Independent are patents by inventors
residing in the U.S. that were either unassigned or assigned to individuals at the time of the patent grant
date. In column 2, we repeat the same analysis looking at all patents (firms and independent inventors).
In column 3, we instead look at the (logarithm plus one) of the average number of citations received by
independent patents. In column 4, we repeat the same analysis looking at all patents. Bank Distress is an
indicator variable equal to 1 for counties with at least one bank suspension during the Great Depression
years of 1930 through 1933, inclusive. The estimates of the effect of bank distress on patents are the
coefficients on the interaction between Bank Distress and the After1929 indicator, which equals one for
the observations starting from the 1930s decade and onwards. Standard errors are clustered at the county
level. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                   (1)            (2)                (3)                    (4)
                               Ind. # Cit     Tot. # Cit      Ind. Avg Citations     Tot. Avg Citations
 BankDistress X After1929        0.013           0.031              0.137***               0.125***
                                 (0.29)          (0.67)             (4.98)                 (4.58)
 StateXTime FE                      Y              Y                   Y                      Y
 County FE                          Y              Y                   Y                      Y
 Start Decade                     1910           1910                1910                   1910
 End Decade                       1940           1940                1940                   1940
 Adj R-Sq                         0.802          0.825               0.368                  0.398
 Obs                             11,900         11,900              11,900                 11,900




                                                    55
             Table 9: Bank Distress During the Great Depression and Quality Distribution

The table shows estimates from a differences-in-differences regression looking at quality metrics. The
estimation strategy relies on cross-sectional variation in bank distress across U.S. counties within a
state. The sample is the near universe of all patents granted by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office
(USPTO) to either U.S. inventors or U.S. firms. The sample of future patent citations includes all
patents granted by the USPTO, including independent, U.S firm and non-U.S. patents. The unit of
observation is county-decade, for the period 1910­1940. In column 1, the dependent variable is the
total number of independent patents in the top 1% of the citation distribution of the corresponding
technology class during 1910­1940 that were filed in the county-decade. In column 2, the dependent
variable is the total number of independent patents in the bottom 99% of the citation distribution of
the corresponding technology class during 1910­1940 that were filed in the county-decade. In column
3 and 4, we construct equivalent outcomes but looking at the top 10% and bottom 90%, and in 5 and
6 the same for top 25% and bottom 75%. The outcome is always transformed as logarithm plus one.
Bank Distress is an indicator variable equal to 1 for counties with at least one bank suspension during
the Great Depression years of 1930 through 1933, inclusive. The estimates of the effect of bank distress
on patents are the coefficients on the interaction between Bank Distress and the After1929 indicator,
which equals one for the observations starting from the 1930s decade and onward. We control for
population in 1920 interacted with the After1929 indicator in all columns. Standard errors are clus-
tered at the county level. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.


                                 (1)          (2)            (3)        (4)           (5)          (6)
                               Top 1%      Bot. 99%        Top 10%   Bot. 90%      Top. 25%     Bot. 75%
  BankDistress X After1929      0.012       -0.083***      -0.013     -0.083***     -0.048*       -0.099***
                                (1.08)      (-2.82)        (-0.63)    (-2.83)       (-1.89)       (-3.35)
  StateXTime FE                   Y           Y              Y           Y            Y             Y
  County FE                       Y           Y              Y           Y            Y             Y
  Start Decade                   1910        1910           1910        1910         1910          1910
  End Decade                     1940        1940           1940        1940         1940          1940
  Adj R-Sq                      0.754       0.895          0.839       0.892        0.871         0.883
  Obs                           11,792      11,792         11,792      11,792       11,792        11,792




                                                      56
Table 10: Bank Distress During the Great Depression and Individual Inventor Patenting During the
1930s among Independent Inventors of the 1920s

The table examines the potential reallocation of independent inventors into firms during the 1930s in
counties with greater bank distress during the Great Depression. The estimation strategy relies on cross-
sectional variation in bank distress across U.S. counties within a state. To test for reallocation, we limit
the sample to individual U.S. inventors who: 1) had at least one independent patent granted by the
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) during the 1920s; and 2) had at least one patent granted
during the 1930s; and 3) we could find the inventor in 1920 or 1930 censuses (to assign the inventor's
location during the Depression, we use the location in the 1930 Census and, when this is not available,
the location in the 1920 Census). Independents are patents by inventors residing in the U.S. that were
either unassigned or assigned to individuals at the time of the patent grant date. In all columns, the
dependent variable equals 1 if the inventor obtains at least one patent assigned to a U.S. firm in the
1930s, and 0 if he obtains at least one independent patent in the 1930s. Column 1 includes state fixed
effects. Column 2 adds additional county-level controls (log of population in 1920), while column 3 adds
a set of individual-level controls based on the 1920 Census (homeownership, log of inventor age, status
as an entrepreneur, and gender). Bank Distress % is defined at the county-level and equal to the ratio of
bank deposits at banks suspended between 1930 and 1933 divided by total banks deposits in 1929. The
results with other definitions of bank distress variable are in Table A.13. Standard errors are clustered
at the county level. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                     Patent in Firm in 1930s
                                       (1)                    (2)                     (3)
 Bank Distress>Med                    0.020*                 0.025**                 0.024**
                                      (1.69)                 (2.07)                  (2.05)
 State FE                               Y                      Y                       Y
 Patent Post                            Y                      Y                       Y
 Pre Ind Pat                            Y                      Y                       Y
 County Controls                        N                      Y                       Y
 Ind. Controls                          N                      N                       Y
 Adj R-Sq                             0.019                  0.020                   0.026
 Obs                                  5,295                  5,294                   5,294




                                                    57
Table 11: Bank Distress During the Great Depression and Individual Inventor Geographic Mobility
During the 1930s

The table examines the potential geographic mobility of inventors away from counties with greater bank
distress during the Great Depression. The estimation strategy relies on cross-sectional variation in bank
distress across U.S. counties within a state. To test for geographic mobility, we limit the sample to
individual U.S. inventors who had at least one patent granted by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office
(USPTO) during the 1930s. In all columns, the dependent variable equals 1 if the inventor' county in
the 1940 complete count Census is different from the county where he lived as of the 1920 Census. Bank
Distress is an indicator variable equal to 1 for counties with at least one bank suspension during the
Great Depression years of 1930 through 1933, inclusive. Bank Distress % is defined at the county-level
and equal to the ratio of bank deposits at banks suspended between 1930 and 1933 divided by total banks
deposits in 1929. Bank Distress > Median is an indicator variable equal to 1 for counties with an above
median % of deposits in suspended banks, calculated as the cumulative deposits in bank suspended from
1930 through 1933 as a share of bank deposits in 1929. Standard errors are clustered at the county level.
*, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                  Inter-County Move in 1930s
                                     (1)                    (2)                     (3)
 Bank Distress>Med                  -0.002
                                    (-0.21)
 Bank Distress %                                          0.026
                                                          (1.30)
 Bank Distress                                                                    0.003
                                                                                  (0.30)
 State FE                              Y                     Y                       Y
 Patent Pre                            Y                     Y                       Y
 Controls                              Y                     Y                       Y
 Adj R-Sq                            0.030                 0.030                   0.030
 Obs                                66,693                66,693                  66,693




                                                   58
