                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             WORKER EMPOWERMENT AND SUBJECTIVE EVALUATION:
                ON BUILDING AN EFFECTIVE CONFLICT CULTURE

                                     W. Bentley MacLeod
                                     Victoria Valle Lara
                                      Christian Zehnder

                                     Working Paper 27857
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27857


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2020




We very much appreciate comments from Björn Bartling, Ernst Fehr, Maria Guadalupe, Michael
Kosfeld, Ola Kvaloy, Jean-Robert Tyran, Giorgio Zanarone and seminar participants at
Workshop on Behavioral Public Economics, Vienna, Workshop on Organizational Economics,
University of Konstanz, Brownbag Seminar, University of Lausanne, Workshop on Incentives
and Motivation, Stavanger, SIOE, Stockholm, Organizational Economics Workshop, Berkeley,
NBER Organizational Economics Workshop, and Relational Contracts Workshop, Moscow. We
also gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Swiss National Science Foundation (Grant
No. 100018_152903i. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by W. Bentley MacLeod, Victoria Valle Lara, and Christian Zehnder. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Worker Empowerment and Subjective Evaluation: On Building an Effective Conflict Culture
W. Bentley MacLeod, Victoria Valle Lara, and Christian Zehnder
NBER Working Paper No. 27857
September 2020
JEL No. D02,D03,J33,J41,M5,M52

                                          ABSTRACT

Although conflicts typically lead to a waste of resources, organizations may still benefit from a
corporate culture that tolerates or even encourages conflicts. The reason is that coordinated
conflicts may help to enforce informal contracts and foster cooperation. In this paper we report
results of a series of laboratory experiments designed to explore whether and under what
conditions an efficiency-enhancing conflict culture can emerge. Using a principal-worker setup
with subjective performance evaluation, we show that establishing a functional conflict culture is
a delicate matter. If conflicts are encouraged in a careless, hands-off manner, the destructive side
of conflicts is likely to dominate. To be successful a conflict culture requires a careful
management of fairness norms. In our experiment we find that conflicts have positive net effects
on efficiency only if an explicit code of conduct is established and conflicts are institutionalized
through a grievance process. Thus, providing workers with more power may be a necessary but
not sufficient condition for improving productivity when performance evaluations are subjective.


W. Bentley MacLeod                               Christian Zehnder
Department of Economics                          Faculty of Business and Economics
Columbia University                              University of Lausanne
420 West 118th Street, MC 3308                   Quartier UNIL-Chamberonne
New York, NY 10027                               Internef 612
and NBER                                         CH-1015 Lausanne
wbmacleod@wbmacleod.net                          Switzerland
                                                 christian.zehnder@unil.ch
Victoria Valle Lara
UNIL-Chamberonne
Internef
CH-1015 Lausanne
Lausanne, not CH-1015
Switzerland
vikivallelara@gmail.com
                         "A good manager doesn't try to eliminate conflict; he tries to keep it from wasting
                         the energies of his people. If you're the boss and your people fight you openly when
                         they think that you are wrong­that's healthy."
                                                                                   Robert Townsend (2007)



                                          1. Introduction

A corporate culture that tolerates or even encourages conflicts in case of perceived injus-
tice entails both opportunities and dangers. On one hand, credible threats of conflict may
motivate otherwise non-complying parties to respect social norms. On the other hand, an
escalation of conflict may lead to waste of resources. In this paper we study conflicts in the
context of employment relations with subjective performance evaluation. We report evidence
from a series of laboratory experiments illustrating that the formation of a healthy conflict
culture is a delicate matter. If conflicts are managed in a careless, hands-off manner, their
destructive side is likely to dominate. Productive conflicts require a coordination of norms.
In our experiment conflicts have positive net effects only if an explicit code of conduct is
established and conflicts are institutionalized through a grievance process.
   Ample evidence shows that perceived unfairness is an important trigger of conflicts. Many
people engage in costly retaliation in response to violations of implicit agreements that are
anchored by norms. Famous examples of such negative reactions to norm violations include
rejections of small offers in ultimatum games (Güth et al., 1982; Kahneman et al., 1986),
punishment of free-riders in public goods experiments (Gächter and Fehr, 2000; Ostrom et al.,
1992), or third-party interventions in distribution games (Leibbrandt and López-Pérez, 2012;
Gächter and Fehr, 2000). Although such confrontations are destructive and inefficient in the
short term (Dreber et al., 2008; Egas and Riedl, 2008), they can be ultimately efficiency-
enhancing because--once established--the threat of retaliation may induce norm breakers
to comply and cooperate (Gächter et al., 2008).
   Existing studies reporting an efficiency-enhancing effect of conflicts have predominantly
focused on deterministic set-ups with symmetric information (see, Chaudhuri, 2011, for a
survey).1 These findings may therefore not generalize to more complex settings like em-
ployment relationships, which are characterized by hidden actions, stochastic input-output
links, and noisy information. Probabilistic outcomes and information asymmetries may con-
siderably complicate the role of conflicts because misaligned views on what constitutes fair
behavior may trigger lots of destructive misunderstandings.

1
 Grechenig et al. (2010) and Ambrus and Greiner (2012) show that peer-punishment technologies are less
beneficial in public good games in which players have imperfect information about contributions of others.
                                                     1
   Our experiments build on a principal-agent game with subjective performance evaluation.
The Worker's effort is private information and creates a stochastic output that neither the
Principal nor to the Worker can observe. Instead, the Principal and the Worker each get a
private, subjective, and non-contractible output signal. These signals are noisy and imper-
fectly correlated so that the Principal and the Worker can have contradicting information.
After observing the subjective signal, principals decide whether or not to pay a bonus. The
Worker then can decide to retaliate. To study the impact of conflicts on efficiency, we com-
pare two treatments: a no conflict treatment that excludes conflict by design and a conflict
treatment in which workers can engage in costly conflict behavior. We implement conflicts in
the form of costly punishment to reflect the view that the immediate consequence of conflict
is typically negative for all involved parties, but mostly so for the party under attack.
   Under the self-interest assumption, subgame-perfection implies low effort in both treat-
ments: conflict and no conflict. And neither bonus payments nor costly conflicts ever occur
on the equilibrium path. Efficiency, in contrast, requires that the Worker exerts high effort.
Intuitively, the presence of fairness considerations might improve matters in this context.
Even in the absence of conflicts, a fair-minded Principal who believes that her Worker pro-
vided high effort can use the bonus payment to return the favor (gift-exchange, see Akerlof,
1980). Moreover, if conflicts are present, a fair-minded Worker can discipline the Principal
through the threat of punishment so that even a selfish Principal may have an incentive pay
the bonus (Fehr and Fischbacher, 2004, 2003). However, a complicating issue is that it is
not obvious what fair compensation entails in our set-up.
   Previous work on bargaining games shows that perceived fairness is both context specific
and shaped by strategic considerations (Prasnikar and Roth, 1992; Binmore et al., 1993)
and these effects are even more pronounced under uncertainty (Kagel et al., 1996). In our
environment uncertainty manifests itself in the stochastic link between the Worker's input
and output and may imply that multiple fairness norms co-exist.2 There are two norms
with a particular intuitive salience in our context. The first fairness norm requires that
agents are compensated for exerting high effort (the pay-for-input norm). The second norm,
in contrast, requires that workers should be rewarded only if output turns out to be high
(the pay-for-output norm).3 For a conflict culture to function it is crucial that the Worker
and the Principal agree on the fairness norm upon which their implicit agreement builds.
If trading partners (unknowingly) disagree about the definition of norm-abiding behavior,

2
 MacLeod and Malcomson (1998) discuss the existence of multiple equilibrium norms in labor markets within
the context of self-enforcing relational contracts.
3
 The labels we use for fairness norms refer to Lazear's (1986) categorization of compensations schemes.
However, whereas Lazear's work aims at identifying determinants of different compensation forms, our
interest is in exploring the efficiency consequences of norm enforcement in employment relationships.
                                                   2
misunderstandings will be interpreted as breach of agreement and may lead to wasteful
conflicts. Moreover, for efficiency it not only matters that parties coordinate on a norm, but
it is also important which particular norm they coordinate on.
   The pay-for-input (PI) norm prescribes that the Worker provides high effort and the Prin-
cipal reciprocates with bonus pay. Workers who enforce the PI norm ignore their subjective
output signal and view any non-payment of the bonus as breach of agreement. If there
are sufficiently many norm enforcers, the threat of conflict will induce principals to pay the
bonus irrespective of their own subjective performance signal. The advantage of implicit
agreements that build on the PI norm is that cooperation does not require any conflicts on
the equilibrium path. Principals are disciplined by the threat of conflict alone. The downside
is that the incentive structure established by the PI norm fails to motivate selfish agents to
exert high effort. In fact, unconditional bonus payments invite selfish agents to invade the
system and to free-ride on the norm enforcement of others. If there is a large fraction of
self-interested Workers, the PI norm will not lead to a large increase in performance.4
   The pay-for-output (PO) norm prescribes that the Worker exerts high effort, but feels
entitled to a bonus payment if and only if his own subjective signal suggests that output
is high. Likewise, the Principal pays a bonus if, and only if, he observes a high subjective
performance signal. The upside of the PO norm is that it deters the shirking of self-interested
agents by connecting performance to pay. If a sufficiently large population of agents enforce
the PO norm, principals have an incentive to make signal-contingent bonus payments and all
agents (including those who are selfish) have an incentive to provide high effort. However,
since the Worker's signal of performance is imperfectly correlated with the Principal's signal,
the two parties may receive conflicting signals. In particular, the Principal might observe a
low signal, and not pay the bonus, while the Agent observes a high signal and expects to
get a bonus. In this case, the PO norm implies that the Worker will punish the Principal.
Thus, there exists conflict on the equilibrium path. However, as long as the probability of
contradicting signals is not too high, the damage created by occasional conflicts is largely
dominated by the efficiency gains from full effort provision.
   Behavioral contract theory typically studies how social preferences shape behavior and
contract design (Fehr and Schmidt, 1999; Fehr et al., 2011; Koszegi, 2014). This research
takes the population of workers and their preferences as given and tries to adjust contracts
and institutions such that performance is high. In this paper, in contrast, we take the
view that preferences are partially endogenous in that they may depend on the institutional
environment. Specifically, we assume that the details of the context may affect the selection
4
 Existing evidence documents strong heterogeneity in the degree to which people care about fairness.
Whereas some people make considerable sacrifices to enforce fairness norms, others behavior is best de-
scribed as approximately selfish (see, e.g., Cooper and Kagel, 2016, for a recent survey of the literature).
                                                     3
of fairness norms that trading parties use as the basis of their implicit agreements. We
explore the coordination on fairness norms within the context of two treatment conditions­
conflict and no conflict. Thus the first question we ask is whether or not the potential
for conflict can enhance organizational performance. Second, we compare these treatments
across varying contexts, while holding the relationship between actions and payoffs fixed. In
standard behavioral contract models, where preferences are defined exclusively over payoffs
and the distribution of payoffs between the two parts is fixed, context should have no effect
on behaviour. If it does (and we find that they does), then this is evidence that context (e.g.
in the form of "corporate culture") can affect behavior.
    Our experiments aim at exploring whether and under what conditions an efficiency-
enhancing conflict culture based on the pay-for-output norm can emerge. In our first exper-
iment (henceforth called "baseline experiment") participants spontaneously interact in our
subjective evaluation setup without any further intervention. Participants play the game
for 15 periods with changing partners (random matching protocol). We observe that par-
ticipants fail to build a functioning conflict culture in the baseline experiment. The conflict
treatment increases the frequency of bonus payments and leads to a small, but statistically
insignificant increase in effort relative to the no conflict treatment. However, overall, the
damage inflicted by the emergence of conflicts is more important than the small increase
in productivity, so that total surplus decreases in the presence of conflicts. The underlying
problem is that participants fail to coordinate on the pay-for-output norm. About half of the
workers in the conflict treatment induce costly sanctions, but many of those norm enforcers
exhibit sanction patterns that are more in line with the pay-for-input norm. The multiplicity
of norms leads to uncoordinated conflicts with only limited motivating effects on workers.
    Our baseline experiment teaches us an interesting lesson: a careless, hands-off implemen-
tation of a conflict culture can easily backfire. Uncoordinated conflicts are costly and have
only a very limited positive impact on motivation.
    At the same time, one might argue that the lack of any communication makes coordina-
tion "unnaturally" complicated. In most real-life settings, communication is available and
organizations can encourage conversations on conflict to foster the development of broadly
accepted fairness norms. Our second experiment (the "communication experiment") inves-
tigates the extent to which communication helps the trading parties to coordinate on an
efficiency-enhancing use of conflicts. To this purpose, we added an additional stage at the
beginning of every period of the experiment. In this communication stage principals and
workers were able to announce their planned strategy through the selection of a message
from a pre-defined set of messages.



                                               4
   Our second experiment reveal that communication does not necessarily facilitate the estab-
lishment of an efficiency-enhancing conflict culture. As in the baseline experiment, average
effort in the conflict treatment is only slightly higher than in the no conflict treatment and
overall surplus decreases in the presence of conflicts. All in all, it seems that communication
further reinforces rather than mitigates the problems observed in the baseline experiment.
In particular, communication leads to an even stronger use of the pay-for-input norm than
in the baseline experiment and the overall negative impact of conflicts on efficiency remains.
   The communication experiment confirms that self-coordination on an efficiency-enhancing
fairness norm is difficult in our setting. As a next step we study the impact of a direct external
appeal to coordinate on the pay-for-output norm. Our third experiment ("the agreement
experiment") explores the effectiveness of a code of conduct in our set-up. We begin each
period with a stage in which we ask the Principal and the Worker to electronically sign a
non-binding agreement in which they confirm their intention to follow the pay-for-output
norm. Failure to sign the agreement by at least one party implies that trade does not occur
and an unattractive outside option is implemented. Surprisingly, this intervention has only
very weak effects. Despite the fact that the vast majority of participants sign the agreement,
most players do not feel obliged to respect the rules of the code of conduct. As a consequence,
the results of the agreement experiment are similar to those of the baseline experiment.
   Our fourth and final experiment ("the grievance experiment") adds a decisive feature to the
agreement experiment: institutionalized conflicts. The trading parties sign the same code of
conduct as in the agreement experiment. The only difference is that the initiation of conflict
requires a formal grievance process. If workers intend to engage in a conflict with their
principal they need to file a complaint in which they explicitly confirm that the Principal
has violated the code of conduct. It is important to emphasize that in our experiment the
institutionalization of the conflict is just a re-framing of the exact same action space that
we use in the agreement experiment. In particular, there is no verification process after a
worker files a complaint and there is no material consequence to lying.
   Nevertheless, we observe that outcomes in the grievance experiment are substantially dif-
ferent from those in our other experiments: the trading parties follow more frequently the
pay-for-output norm and conflicts are much more coordinated. Moreover, the conflict pat-
terns also induce the principals to make their bonus payments contingent on their subjective
signal so that even selfish workers have a monetary incentive to exert high effort. As a con-
sequence, there is a significant increase in the average effort level and higher total surplus in
the conflict treatment relative to the no conflict treatment.
   Our results have implications for conflict management in organizations. The management
literature recognizes that conflicts are inevitable and many authors recommend tactics and

                                                5
procedures to handle conflicts constructively (Coleman et al., 2014; De Dreu et al., 2008;
Tjosvold et al., 2014). Our findings suggest that even conflicts that appear to be purely
wasteful may be ultimately efficiency-enhancing because they establish an implicit incentive
system. The challenging part for management is the creation of broadly shared fairness
norms on which implicit agreements within the organization are built. We believe that the
effective choice of managerial interventions that coordinate people on specific norms is part
of what creating a corporate culture means. We share the view of identity economics (Akerlof
and Kranton, 2000, 2010) that preferences should be modeled as a function of social context,
because it is the context that defines the norms with which people identify (see also Krupka
et al., 2017). This perspective also relates to insights in the sociology and law literatures.
Already Weber (1947) recognized the importance of norms and legitimacy for modifying
individual behavior and argued that parties are more likely to follow "legitimate" norms.
The literature on the expressive role of law discusses how rules that are viewed as legitimate
affect behavior (see McAdams, 2017).
   Our work also extends the literature on norms in two ways. On the theory side, we
introduce the notion of a norm equilibrium. This concept allows us to establish the stability
of a fairness norm with respect to invasion from players following another norm (including
players who follow the rational, self-interest "norm"). As detailed above, there are three
natural norms in our experiment: pure self-interest, pay-for-input, and pay-for-output. In
the no conflict treatment only the pure self-interest norm is an equilibrium. In the conflict
treatment, in contrast, both the pure self-interest norm and the pay-for-output norms are
equilibria and pay-for-output is the payoff-dominant equilibrium. This result motivates our
quest for contextual conditions that favor coordination on the pay-for-output norm.
   On the empirical side, we demonstrate that a feature of our environment is that outcomes
can be represented with a binary tree. If subjects are assumed to choose a norm with
error, then the probability distribution of the end nodes of the tree can be represented by
a multi-nomial logit. Hence adherence to a norm can be estimated using an off-the-shelf,
multi-nomial regression. This approach not only allows us to measure whether a particular
norm gets better or worse at describing the data as we move across environments, but it also
enables us to use a non-nested likelihood ratio test to formally test which norm does the
best job of fitting the data within a given treatment. We see this as a contribution to the
development of empirical methods for identifying and measuring social norms and cultures.
   The remainder of our paper is organized as follows. The next section introduces our
framework and defines the norm equilibrium. Section 3 presents the experimental results by
environment. In Section 4 we introduce a method to measure the prevalent social norm in a
given experiment. Section 5 concludes.

                                              6
                                      2. Framework

The Subjective Evaluation Game. Our work builds on a simplified version of the sub-
jective evaluation model introduced in MacLeod (Section III). In particular, we consider the
following contracting problem: The Principal hires a Worker and offers a contract (w, B ),
where w is a contractible base wage and B is a non-enforceable bonus that the Principal
can pay at her discretion. The Worker can choose an effort e  {0, 1} at cost c(e) = c × e,
where c > 0. The Worker's effort induces a stochastic return r  {rH , rL }, where rL  0,
  rH - rL > 0, P rob(r = rH |e) = e , and 1 > 1 > 0 > 0. The return is not observable,
neither for the Principal, nor for the Worker. However, both parties receive private and
subjective performance signals. The Principal's subjective signal sP  {0, 1} depends on the
return and is determined by the following conditional probabilities:

                                P r {sP = 1|r = rH } = p,
                                P r {sP = 1|r = rL } = 1 - p,

where p  (0.5, 1). The Worker's subjective signal sA  {0, 1} depends on the Principal's
signal and the corresponding conditional probabilities are:

                                P r {sA = 1|sP = 1} = q.
                                P r {sA = 1|sP = 0} = 1 - q,

where q  (0.5, 1).
   After having observed her signal, the Principal decides whether or not she pays the bonus
(b  {0, B }). In response to the bonus decision the Worker then decides whether or not to
initiate a conflict d  {0, 1} that reduces the Principal's payoff by an amount f (d) = dF ,
where F > 0. Engaging in a conflict also has a material cost for the Worker k (d) = dK ,
where 0 < K  F .
   Thus, the Principal and the Worker realize the following payoffs:

                                P = rL + e  - w - b - dF,
                                    A = w + b - c(e) - dK.

   The decisive parameters of this game are 1 , 0 , p, and q . These parameters govern
the stochastic relation between input (effort) and output (return), the degree to which the
Principal's signal is distorted, and the subjectiveness of the players' performance evaluation
(i.e., the correlation between the Principal's and the worker's signal). If q = 1 the signals
of the Principal and the Worker are always perfectly aligned and performance evaluation
is no longer subjective. If p = 1 the Principal has perfect information about the worker's


                                              7
output (thus, the special case p = q = 1 corresponds to the standard principal-agent model).
Finally, if 1 = 1 and 0 = 0, input and output are perfectly correlated (in this case, a simple
output-contingent contract implements first-best effort).
  To study the impact of conflicts on outcomes, we implement two versions of this game
in our experiment. In the no conflict condition, the game ends with the Principal's bonus
choice. In the conflict condition, the full game is played.

Norm Guided Behavior. The economic approach to studying behavior in such an en-
vironment typically relies on some version of a Nash equilibrium. Each party chooses a
strategy that maximizes their own material payoff given correct expectations of the other
party's behavior. Decades of research have shown that individuals do respond to material in-
centives, much as predicted by the theory. However, the evidence also reveals two important
qualifications: i) Individuals respond imperfectly: people make mistakes, do no consider all
the options, and process information incompletely (see, e.g., Simon, 1997; Rubinstein, 1998).
ii) Material payoffs are not the only driving force behind human behavior: many identify
with and respect social norms that are prevalent in their environment (see, e.g., Akerlof and
Kranton, 2000, 2010; Cooper and Kagel, 2016).
   We believe that there is an interesting link between bounded rationality and norm abid-
ance. A fundamental problem that complicates individuals' decision making process is that
the strategy space they face is huge.5 Even though our experiment is a simplified and highly
stylized version of employment, our setup still allows for a wide variety of behaviors, so
that it is not obvious what optimal or "appropriate" behavior is. We argue that norms may
mitigate this problem, because they increase the salience of certain strategies and therewith
reduce the perceived set of relevant options. As discussed in the introduction, there are two
fairness norms that seem natural in our environment. We borrow the terminology introduced
by Lazear (1986) and call the norms pay-for-input (PO) and pay-for-input (PI).
   Under the PI norm, the Worker agrees to provide high effort in exchange for generous
pay. This norm essentially corresponds to a version of gift-exchange (see Akerlof, 1980; Fehr
and Schmidt, 1999; Falk et al., 2003, , for example). When following this norm, the Worker
provides high effort in expectation of getting the bonus. If the Principal decides not to
pay the bonus, the Worker feels unfairly treated, and will, if given the chance, retaliate by
                                          PI      PI
punishing the Principal. Formally, let W     and P   be the strategies in the game described
above corresponding to adherence to the PI norm for the Worker and the Principal.
   The PO norm is closer to what classical agency theory predicts: if effort cannot be ob-
served, then the optimal contract should be one in which the Worker is rewarded for observed
performance measures. The twist in our experiment (relative to the standard agency model)
5This   is well known since the seminal work of Simon (1982).
                                                     8
is that performance signals are subjective and not observed by the other party. Under the PO
norm, the Worker therefore agrees to provide high effort in expectation of a bonus payment
for (subjectively perceived) high output. The Principal pays a bonus, if and only if, she
observes a high subjective signal herself. If the Worker and the Principal receive the same
signal, there will never be a conflict. If both signals are low, the Principal does not pay the
bonus, but the Worker accepts it. If both signals are high, the Principal pays the bonus and
the Worker takes no action. However, if the Worker's signal is positive, but the Principal's
signal is negative, the Worker will not get the bonus although he feels that he deserves it.
In this case, the Worker will engage in conflict and punish the Principal. Conflicting signals
in the reversed direction are not causing conflicts because in those cases the Worker simply
                                                                                    PO       PO
gets a bonus although he feels that he does not necessarily deserve it. Let W           and P
denote the strategies corresponding to adherence to the PO norm.
   Finally, we also consider the benchmark of purely cynical/self-interested players. In our
experiment it is costly to initiate conflict and, hence, a cynical/self-interested Worker would
never punish the Principal for being unfair. Given this, the cynical/self-interested Principal
would never face consequences for keeping the bonus for herself instead of paying it to the
Worker. Thus, the Worker will never be rewarded for high effort and, hence, will be better
off shirking. Under standard assumptions, this strategy combination is the unique sub-game
perfect Nash equilibrium of this game. It is obvious that the hypothesis that play can
be predicted by the sub-game perfect Nash equilibrium concept is soundly rejected by the
                                                     SI        SI
data, but it serves as a useful benchmark. Let W        and P     be the strategies in the game
corresponding to self-interested (SI) choices.
   In terms of organizing the results we propose to think in terms of a "norm" equilibrium,
motivated in part by Axelrod (1981) and Akerlof (1980). Instead of assuming that parties
can follow any strategy, let us suppose that cognitive/behavioral effects imply that parties
focus upon one of the three norms (PI, PO or SI). Hence, the strategy space for each player
is assumed to be given by:
                                       PI   PO   SI
                                   P = P  , P  , P  ,
                                       PI   PO   SI
                                   W = W  , W  , W  .

Let UP (P , W ) and UW (P , W ) be the corresponding payoffs for the Principal and the
Worker. Given this game, the notion of a Nash equilibrium is well defined in "norm space".
The intuition is that a norm is an equilibrium if no party has an incentive to unilaterally
switch to another norm (i.e., equilibrium norms are robust to an "invasion" of another norm).
   It is easy to see that in our game self-interest is the only equilibrium in the no conflict
treatment. The reason is that in the absence of a sanctioning mechanism the Principal

                                               9
always has an incentive to switch to SI norm and keep the bonus for herself (this holds for
both, the PI and the PO norm).
   In the conflict treatment the SI norm remains an equilibrium because the purely self-
interested strategies obviously are mutual best responses for both players. The PI norm is
not an equilibrium. Whereas the Principal would not have an incentive to switch norms if
the agent plays the PI strategy (conflicts enforce bonus payments), the unconditional bonus
payments imply that the Worker has an incentive to switch to the SI norm and shirk on effort.
The PI norm is therefore vulnerable to an "invasion" of self-interested agents. The PO norm,
in contrast, is an equilibrium in the conflict treatment. The logic is that the punishment
strategy of the Worker motivates the Principal to pay the bonus, and the contingent bonus
payments of the Principal motivate the Worker to provide high effort. The PO norm in the
conflict treatment is therefore the only equilibrium in which the worker provides high effort.
Notice though that the PO norm does not yield the first-best outcome, because it implies
that there are conflicts on the equilibrium path (if conflicting signals imply that the Worker
does not get a bonus although he feels that he deserves it).
   In practice it is unrealistic to expect that play will be characterized by a single norm.
However, we can measure how close behavior is to a particular norm. Notice that players
face a sequence of binary choices, that in turn can be viewed as a probability vector in a
simplex. For the Principal, she has a single choice - how much bonus to pay after having
observed her signal (sp  {0, 1}). Hence, the strategy of the Principal is given by:

                       P = (p0 , p1 )  2 = {(p0 , p1 ) |1  p0 , p1  0} ,

where p0 is the probability of paying a bonus when the signal is low (sP = 0), and p1 is the
probability of paying a bonus when the signal is high (sP = 1). With this notation it follows:
                           PI            PO            R
                           P  = (1, 1) , P  = (1, 0) , P = (0, 0) .

The Worker has a more complex decision. He needs to chose high or low effort and then
choose to initiate conflict depending upon his bonus and his observed signal. Suppose that
pe is the probability of high effort. Let his information set be given by I={B 1, B 0, 01, 00},
where B 1 means a bonus was paid and he observes a high signal, 01 is no bonus and low
signal and so on. Thus the strategy of the Worker can be given by vector of probabilities of
effort and imposing a cost upon the Principal:

                              W = (pe , pB 1 , pB 0 , p01 , p00 )  5 .




                                                10
The three types of norm behaviors are:
                                      PI
                                      W  = (1, 0, 0, 1, 1) ,
                                     PO
                                     W  = (1, 0, 0, 1, 0) ,
                                      SI
                                      W  = (0, 0, 0, 0, 0) .

Notice that the extensive form game tree is a binary tree with three players: Nature, Principal
and Worker. Since it is a binary tree we can estimate the strategies using a multi-nomial
logit. Specifically, each norm implies a binomial distribution at each node, which in turn
implies a probability distribution over the final nodes in the game that can be represented
by a logit model. We can then estimate how well the data is represented by a particular
combination of norms. The details are provided in Section 4.

                                   3. The Experiments

    With our experiments we explore the conditions under which an efficiency-enhancing con-
flict culture emerges. In the first experiment (the baseline experiment) participants play the
subjective evaluation game without any further intervention or clarification from the experi-
menter. We identify the causal effect of the opportunity to engage in conflicts by comparing
a treatment in which conflicts are excluded by design (no conflict treatment) to a treatment
in which the conflict option is available (conflict treatment). As we illustrate later, in this
first experiment the participants failed to use the conflict option in a beneficial way so that
efficiency was lower in the conflict treatment than in the no conflict treatment. In response
to the results of the first experiment, we decided to run a series of additional experiments
to explore different factors that potentially facilitate the emergence of a coordinated conflict
norm. In total, we run three additional experiments that explore the impact of structured
communication (the communication experiment), codes of conduct (the agreement experi-
ment), and institutionalized procedures (the grievance experiment).
    Each experiment stands on its own and includes at least 10 independent sessions comparing
a conflict and a no conflict treatment. Moreover, each experiment is based on data from about
200 participants (in all four experiments together we had 852 participants in 42 sessions).
As each experiment was conducted in a different time period, we present the results of each
experiment in isolation and do not pool our data in this section. We establish our main
results using two-sided, non-parametric tests that use session-level averages from the same
experiment as independent observations. We present additional results in Section 4 on norm
adherence across experiment. For this part we will use a pooled data set that includes
observations from all experiments together. Doing so allows us to apply more complex
statistical models.
                                               11
  We next describe the subjective evaluation game underlying all our experiments and pro-
vide details regarding choice structure and parameters. Thereafter we describe each of our
four experiments separately. In particular, for each experiment we outline the specific design
characteristics, describe the procedures, and finally report the results.

Implementation of the Subjective Evaluation Game. All our experiments are based
on the same implementation of the subjective evaluation game. In this section we outline
a step-by-step account of the game and describe each player's strategy space and decision
sequence in detail. Participants play the experiment for a total of 15 periods. Principals and
workers are randomly re-matched at the beginning of every period. Each period consists of
the following steps:
    (1) Matching and Contract : Each worker is randomly assigned to a principal. The Worker
        gets a standardized contract. The contract guarantees a fixed wage w = 100, which
        the Worker gets with certainty. In addition, the Principal has the possibility to pay
        a bonus, b  {0, B = 50}, after she has received a private signal sP about the output
        r produced by the Worker.
    (2) Worker's Effort Choice : The Worker can choose between a low, e = 0, and a high
        effort level, e = 1. Choosing the high effort level is associated with a cost c = 10. The
        effort exerted by the Worker produces a return that can either be high, rH = 350,
        or low, rL = 150. The effort choice defines the probability with which the output is
        high or low: P rob(r = rH |e = 1) = P rob(r = rL |e = 0) = 0.85 and P rob(r = rL |e =
        1) = P rob(r = rH |e = 0) = 0.15.
    (3) Output Determination and Signals : After the Worker has chosen his effort level, a
        computerized random device determines the realized output. Neither the Principal
        nor the Worker observe the output. Instead, each one of them receives a private signal
        s indicating either a high output, s = 1, or a low output, s = 0. The Principal's
        signal depends on the realized output r: P rob(sP = 1|r = rH ) = P rob(sP = 0|r =
        rL ) = 0.75. The Worker's signal depends on the Principal's signal sP : P rob(sP =
        1|sP = 1) = P rob(sP = 0|sP = 0) = 0.75.6
    (4) Principal's Bonus Payment : After the Principal observes the signal, sP , she makes
        a decision regarding the bonus payment b.
    (5) Worker's Initiation of Conflict : Finally, the Worker observes the private signal sA
        and the Principal's bonus choice b and decides whether to initiate conflict, d  {0, 1}.
        When initiating a conflict the Worker determines the intensity of the conflict F 
6Obviously, it would be possible to write down an equivalent structure of signals in which both signals depend
on output. However, we chose this way of presenting the signals to the participants because it makes the
imperfect correlation of the two signals very transparent to the participants.
                                                     12
       [0, 100]. Conflict harms the Principal by reducing her payoff by f (d) = dF = F and
       creates a cost k (d) = dF K for the Worker, where K  {0.1, } depending on the
       treatment.

Payoffs. In this section, we explain in detail the material payoffs and show that for this
employment problem there are two norm equilibria - either all self-interested (SI) or all
pay-for-output (PO). Instead, the pay-for-input norm (PI) is never an equilibrium since the
workers face an incentive to shirk on effort.
  Table 1 shows the social surplus of the conflict treatments for each combination of norms
played by the Principal and the Worker. Notice that the highest surplus is achieved when
both parties follow the PI strategy. This is because the PI entails high effort and no conflict
costs. If workers and principals were trustworthy, then this would be the outcome all would
agree upon. The smallest surplus is achieved when the Worker follows the rational strategy
regardless of the strategy followed by the principal. This is because the Worker never exerts
high effort, which decreases greatly the expected output produced for the principal.

                             Table 1. Social Surplus in Conflict Treatment

                                                                      Worker
                                      Self-Interest (e = 0)   Pay for Input (e = 1)   Pay for Output (e = 1)
                     Self-Interest             180                     200                     236
         Principal   Pay for Input             180                     310                     290
                     Pay for Output            180                     274                     290



   As we mentioned before, the highest surplus is achieved when both parties follow the
pay-for-input strategy. However, this is not a stable strategy because the agent has high
incentives to shirk. Table 2 normalizes the surplus to the equilibrium utility and the gain
from deviation. In the table, movement along a column corresponds to changes in the
Principal's payoff, while movement along a row corresponds to changes in the Worker's
payoff relative to the norm for that row. The table illustrates that when the Principal and
the Worker choose to play the combination of "SI/SI" or "PO/PO", there are no gains to
deviation, hence, these are stable norms. Instead, if they follow the PI norm, the Worker
has a net gain of 10 by moving to the rational norm and, hence, this is not a stable norm.
However, as we shall see there is evidence that some players would like to coordinate upon
the PI norm.
   In the no conflict treatments the SI norm is the only stable norm. The reason is that in
the absence of conflicts, principals always have an incentive to play the SI strategy.


Experiment 1: Baseline.
                                                         13
                     Table 2. Gain to Deviation from Norm in Conflict Treatment

                                                                       Worker
                                       Self-Interest (e = 0)   Pay for Input (e = 1)   Pay for Output (e = 1)

                                       Principal   Worker      Principal   Worker      Principal    Worker

                       Self-Interest       0           0          -50        -20          -15       -16.75
         Principal    Pay for Input       -50         10           0          0         -16.25       -1.88
                     Pay for Output     -16.25       -5.63      -16.25      -1.38          0           0


Design. In our first experiment the participants played the game exactly as described in
section 3. We implemented the following two treatments:
     · No Conflict Treatment: In this treatment the interaction between the Princi-
       pal and the Worker ends after the bonus payment of the Principal. Formally, this
       corresponds to a version of the subjective evaluation game in which conflicts are pro-
       hibitively costly for the Worker, K = . In this treatment Step 5 (the conflict stage)
       of the above procedure does not exist.
     · Conflict Treatment: In this treatments all 5 steps of the game are played and the
       cost of conflict is K = 0.1.

Data Collection and Procedural Details. We conducted the study at the behavioral
laboratory of HEC Lausanne (LABEX). Participants were recruited from the regular subject
pool, covering all fields of study. We used ORSEE (Greiner, 2015) for the recruitment and z-
Tree (Fischbacher, 2007) for programming the experiment. We ran 10 sessions with a total of
204 subjects and we conducted the sessions in November and December 2012. Sessions were
randomly allocated to treatments and within sessions participants were randomly assigned to
roles. We aimed at 24 subjects per session but some sessions were smaller due to no-shows.
Five sessions had 16 subjects only and the other sessions had either 18 or 20 subjects.
Sessions lasted for 50 to 80 minutes including the reading of the instructions and the final
cash payments. Subjects received a show-up fee of 10 CHF and experimental points were
converted at a rate of 70 points per CHF. Average total earnings were 23.8 CHF (24.2 CHF
for subjects in the role of worker, and 23.3 CHF for subjects in the role of employer). The
roles in the experiment were labeled as "worker" and "employer". Role assignments, choices,
and earnings were completely anonymous.

Results. We first illustrate how the conflict treatment affects the main variables of interest
(effort and surplus). Subsequently, we explore the underlying mechanisms by investigating
how conflict strategies affect bonus payments and effort choices.

Result 1 (Baseline - Effort and Surplus). The opportunity to engage in costly conflict leads
to a small and statistically insignificant increase in worker's effort. However, conflict costs
                                                          14
dominate the efficiency gains produced by a higher effort, so that total surplus in the conflict
treatment is lower than in the no conflict treatment.

   The top row of Figure 1 compares the relative frequency of high effort (left-hand side)
and the average total surplus (right-hand side) in the no conflict and conflict treatment of
the baseline experiment. The figure shows that the rate with which workers choose high
effort rises from 40.4% in the no conflict treatment to 47.5% in the conflict treatment. This
corresponds to an increase of 18%, but this increase is not statistically significant (RS:
p = 0.420).7 Moreover, the figure also reveals that the increase in the frequency of high
effort does not translate into a higher total surplus. On the contrary, total surplus decreases
insignificantly from 233.8 in the no conflict treatment to 221.6 in the conflict treatment (RS:
p = 0.222).
   Figure 2 illustrates the reason we find a lower surplus in the conflict treatment. The
figure contrasts the total cost of conflict (i.e., the Worker's cost of initiating conflict plus the
damage imposed on the Principal) with the additional gains from trade that result from the
increased effort level. We find that average conflict costs (20.0) are larger than average gains
from higher effort (7.8) resulting in a negative effect of conflict on efficiency.
   As our participants play the game for 15 periods with different partners, learning effects
might occur and it is important to look at the dynamics. Table 3 presents the relative
frequency of high effort and average total surplus over time (in bins of 5 periods). The table
reveals that effort and surplus are subject to a downward trend in both treatments, but
in particular in the absence of conflict. The frequency of high effort drops by 19% in the
conflict condition (SR: p = 0.188) and by 35.6% in the no conflict condition (SR: p = 0.063).
Total surplus decreases by 10% in the conflict condition (SR: p = 0.063) and by 13.4% in
the no conflict condition (SR: p = 0.063). Although the presence of conflict slows down the
decrease in effort provision over time compared to the no conflict treatment, the difference
between effort levels across treatments remains insignificant, even in the final periods of the
experiment (RS: p = 0.310). Moreover, total surplus keeps being superior in the absence of
conflicts. Hence, Result 1 holds throughout the experiment.
                        Table 3. Baseline - Development of effort and surplus over time

                                         High Effort (in %)                     Average Surplus
              Periods             1-5          6-10            11-15    1-5          6-10         11-15

              Conflict           53.06         46.53           42.86   235.31       217.74        211.65
              No conflict        52.83         34.34           33.96   259.43       216.76        225.10

              p-values (RS)      0.753         0.151           0.421   0.222         1.000        0.310

7If not explicitly stated otherwise reported p-values are based on two-sided, non-parametric rank sum (RS)
or signed rank (SR) tests using session averages as independent observations.
                                                          15
                                            Figure 1. Effort and surplus




 Note: Error bars represent plus/minus one standard error of the mean, clustered at the session level.


  To understand the reasons for why conflicts fail to be efficiency-enhancing, it is instructive
to take a careful look at the conflict pattern that emerges in our first experiment.

Result 2 (Baseline - Conflict Pattern). Most workers in the conflict treatment either refrain
from engaging in conflict or follow a conflict pattern that aims at enforcing the pay-for-input
norm. As a consequence, the Worker's subjective performance signal has a very low impact
on the conflict rate. If conflicts are initiated at all, they most frequently occur when workers
provide high effort, but do not receive a bonus.
                                                             16
                                        Figure 2. Gains and costs of conflict




 Note: Error bars represent plus/minus one standard error of the mean clustered at session level.




   The top row of Figure 3 presents the relative frequency of conflict initiation contingent
on three determinants, the Worker's effort level, the Worker's subjective performance signal
and the Principal's bonus payment. The left-hand panel covers low effort observations, the
right-hand panel covers high effort observations. Two insights emerge from the observed
pattern in this figure: First, the punishment decision of a large set of workers is guided by
the pay-for-input norm (PI): the conflict rate is highest if workers who decide to exert high
effort are not rewarded with a bonus. Second, the pay-for-output (PO) norm matters only
for a minority of workers as the subjective performance signal of workers has a weak impact
on the decision to engage in conflict.
   Figure 3 shows that the worker's effort choice in combination with a lack of a bonus
payment is the most important determinant of conflict. The highest conflict rate is observed
if the Worker chooses high effort, gets a positive subjective signal, but does not receive
a bonus (64.4%). Keeping everything else constant (high effort, positive worker signal) the
conflict rate drops to 10.7% if the Principal pays the bonus, a decrease of 83% (SR: p = 0.063).
Likewise, if we compare the highest conflict rate (64.4%) to the corresponding low effort case
(keeping the absence of a bonus and the positive worker signal constant) the conflict rate
drops to 26.1%, a decrease of 59.4% (SR: p = 0.063). At the same time, the figure also
reveals that the Worker's signal has a weaker impact on conflict initiation. For example, if
we compare the highest conflict rate (64.4%) to the case in which the Worker's subjective
                                                             17
signal is negative (keeping the high effort and the absence of the bonus payment constant),
the conflict rate only drops from 64.4% to 48.6%, a decrease of 24.5% (SR: p = 0.063).8


                                         Figure 3. Determinants of conflict




 Note: Error bars represent plus/minus one standard error of the mean, clustered at the session level.


  Figure 4 provides a different perspective on the workers' conflict strategies. In this figure,
instead of averaging behavior across subjects, the figure shows different distributions of
punishment patterns taking individual workers as the unit of observation, i.e., each dot in
the figure represents a single worker. Moreover, as conflicts emerge predominantly when
the Worker does not receive a bonus, the figure focuses only on conflict initiation in the
cases in which the Principal decides not to pay a bonus. The figure illustrates the extent to
8The  finding that the conflict rate is predominantly determined by bonus payments and effort choices receives
further support when we focus the analysis on the cases in which the Worker receives a negative signal. If
the Worker exercises high effort, the conflict rate decreases from 48.6% to 10.7% if the Principal decides to
pay the bonus (SR: p = 0.063). Similarly, if we keep the absence of a bonus payment constant, the conflict
rate drops from 48.6% to 20.9% if the Worker decides to exert low effort (SR: p = 0.125).
                                                             18
which the decision to initiate conflict depends on the worker's subjective signal (given that
no bonus payment has been made). On the x-axis (y-axis), we measure the probability of
initiating conflict if the signal is negative (positive). In addition, the figure also reveals each
worker's effort level: small (large) dots represent workers that mostly picked a low (high)
level of effort. Finally, the figure uses colors to categorize the workers. We distinguish four
types of workers: pay-for-output norm enforcers (PI), pay-for-input norm enforcers (PI),
self-interest non-enforcers (SI) and motivated non-enforcers (MNE). PO enforcers pick high
effort and only engage in conflict if they do not receive a bonus after having observed a
positive subjective signal. These workers appear as large dots in the top-left quadrant. PI
norm enforcers also choose high effort, but they ignore their signal and engage in conflict
whenever they do not receive the bonus. These workers appear as large dots in the top-right
quadrant. MNE are workers who exert high effort, but do not engage in norm enforcement
(i.e., stay away from conflicts). They appear as large dots in the bottom-left quadrant. SI,
finally, pick low effort and do not engage in conflict. They appear as small dots in the
bottom-left quadrant.


                      Figure 4. Worker's Effort and Conflict Decisions (Individual Level)




Note: In this graph each dot represents one worker in each treatment. The dots give information on (1) the level of effort,
represented by size of the dot; and (2) the conflict behavior, represented by the position of the dot in the graph. The
space of the graph is determined by the probability of conflict if the Worker does not receive a bonus and the signal is
positive (y-axis) and the probability of conflict if the Worker does not receive a bonus and the signal is negative (x-axis).
Furthermore, the colors of the dots help to emphasize the norm behavior that each worker most closely follows.

                                                               19
   The figure shows that the worker's population fails to coordinate on any particular norm.
To begin with, only 42.5% of all workers can be defined as norm enforcers (PI or PO).
Moreover, there are more PI enforcers (25.5%) than PO enforcers (17.0%). The majority of
non-enforcers (46.8%) are SI and exert mostly low effort (36.2%) and MNE are rare (10.6%).
The remaining workers (10.6%) show profiles that do not correspond to either of the four
types described above.
   In Table 4 we present the development of the conflict rate over time. The table reports
conflict initiations for cases in which no bonus has been paid contingent on the worker's effort
level. Most interesting is the development of the conflict rate in the situations in which the
Worker exerts high effort. The table reveals that in the first 10 periods of the experiment,
the conflict rate is only slightly higher when the Worker's subjective performance signal is
positive than when it's negative and the difference is not statistically significant. In the
final five periods, in contrast, we observe a substantial increase in the conflict rate when the
worker's signal is positive (from roughly 60% in periods 1-10 to more than 80% in periods
1-15). No such increase is observed for the cases in which the worker's signal is negative. As
a consequence, the conflict rate in the final five periods is marginally significantly higher for
a positive worker signal than for a negative one (SR: one-sided p = 0.063). However, despite
the fact that the dynamic analysis suggests that the pay-for-output norm may increase in
importance over time, it is also important to emphasize that the conflict rate with negative
signals remains roughly constant and at a high level throughout the experiment (~       45-52%).
This observation confirms that workers fail to coordinate on the enforcement of the pay-for-
output norm (even after having played the game for many periods).

         Table 4. Baseline - Development of conflict rate over time (only if no bonus received)

                                                          Conflict Rate (in %)

                  Effort Choice             High Effort                          Low Effort
                  Periods            1-5       6-10         11-15      1-5         6-10       11-15

                  Positive Signal   59.52     59.46         81.81     18.52        26.92      31.43
                  Negative Signal   47.83     52.17         45.83     19.15        25.93      17.74

                  p-values (SR)     0.20       0.79          0.06      0.50         0.44      0.64



  From a theoretical point of view, the workers' failure to coordinate on the pay-for-output
norm is problematic because the somewhat erratic conflict patterns displayed in Figures
3 and 4 does not create well-aligned financial incentives for principals to use their bonus
payments in a way that rewards those workers who are perceived to be productive. A more
detailed investigation of principals' bonus payments confirms the empirical relevance of this
concern.

                                                      20
Result 3 (Baseline - Bonus Payments). Principals in the conflict treatment pay the bonus
significantly more often than principals in the no conflict treatment. However, the bonus
payments in the conflict treatment are only partially consistent with the pay-for-output norm.
Although the principals pay the bonus more often when their subjective signal is positive,
bonus payments also occur quite frequently when the Principal's subjective signal is negative.

   The opportunity to engage in conflict has a strong positive impact on the overall frequency
with which principals pay a bonus to the Worker: the bonus rate increases from 14.3% in
the no conflict treatment to 42.6% in the conflict treatment (RS: p = 0.008). Figure 5
shows the frequency of bonus payments as a function of the Principal's private signal in
both treatments. The pattern observed in the bonus payments is only partially in line with
the pay-for-output norm; although in both treatments principals are more likely to pay the
bonus if their subjective signal is positive, bonus payments occur frequently when the signal
is negative. In the conflict treatment the bonus rate is 57.4% if the Principal's subjective
signal is positive and 29.0% if the signal is negative (SR: p = 0.063). The corresponding
numbers in the no conflict treatment are 24.7% and 5.4% (SR: p = 0.063).
   Table 5 shows bonus payments in both treatments over time contingent on the signal
observed by the Principal. In the conflict treatment the observed patterns remain stable
over time. In the no conflict treatment bonus payments show a decreasing trend when
the signal is high (this development occurs in parallel with the observed decrease in effort
displayed in Table 3).

                   Table 5. Baseline - Development of bonus payments over time

                                                        Bonus Payments (in %)

                Principal's Signal           High Signal                     Low Signal
                Periods               1-5       6-10         11-15    1-5       6-10      11-15

                Conflict             54.20      60.18        58.33   30.70      28.03     28.47
                No conflict          32.14      23.90        16.81    4.80      6.41      4.80

                p-values (RS)        0.02       0.01         0.01    0.04       0.03      0.04



   Figure 6 displays distributions of bonus payment patterns in the conflict treatment at
the individual level; each dot in the figure represents one principal. The only information
that principals have when deciding about the bonus payment is their subjective performance
signal. The Figure, therefore, displays the frequency with which principals pay the bonus as a
function of their signal. The horizontal axis displays the bonus rate in response to a negative
signal and the vertical axis the bonus rate in response to a positive signal. Similar to Figure
4, this figure allows to identify norm compliance, but this time for the principals instead
of workers. Principals who follow the pay-for-output norm and pay bonuses predominantly
                                                        21
                                          Figure 5. Determinants of bonus




 Note: Error bars represent plus/minus one standard error of the mean, clustered at the session level.




after having observed a positive signal are located near the top-left corner. Those who
subscribe to the pay-for-input norm and pay bonuses irrespective of their signal are located
near the top-right corner. Principals who follow neither norm and never pay bonuses appear
near the bottom-left corner.
   The Figure reveals that no principal strictly sticks to a particular fairness norm. The
large majority of principals pay the bonus more frequently after observing a positive signal
(55.1%), but there is considerable heterogeneity in both the bonus frequency and the weight
that principals assign to their subjective signal. This suggests that workers' inability to
coordinate on the enforcement of the pay-for-output norm is consistent with the observation
that many principals also fail to coordinate on the norm. The lack of coordination on the side
of principals, in turn, implies that the bonus payments fail to create the optimal monetary
                                                             22
              Figure 6. Principal's Bonus Payment Decisions Averaged at the Individual level




 Note: In this graph each dot represents one individual in each treatment. The dots give information on the bonus payment
 behavior of the Principal. The space of the graph is determined by the probability of paying a bonus after a positive signal
 (y-axis) and the probability of paying a bonus after a negative signal (x-axis). Furthermore, the colors of the dots help to
 emphasize the norm behavior that each principal most closely follows.


incentive for workers to exert high effort. When comparing the profits of workers before
the conflict stage, we find that the expected gains from exerting low effort in the conflict
treatment amount to 19.1, whereas the expected gains from exerting high effort are only 14.1.
The fact that the opportunity to engage in conflicts does not prevent self-interested workers
from being better off by choosing low effort provides an explanation for the high population
fraction of self-interest non-enforcers observed in Figure 4 and the limited positive impact
that the conflict treatment has on overall effort (see Result 1).
   Our first experiment illustrates that it is not obvious that conflicts have an efficiency-
enhancing effect in a work environment with subjective performance evaluation. Our results
confirm that the presence of multiple fairness norms can lead to coordination failure which, in
turn, implies that conflicts fail to have the desirable motivating effects. As a consequence, the
cost of conflicts dominate and total surplus is lower in the presence of conflict opportunities
than in their absence.



Experiment 2: Communication.
                                                             23
Design. The lack of communication is arguably one factor that renders coordination dif-
ficult in our baseline experiment. There is ample evidence in the literature that pre-play
communication helps to overcome coordination failure (see e.g., Cooper et al., 1992; Brandts
and MacLeod, 1995; Cason and Mui, 2007; Brandts and Cooper, 2007) and communication
opportunities are available in most real-life settings in organizations. Our second experi-
ment (subsequently termed "communication experiment") therefore investigates the extent
to which communication helps the trading parties to coordinate on an efficiency-enhancing
use of conflicts. The design of the experiment is identical to the one of the baseline ex-
periment, but we now add a communication stage at the beginning of every period. In
the communication stage both the Principal and the Worker could pick a message to their
trading partner from pre-defined sets of messages.9
   The message set of the Principal was the same in both the no conflict treatment and the
conflict treatment. It contained the following announcements of different bonus strategies:
    (1)   I   will pay the bonus with certainty.
    (2)   I   will pay the bonus with high probability.
    (3)   I   will pay the bonus if I have the impression that you exerted high effort.
    (4)   I   pay the bonus if my private information indicates a high return.
    (5)   I   will not pay the bonus.
    (6)   I   prefer not to send a message.
In the no conflict treatment workers' messages contained only announcements of their effort
strategies. The following options were available:
    (1) I will exert high effort.
    (2) I will exert low effort.
    (3) I prefer not to send a message.
In the conflict treatment workers could add a second part to their message in which they
announced their conflict strategies:
    (1)   I   will   always reduce the return.
    (2)   I   will   reduce the return if I do not get the bonus.
    (3)   I   will   reduce the return if I do not get the bonus although I got a good signal.
    (4)   I   will   never reduce the return.
9There  is an emerging consensus in the experimental literature that in many environments free-form commu-
nication is more effective than structured communication (Brandts and Cooper, 2007; Brandts et al., 2015).
Nevertheless, we consciously decided to use structured communication in this experiment, because including
the different fairness norms in the set of pre-specified messages allowed us to make these norms very salient
to the participants. This point is particularly relevant in light of the fact that the pay-for-output norm is
somewhat complicated. Including it in the set of messages made this choice available even to participants
who did not think about this possible norm themselves.
                                                     24
   (5) I prefer not to send a message.
This set of pre-specified messages includes the fully self-interested strategy, the pay-for-
input norm, the pay-for-output norm and the possibility not to communicate. Messages
were selected and sent simultaneously by the Worker and the Principal.

Data Collection and Procedural Details. The laboratory, the subject pool, the recruit-
ment process and the software used to program and run the experiment were the same as in
baseline experiment. We ran 10 sessions with a total of 176 subjects. We conducted them
in March, April, May and December 2013. We aimed at 24 subjects per session but some
sessions were smaller due to no-shows. Five sessions had 16 subjects only and all other ses-
sions had at least 18 subjects. Average total earnings were 35.8 CHF (36.6 CHF for subjects
in the role of worker, and 35 CHF for subjects in the role of employer).

Results. We begin by analyzing how conflicts affect effort and surplus in the presence
of communication before we turn to a detailed investigation of communication strategies,
conflict patterns and bonus payments.

Result 4 (Communication - Effort and Surplus). The impact of conflicts on efficiency in the
presence of pre-play communication is similar to the one observed in the baseline experiment.
The availability of conflicts leads to a slight increase in workers' effort, but the effect remains
insignificant. Total surplus is slightly lower in the conflict treatment than in the no conflict
treatment.

   The second row of Figure 1 displays the relative frequency of high effort and average
total surplus in the communication experiment. The rate with which workers choose high
effort rises from 51.8% in the no conflict treatment to 58.5% in the conflict treatment.
This corresponds to an increase of 13%, but the effect is not statistically significant (RS:
p = 0.690). Total surplus decreases insignificantly from 243.7 in the no conflict treatment
to 237.7 in the conflict treatment (RS: p = 1.000). The top, right-hand panel of Figure 2
contrasts the total cost of conflict with the additional gains from trade that result from the
increased effort in the conflict treatment. Average costs (22) are larger than average benefits
(16) resulting in the above reported negative effect of conflict on surplus.
   Table 6 presents effort and total surplus over time (in bins of 5 periods). The table reveals
that the difference in effort arises exclusively in the final periods of the experiment. In
periods 11-15 workers choose high effort in 57.8% of the cases in the conflict treatment, but
only in 34.0% of the cases in the no conflict treatment. However, considerable variance across
sessions implies that this difference remains statistically insignificant (SR: p = 0.420). Total
surplus in the conflict treatment never surpasses total surplus in the no conflict treatment
in any phase of the experiment.
                                                25
               Table 6. Communication - Development of effort and surplus over time

                                    High Effort (in %)                     Average Surplus
            Periods         1-5           6-10            11-15    1-5          6-10         11-15

            Conflict        60.89         45.58           57.78   243.28       234.71        235.12
            No conflict     63.72         46.05           33.96   256.19       238.42        236.61

            p-values (RS)   1.00           0.55           0.42     0.70         1.00          1.00



   Result 4 reveals that the availability of structured pre-play communication does not trigger
the efficiency-enhancing effects of conflicts. In the following we shed more light on the reasons
for this result. We begin with an analysis of communication choices.

Result 5 (Communication - Message Choices). Workers and principals most frequently
choose messages that are in line with the pay-for-input norm. First, a large majority of
workers announce that they will exert high effort and threaten to engage in conflict if they do
not get a bonus. Second, the majority of principals state that they will pay the bonus if they
have the impression that the Worker exerted high effort, but only a minority communicates
explicitly that they plan to make their bonus payment contingent on their subjective signal.

   We start with the communication strategies of workers. The vast majority of workers in
both the conflict and the no conflict condition choose to send the message: "I will exert
high effort" (79.0% and 85.6%, respectively) and only a small proportion in both treatments
chooses to send "I will exert low effort" (15.1% and 12.1%, respectively). Regarding conflict
strategies, the most frequent message chosen is "I will reduce the return if I do not get the
bonus" (55.1%). This observation hints at the fact that many workers seem to subscribe to
the pay-for-input norm. Instead, the message corresponding to the pay-for-output norm "I
will reduce the return if I do not get the bonus although I got a good signal" was picked less
than half as often (21.8%). Other messages played only a minor role ("I will never reduce
the return", 16.7%) or barely any role at all ("I will always reduce the return", 0.3%).
   Principals remain rather non-committal in their bonus payments announcements. In both
the conflict and the no conflict condition, nearly half of the principals choose to send "I
will pay the bonus if I have the impression that you exerted high effort" (49.9% and 49.6%,
respectively). To interpret the choice of this message it is important to keep in mind that
principals also had the possibility to choose the message "I pay the bonus if my private
information indicates a high return" (which was picked by 25.6% and 20.0%, respectively).
Thus, principals who choose the former message decide explicitly not to signal that they
will make their bonus payment strictly contingent on their subjective information because,
otherwise, they should have selected the latter message. From this point of view, it seems
inconsistent to interpret the most frequently chosen message as being fully in line with the
                                                     26
pay-for-output norm. In fact, the message can also be consistent with the pay-for-input
norm, if the Principal plans to base her impression on the worker's effort message. The
other messages available to principals were chosen with low frequency: "I will pay the bonus
with certainty" (12.6% and 15.3%, respectively), "I will pay the bonus with high probability"
(8.4% and 9.0%, respectively), and "I will not pay the bonus" (0.6% and 1.1%, respectively).
  The analysis of the communication strategy suggests that most trading parties signal to
each other that they intend to follow the pay-for-input norm. The most frequent message
combination (26.2%) is the one in which the Worker announces to exert high effort and to
engage in conflict if no bonus is paid and the Principal announces to pay the bonus as long
as she has the impression that the Worker exerts high effort. Next we analyze the extent to
which actual behavior corresponds with these messages.

Result 6 (Communication - Conflict Pattern). Most workers in the conflict treatment either
follow conflict patterns that are in line with the pay-for-input norm (PI) or abstain from
engaging in conflicts. Conflict patterns consistent with the pay-for-output norm (PO) are
rarely observed.

   The second row of Figure 3 presents the relative frequency of conflict initiation in the
communication experiment contingent on the worker's effort level, the worker's subjective
performance signal and the Principal's bonus payment. The panel on the right-hand side
covers observations in which workers exert high effort. The conflict pattern observed in these
situations is in line with the PI behavior: the conflict rate is high if the workers receive no
bonus and low otherwise, moreover, the subjective signal of the workers plays no role. In the
absence of a bonus a high signal triggers conflicts in 65.8% of the cases and a low signal in
66.1% of the cases (SR: p = 0.625). Somewhat surprisingly, we observe a similar pattern for
observations with low effort levels: in the absence of a bonus a high signal triggers conflicts
in 56.7% of the cases and a low signal in 51.9% of the cases (SR: p = 0.625).
   To better understand the conflict strategies of workers it is instructive to take a look at
Figure 4 which shows distributions of punishment patterns based on observations at the
individual level (see Result 2 for a detailed explanation of this figure). The figure reveals a
strong clustering of observations near the top-right corner showing both large orange dots and
small red dots. Whereas the orange dots correspond to individuals who subscribe to the PI,
the red dots represent workers who systematically initiate conflicts without providing high
effort themselves. This indicates that the conflicts observed in Figure 3 after not obtaining
a bonus payment, are not only a consequence of imperfect PI enforcers (who shirk on effort
from time to time), but are also caused by workers who do not provide high effort and
systematically initiate conflicts.
                                              27
   In this treatment workers tend to coordinate on the PI more frequently than in the base-
line. Overall, the population size of norm enforcers remains the same as in the baseline,
however, the concentration of norm enforcers who follow the pay-for-input norm is even
more pronounced. The overall population share of norm-enforcers - PI and PO together -
amounts to 44.4%, which is almost identical to the corresponding rate in the baseline ex-
periment: 42.5%. However, the fraction of PI corresponds to 80% of the norm enforcers in
the communication experiment compared to 60% in the baseline experiment. Moreover, the
population share of motivated non-enforcers (MNE) remains roughly constant - from 11.1%
in the communication treatment to 10.6 in the baseline. The share of SI decreases from
36.2% (baseline) to 19.4% (communication). However, this decrease is misleading because it
is almost fully compensated by an increase in the share of unclassified workers who mostly
consist of the above discussed systematic conflict initiators who do not provide high effort.
   In Table 7 we show how the conflict rate after not receiving a bonus develops over time.
The table distinguishes between observations with positive and negative subjective signals of
the Worker and high and low effort provision. The Table reveals the absence of response of
the workers to their private signal when deciding to initiate conflict. This finding reinforces
the interpretation that workers predominantly focus on the enforcement of the PI norm in
the communication experiment.

     Table 7. Communication - Development of conflict rate over time (only if no bonus received)

                                                         Conflict Rate (in %)

                 Effort Choice             High Effort                          Low Effort
                 Periods            1-5       6-10         11-15      1-5         6-10       11-15

                 Positive Signal   63.64     62.50         72.73     71.43        50.00      37.50
                 Negative Signal   58.33     68.42         73.68     40.00        61.54      53.57

                 p-values (SR)     0.89       0.85          NA        0.10         NA        0.63



   The analysis of the communication strategies and the conflict patterns suggests that work-
ers have a strong focus on the pay-for-input norm in the communication experiment. From
the analysis of the communication choices we already know that most principals do not ex-
plicitly announce that they will make their bonus payment contingent on their subjective
signal (as in compliance with the pay-for-output norm would require), but seem to prefer
a non-committed message that promises a bonus payment as long as the Principal has the
impression that the Worker worked hard. We now explore how all this translates into the
principals' decision to pay bonuses.

Result 7 (Communication - Bonus Payments). As in the baseline experiment, principals are
more likely to make bonus payments in the conflict treatment than in the no conflict treatment.
                                                     28
However, in line with their non-committal announcements, principals do not seem to follow
either norm very systematically. Most principals condition their bonus payments to some
extent on their signal of Worker performance, but many principals also pay bonuses with
high frequency after a negative signal.

   At the average level, we observe that conflict increases the fraction of bonus payments and
that the large majority of principals pay the bonus more frequently after having observed
a positive signal. The second row of Figure 5 shows the frequency of bonus payments as
a function of the Principal's private signal. In the conflict treatment the bonus payment
rate is 87% if the Principal's subjective signal is positive and 50.3% if the signal is negative
(p = 0.063). The corresponding numbers in the no conflict treatment are 36.8% and 6.2%
(p = 0.063). These bonus patterns suggest that principals are not always following a norm.
   At the individual level, we observe that most principals play a mix of the pay-for-input and
the pay-for-output norm. The top-right panel of Figure 6 displays bonus payment patterns
in the conflict treatment at the individual level. If most principals were to follow the pay-
for-input norm (pay-for-output norm), dots should be clustered in the top-right (top-left)
corner. Instead we observe that most dots lie between the top-right and top-left quadrant,
indicating that the principals are not systematically following either norm.
   Table 8 shows bonus payments contingent on the signal observed by the Principal over
time. In the conflict treatment, the bonus payment frequency remains very stable over time.
In the no conflict treatment, in contrast, the frequency of bonus payments decreases quite
drastically towards the end of the experiment.

                Table 8. Communication - Development of bonus payments over time

                                                        Bonus Payments (in %)

                Principal's Signal           High Signal                     Low Signal
                Periods               1-5       6-10         11-15    1-5       6-10      11-15

                Conflict             86.21      85.60        89.42   46.79      49.00     54.55
                No Conflict          41.46      41.96         7.77   10.87      25.49      0.89

                p-values (RS)        0.02       0.01         0.01    0.01       0.01      0.01



  Our second experiment shows that communication does not solve the coordination prob-
lem of principals and workers. If anything, workers seem to have an even stronger focus on
the pay-for-input norm than in the baseline experiment (this is reflected in both their com-
munication strategies and their actual choices). In the conflict treatment, principals do not
systematically follow a norm and, accordingly, their bonus payments fail to provide financial
incentives for the Worker to work hard. The expected gains for the Worker after exerting
high effort in the conflict treatment are only 27.5, whereas the expected gains after exerting
                                                        29
low effort are 31.1. As a consequence, the results resemble those of the baseline experiment;
conflicts fail to enhance cooperation and efficiency because the costs of conflict outweigh the
benefits of additional effort.


Experiment 3: Agreement (Code of Conduct).

Design. The first two experiments rely on self-coordination. The results indicate that peo-
ple have a tendency to focus on the simpler and arguably more intuitive pay-for-input norm.
Unfortunately, this norm is not well-suited to increase cooperation in the subjective evalua-
tion framework we are interested in. The fact that spontaneously emerging conflict cultures
may be ineffective or even counterproductive suggests that there may be an important role
for active management. Code of conducts are one way through which many organizations
transmit values, guidelines and proper practices to their workforce. Our next experiment
(henceforth called "the agreement experiment") therefore aims at studying the impact of an
external appeal to coordinate on the pay-for-output norm. In this experiment we begin each
period with a stage in which we ask both the Principal and the Worker to electronically sign
a non-binding agreement in which they confirm their intention to follow the pay-for-output
norm. Failure to sign this agreement by at least one party implies that trade does not occur
and an unattractive outside option (ur = 40) is implemented. The agreement specifies a sim-
ple code of conduct for the relationship. The suggested choices correspond to the strategies
prescribed by the pay-for-output norm. In the no conflict treatment the Worker agrees to
exert high effort, whereas the Principal agrees to pay the bonus if and only if her subjective
signal is positive. In the conflict treatment, the code of conduct has an additional paragraph
in which the Worker agrees to engage in conflict only if he does not receive a bonus although
his subjective performance signal is positive. In the instructions all participants are made
aware of the fact that the agreement is not binding, i.e., signing the code of conduct does
not alter the strategy set available to the players. An example of the agreement in English
can be found in the Appendix.

Data Collection and Procedural Details. The laboratory, the subject pool, the recruit-
ment process and the software used to program and run the experiment were the same as in
the previous experiments. We ran 10 sessions with a total of 200 subjects and we conducted
them in November and December 2017. We aimed at 24 subjects per session but some ses-
sions were smaller due to no-shows. Two sessions had 18 subjects only and the other session
had either 20 or 22 subjects. Sessions lasted for 50 to 80 minutes including the reading of
the instructions and the final cash payments. Subjects received a show-up fee of 10 CHF and
experimental points were converted at a rate of 70 points per CHF. Average total earnings
                                              30
were 34.7 CHF (33.3 CHF for subjects in the role of worker, and 36.1 CHF for subjects in
the role of employer).

Results. We first analyze how the need to sign a code of conduct before interacting with a
trading partner affects the main outcomes of the experiment:

Result 8 (Agreement - Effort and Surplus). The introduction of a code of conduct does
not substantially change the impact of conflicts on effort and surplus. As in the baseline
experiment, workers' effort is not significantly higher and total surplus is lower in the conflict
treatment than in the no conflict treatment.

   The third row of Figure 1 shows the relative frequency of high effort and average total
surplus in the agreement experiment. The figure shows that the rate with which workers
choose high effort rises from 49.1% in the no conflict treatment to 52.4% in the conflict
treatment. This corresponds to an increase of 6.7%, but this effect is far from significant
(RS: p = 0.842). Moreover, total surplus decreases from 243.1 in the no conflict treatment
to 224.5 in the conflict treatment (RS: p = 0.151). Figure 2 shows that the average cost of
conflict (24.9) is higher than the average benefit from higher higher effort (6.3) resulting in
a negative effect of conflict on efficiency.
   Result 8 indicates that the code of conduct fails to have a positive impact on the outcomes.
To better understand why the code of conduct doesn't have an effect on effort provision, we
analyze the participants' decisions in the different stages of the game in more detail.

Result 9 (Agreement - Acceptance of agreement). In both the conflict and no conflict treat-
ment, nearly all participants accept the agreement.

   A total of 95.1% of the participants accept the agreement in the no conflict treatment
and 100% in the conflict treatment. There is no time trend in the acceptance rate in either
treatment.

Result 10 (Agreement - Conflict Pattern). Signing a code of conduct does not coordinate
workers on the pay-for-output norm. Norm enforcement is rather week in the agreement
experiment in general, but among the workers who engage in norm enforcement, the clear
majority follows the pay-for-input norm.

   Despite the fact that all workers who interact with a principal sign a code of conduct that
instructs them to follow the pay-for-output norm, the conflict pattern looks almost identical
to the one observed in the baseline experiment: conflict initiation is mostly determined by
whether the Principal pays a bonus or not. The third row of Figure 3 presents the relative
frequency of conflict initiation in the agreement experiment contingent on the worker's effort
                                                31
level, the worker's subjective performance signal and the Principal's bonus payment decision.
The Worker's subjective signal has only a very small impact. If the Worker exerts high effort,
observes a positive signal, but gets no bonus, conflicts are initiated in 54.7% of the cases.
If everything remains constant, but the Principal decides to pay a bonus, the conflict rate
decreases to 6.2% (a decrease of 88.7%, SR: p = 0.063). However, if we compare the initial
situation to the same situation except that the workers now observes a negative signal the
conflict rate goes down only to 43.3% (a decrease of 21%, SR: p = 0.188). This pattern is
consistent with the pay-for-input norm.10
   The punishment strategies of individual workers displayed in Figure 4 further reinforces
that the code of conduct doesn't affect the decisions of the parties. The population is divided
into non enforcers (50.0%) and norm enforcers (26.1%). The share of norm enforcers in this
experiment is nearly half the size of what we observe in the baseline experiment (42.5%) or in
the communication experiment (44.4%). Among the non enforcers, roughly two thirds exert
low effort (blue dots - 32.6%) and the rest exert high effort (black dots - 17.4%). The share of
self-interested non enforcers is the same as the share of pay-for-input norm followers (orange
dots - 17.4%), while only 8.7% of the workers subscribe to the pay-for-output norm (green
dots). Moreover, 23.9% of the workers cannot be defined by any of our pre-defined norms
(red dots) giving further support to the claim that the code of conduct fails to coordinate
workers.
   Despite its failure to coordinate workers (and the resulting erratic punishment pattern),
we observe that the code of conduct helps to coordinate bonus payments of principals.

Result 11 (Agreement - Bonus Payments). As in the baseline and the communication ex-
periments, principals pay bonuses more often in the conflict treatment than in the no conflict
treatment. Moreover, signing the code of conduct induces more principal to follow the pay-
for-output norm, that is, to condition their bonus payments on their subjective performance
signal.

   At the average level, principals pay bonuses more often in the conflict treatment than in
the no conflict treatment. Overall, the frequency with which principals pay the bonus nearly
doubles, from 23.5% in the no conflict treatment to 42.8% in the conflict treatment (RS:
p = 0.008). Furthermore, in this experiment, the signal becomes relevant in the decision
to pay a bonus. The third row of Figure 5 presents the bonus payments in the agreement
experiment contingent on the Principal's private signal in both the conflict and no conflict
treatments. The bonus patterns shown in this figure indicate that the principals pay attention
10The  pattern is similar for low effort choices. Low effort, no bonus and a positive signal yield a conflict rate
of 27.4%. A bonus payment lowers the conflict rate to 5.1% (p = 0.126), but a positive signal only reduces
it to 22.1% (p = 0.844).
                                                       32
to their own subjective signal when deciding about the bonus payment. In the conflict
treatment, the bonus rate is 20.0% if the Principal's subjective signal is negative and 65.8%
if the signal is positive (an increase of 69.6% SR: p = 0.126). The corresponding numbers in
the no conflict treatment are 8.2% and 39.2% (an increase of 79.1% SR: p = 0.062).
   At the individual level, signing the code of conduct induces more principals to follow the
pay-for-output norm. The bottom left panel in figure 6 shows the individual patterns. The
figure reveals that 77.6% (green dots) of the principals in the agreement experiment subscribe
to the pay-for-output norm,compared to 55.8% in the baseline experiment and 44.4% in the
communication experiment. However, a careful examination of the figure, shows that the
green dots representing the pay-for-output principals are concentrated between the 0.50-0.75
range of the vertical axis (probability of bonus payment after a high signal). Hence, although
the tendency is to pay the bonus after a positive signal, principals do not do this often enough
to create financial incentives for workers to exert high effort: the worker's expected payoff
from exerting low effort is still higher (17) than the one from exerting high effort (15.5).
   Our third experiment shows that a code of conduct alone does not successfully coordinate
the trading parties on the pay-for-output norm. Although nearly all participants accept
the agreement, only the principals follow the pay-for-output norm more frequently. The
workers, in contrast, mostly choose to either abstain from conflict initiation or to enforce the
pay-for-input norm.


Experiment 4: Grievance.

Design. Our third experiment explored the idea that organizations might channel the dis-
ciplining effect of conflicts by employing a code of conduct to explicitly define the situations
for which conflicts are appropriate. In our final experiment we take this idea one step fur-
ther and study the impact of an institutionalization of conflicts. Instead of simply providing
behavioral guidelines, organizations can also design explicit procedures that allow their mem-
bers to file formal complaints against each other if the organization's code of conduct has
been violated. The design of the experiment is identical to the agreement experiment, ex-
cept for one important detail: instead of simply initiating conflicts directly, workers need
to follow a formal grievance procedure if they want to sanction their principal. The griev-
ance procedures requires the filing of a standardized report in which the Worker needs to
explicitly confirm that no bonus has been paid although the Worker has received a positive
subjective signal. Once the report is submitted the punishment of the Principal is initiated
with the exact same consequences as in the previous experiments. From an experimental
point of view the institutionalization of the conflict corresponds to a pure re-framing of the
sanctioning decision. However, the fact that the Worker needs to file a formal complaint
                                               33
implies that the he needs to lie in order to trigger a sanction in a situation in which the
code of conduct does not deem a conflict appropriate. If workers are averse to lying, such a
grievance procedure might help to coordinate workers on the pay-for-output norm (see, e.g.,
Gneezy, 2005; Lundquist et al., 2009; Gneezy et al., 2013).

Data Collection and Procedural Details. The laboratory, the subject pool, the recruit-
ment process and the software used to program and run the experiment were the same as in
the previous experiments. We ran 12 sessions with a total of 272 subjects and we conducted
them in May 2017. We aimed at 24 subjects per session but some sessions were smaller due
to no-shows. Two sessions had 18 subjects only and the other session had either 20 or 22
subjects. Sessions lasted for 50 to 80 minutes including the reading of the instructions and
the final cash payments. Subjects received a show-up fee of 10 CHF and experimental points
were converted at a rate of 70 points per CHF. Average total earnings were 35.6 CHF (33.8
CHF for subjects in the role of worker, and 37.3 CHF for subjects in the role of employer).


Results. We first explore how the introduction of a grievance procedure in addition to the
code of conduct shapes the impact of conflicts on effort and surplus.

Result 12 (Grievance - Effort and Surplus). In the presence of a grievance procedure, the
opportunity to engage in conflicts has a significantly positive effect on workers' effort and
leads to higher total surplus.

   The fourth row of Figure 1 displays the relative frequency of high effort and average total
surplus in the grievance experiment. The figure shows that the rate with which workers
choose high effort rises from 44.1% in the no conflict treatment to 64.4% in the conflict
treatment. This corresponds to a statistically significant increase of 46% (RS: p = 0.026).
The increase in effort in the conflict treatment also induces an increase in total surplus from
237.3 in the no conflict treatment to 243.7 in the conflict treatment. However, the increase
in surplus effect is not statistically significant (RS: one-sided p = 0.844).11
   An analysis of the dynamics reveals that institutionalized conflicts help sustain a higher
effort level in all phases of the experiment. Table 9 presents the relative frequency of high
effort and average total surplus over time. In the conflict condition, effort decreases only
slightly over time, from 71.1% in the first five periods to 61.3% in the last five periods (a
decrease of 13.8%, SR: p = 0.063). In the no conflict condition, in contrast, effort clearly
declines over time, from 57.1% in periods 1-5 to 35.6% in periods 11-15 in the no conflict
treatment (a decrease of 35.9%, SR: p = 0.031). Average surplus shows similar time patterns.
11See the bottom right panel of Figure 2 for an illustration of the total cost of conflict (20.2) in comparison
with the benefits of additional effort (26.2).
                                                      34
                     Table 9. Grievance - Development of effort and surplus over time

                                        High Effort (in %)                     Average Surplus
               Periods          1-5           6-10            11-15    1-5          6-10         11-15

               Conflict         71.10         60.86           61.32   253.50       237.26        240.54
               No Conflict      57.10         39.51           35.60   252.93       237.41        221.36

               p-values (RS)    0.180         0.040           0.020    1.00         0.820        0.180



Result 13 (Grievance - Acceptance of agreement). In the no conflict and conflict treatments
nearly all participants accept the agreement.

  Again, most of the participants accept the agreement - 98.1% in the no conflict treatment
and 99.5% in the conflict treatment. In both treatments, acceptance rates remain constant
overtime.

Result 14 (Grievance - Conflict Pattern). workers in the conflict treatment of the grievance
experiment are more likely to follow the pay-for-output norm than the pay-for-input norm.
As a consequence, the worker's subjective performance signal has an impact on the conflict
rate. However, also in the grievance experiment there is a substantial share of workers who
refrain from initiating conflict and do not enforce any norm.

   The fourth row of Figure 3 presents the relative frequency of conflict initiation in the
grievance experiment contingent on worker's effort level, the worker's subjective performance
signal and the Principal's bonus payment. We observe that, as in all previous experiments,
conflicts are most often initiated when effort is high, the worker's signal is positive and no
bonus is paid. In this case the conflict rate amounts to 61.2%. If all remains equal except that
the Principal pays the bonus, the conflict rate decreases substantially to 1.9% (a decrease of
98%, SR: p = 0.032). However, whereas the impact of the bonus payment is comparable to
what we observed in previous experiments, we now also observe that the worker's subjective
signal has a decisive impact. If we replace the positive signal in the initial situation with a
negative one, the conflict rate drops to 35.6% (a decrease of 42%, SR: p = 0.032).12
   At the individual level, we observe that while institutionalized conflicts in the grievance
experiment help to coordinate workers on the pay-for-output norm, it is not the case that
all workers respect the code of conduct. The individual conflict patterns illustrated in the
bottom-right panel of Figure 4 shows that overall 42.7% of the workers engage in norm en-
forcement. Two thirds of the norm enforcers follow the pay-for-output norm (27.9%), whereas
the rest (14.8%) enforces the pay-for-input norm. Moreover, about a third of the worker's
12The  pattern is similar for low effort choices. Low effort, no bonus and a positive signal yield a conflict rate
of 40.5%. A bonus payment lowers the conflict rate to 1.1% (p = 0.062) and a positive signal reduces it to
15.3% (p = 0.094).
                                                         35
population (34.5%) abstains from initiating conflicts. Table 10 presents the development of
the conflict rate of workers who do not receive a bonus over time.
       Table 10. Grievance - Development of conflict rate over time (only if no bonus received)

                                                         Conflict Rate (in %)

                 Effort Choice             High Effort                          Low Effort
                 Periods            1-5       6-10         11-15      1-5         6-10       11-15

                 Positive Signal   66.67     60.00         57.50     30.30        32.08      48.78
                 Negative Signal   40.00     44.44         37.04     22.50        13.73      11.86

                 p-values (SR)     0.040     0.040         0.460     0.860        0.160      0.320




Result 15 (Grievance - Bonus Payments). The structure of principals' bonus payments in
the grievance treatment is similar to the one in the agreement treatment. Principals pay
bonuses more often in the conflict treatment than in the no conflict treatment. Moreover,
many principals follow the pay-for-output norm and condition their bonus payments on their
subjective performance signal.

    The fourth row of Figure 5 shows the frequency of bonus payments in the grievance
experiment as a function of the private signal of the Principal in both treatments. In this
experiment bonus payments in the conflict treatment are highly contingent on the signal
observed. The bonus rate is 79.3% if the Principal's subjective signal is positive and 20.2%
if the signal is negative (SR: p = 0.032). A similar pattern (although at a lower level) is
observed in the no conflict treatment where the corresponding numbers are 36.1% and 4.5%
(SR: p = 0.032).
    At the individual level, the bottom-right panel of Figure 6 adds supportive evidence to
the claim that most principals in the grievance treatment condition their bonus payments on
their subjective signal: 84.4% of the principals are classified as pay-for-output norm followers
(compared to 55.1% in the baseline) and only 10.2% of principals follow the pay-for-input
norm. These bonus patterns finally create (weak) monetary incentives for the Worker to
exert high effort as the expected payoffs of exerting high effort are 20.1 and the gains from
exerting low effort are 19.7.
    In terms of bonus payment dynamics, table 5 show bonus payments over time contingent
on the signal observed by the Principal and conflict. The bonus payment patterns remain
very stable over time.
    Our final experiment shows that conflicts can have beneficial effects on motivation (and
efficiency) even in a challenging environment like our subjective evaluation game. At the
same time, the experiment also demonstrates that the establishment of a conflict culture is a
delicate and somewhat risky endeavor. Despite the establishment of a clear code of conduct
                                                     36
        Table 11. Formal agreement with grievance - Development of bonus payments over time

                                                          Bonus Payments (in %)

               Principal's Signal           Positive Signal                   Negative Signal
               Periods               1-5         6-10         11-15    1-5         6-10         11-15

               Conflict             81.58       78.38         77.90   18.59       20.61         21.38
               No Conflict          42.26       37.95         27.03    7.05        4.43         2.29

               p-values (RS)        0.00         0.00         0.00     0.01        0.03         0.00



and grievance procedure that forces workers to lie if they wish to deviate from the code of
conduct, not all workers follow the code of conduct and conflicts still emerge in situations in
which they have no beneficial effects. These findings suggests that conflict cultures need to
be carefully managed in order to be successful.

                                4. Measuring Norms and Cultures

   The relationship between action and payoffs is unchanged across our different experiments,
but we find that behavior is sensitive to variations in contextual elements. Such a pattern is
incompatible with models that assume fixed preferences over distributions of payoffs, but is
consistent with the idea that people care about being behaviorally consistent with context-
driven and endogenously selected norms. Our results illustrate that--if a group (or an
organization) manages to successfully set up a set of interlocking norms--conflicts may have
a disciplining effect on principals and may ultimately also lead to an increase in workers'
effort. We call such a set of interlocking norms a "culture".13
   From an empirical point of view, our approach raises the question of how to best measure
the extent to which behavior is consistent with norm-abidance. In this section we provide a
framework--using off-the-shelf econometric packages--that allows us to measure norm and
cultural compliance in a simple manner. We build upon the fact that any strategic situation
can be represented as an extensive form. We know that the end nodes of the decision tree
provide a complete representation of the game. More precisely, let Z be the end nodes of
an interaction between a Principal, a Worker and Nature (in line with the tradition in game
theory, Nature is represented as a player with fixed mixed strategies). The outcome of an
interaction induces a probability distribution over Z . A set of norms or culture effectively
says that certain behaviors imply that some actions should never be taken, which in turn
implies that there is a Z 0K  Z , where K refers to culture K  {SI, P I, P O}, such that
P r z  Z 0K = 0. For example, under culture SI (self-interest choice ), effort should be zero
13
  This definition is consistent with a literature that views culture through the lens of game theory. Kreps
(1990) and Greif (1994) view culture as a Nash equilibrium to an employment game. MacLeod and Malcom-
son (1989, 1998) show that in market contexts multiple self-enforcing "social norm" equilibria may exist.
                                                         37
(e = 0). Thus, if we observe many pairs with positive effort (e = 1), we get P r Z 0SI > 0,
which implies that behavior is not well represented by self-interest.
   However, our aim in this paper is obviously not to reject the self-interest model. Such
findings are neither new, nor particularly useful. Rather, the question we want to ask is:
which culture best fits our data? It might be the case that even though mistakes are frequent,
rational choice still provides the best description of behavior (a common claim). The goal
of this section is to provide a method to measure the descriptive quality of any behavioral
norm. Second, we use the term "culture" to mean a set of interlocking norms, so that we can
also ask whether the population as a whole can be characterized by a common culture.
   Our approach is inspired by Selten (1975)'s notion of a perfect equilibrium. He envisions
players who at each node may make mistakes (trembling hand). In our experiment the game
can be represented as a binary tree, and hence at each decision node choice can be viewed
as a binomial distribution which can be represented using the logit model. For each context
we can measure the distance between observed choices and a norm. Norm compliance is less
general than a "culture", which we see as a collection of norms that work together.14 After
discussing norm compliance by the Principal and Worker, we measure the extent to which
the population (organization) as a whole can be characterized by a single culture.


The Principal's Norms. Let us begin by measuring the Principal's adherence to a norm.
Figure 7 illustrates the Principal's choices parameterized for the case of the pay-for-output
norm (PO). The Principal cannot observe whether or not the Worker has produced effort,
and hence the Principal does not know the probability of a high signal. The choice of a
high signal is an action chosen by Nature that we can estimate as a binomial distribution
characterized by H that determines the probability of a high signal via:
                                                         exp (1 )
(4.1)                            P rob [sP = 1] =                        .
                                                    exp (1 ) + exp (-1 )
In the figure we use the terminology P  exp (1 ) to indicate that the probability varies
with 1 modulo a factor to normalize to a probability as we have done in (4.1) (see DeGroot,
1972, for details on this approach). Given the state, the Principal then chooses to pay a
bonus or not. Notice that as P O  , then

                           P rob [b = B |sP = 1] = P rob [b = 0|sP = 0]  1.

These choices are exactly the ones indicated by the PO norm. The outcomes z  ZP =
{Z1 , ..., Z4 } are observed in the data. Since the realization of the signal is independent of

14On    the notion that culture is based upon constituent parts see Homans (1961).
                                                     38
the Principal's choice, then the PO norm described in Figure (7) satisfies:
                                                             PO
(4.2)                                    P rob [z ] = logit Xz  P O ,
       PO
where Xz  is defined in the figure and:

                                                               1
                                                P O =                  .
                                                               P O



               Figure 7. Parameterizing the Principal's Choices under Pay-for-Output


                                                            Nature




                              High-Signal                                           Low-Signal
                            P rob  exp(1 )                                       P rob  exp(-1 )

                                 Principal                                           Principal



                  Pay-Bonus                  No-Bonus                  Pay-Bonus                     No-Bonus
              P rob  exp(P O )          P rob  exp(-P O )          P rob  exp(-P O )             P rob  exp(P O )

                      Z1                        Z2                         Z3                        Z4
            P rob  exp(1 + P O )      P rob  exp(1 - P O )      P rob  exp(-1 - P O )      P rob  exp(-1 + P O )
                  P O = (1, 1)
                 XZ                       XZP O = (1, -1)             P O = (-1, -1)             P O = (-1, 1)
                    1                        2                      XZ 3                        XZ 4




   This model can be estimated from the data as a multinomial logit from which we obtain
                                                                                         
parameters P   O = (1 , P O ). If the Principal followed the PO norm perfectly, then P O  .
However, as we discussed above, we never get perfect compliance with any norm in any
                                                                                   
treatment, and hence these models are always well identified. A larger P            O indicates a
behavior that is more closely approximated by the PO norm. In a similar way we can estimate
           
P  I and R for the pay-for-input norm (PI) and self-interest choice (SI) respectively.
   Different norms correspond to different values for Xz , whose coefficients reflect the strength
of a norm. The values of Xz for different norms are illustrated in Table (12).

                             Table 12. Empirical Norm Model for Principals

                   ZP rincipal    Principal Signal   Bonus Paid?       PO
                                                                      XZ          PI
                                                                                 XZ          SI
                                                                                            XZ
                       Z1               High            Yes            (1, 1)     (1, 1)    (1, -1)
                       Z2               High            No            (1, -1)    (1, -1)     (1, 1)
                       Z3               Low             Yes          (-1, -1)    (-1, 1)   (-1, -1)
                       Z4               Low             No            (-1, 1)   (-1, -1)    (-1, 1)


                                                          39
  Notice that SI calls for never paying a bonus, and hence is simply the opposite of PI,
                        
which implies R   = -P   I . Thus we do not need to run separate regressions for SI choice.
The results from estimating model (4.2) for each treatment are given in Table 13.
                      Table 13. Estimated Adherence of Principal's Behavior to a Norm

                              No Conflict Treatments                                 Conflict Treatments
                                      )
                     Pay-for-output (P                      )
                                            Pay-for-input (P          Pay-for-output (P )                        )
                                                                                                 Pay-for-input (P
                                       O                     I                          O                         I
Baseline                   0.250                -0.894                      0.298                    -0.149
                            (0.037)               (0.051)                    (0.039)                   (0.037)
Communication              0.288                -0.628                      0.394                     0.401
                            (0.041)               (0.047)                    (0.042)                   (0.042)
Code of Conduct            0.330                -0.590                      0.496                    -0.145
                            (0.039)               (0.043)                    (0.042)                   (0.038)
Grievance                  0.332                -0.687                      0.678                       0.043
                            (0.034)               (0.040)                    (0.038)                   (0.031)

 Notes:     p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01,   errors clustered by session.


   The results confirm what we see visually in Figure 7. In the no conflict treatments the
                                                           
coefficient for the SI norm--as measured by R        = -P   I --is larger in value than the PO
              
coefficient P  O . Negative coefficients mean that the Principal is more likely not to pay the
                                                  
bonus regardless of the signal. The fact that P    O > 0 for the no conflict treatments reflects
that effort is lower and hence the low signal is observed more often, so that there is a greater
than 50% chance of the Principal observing the low signal, and then paying no bonus.
   Things are very different in the conflict treatments. In the communication treatment
the PI coefficient is indistinguishable from the PO coefficient. Since the PI coefficient is
significantly positive, this implies that this norm dominates the SI, in contrast to the no
conflict treatment where SI is a better fit. Hence the threat of conflict greatly increases the
probability that the Principal pays the bonus.
   In the communication treatment PI fits better than PO, but this result changes in the
code of conduct and grievance cases. There the PO norm better describes the behavior of
                                                                                      
principals than either the PI norm or SI choice. Finally notice that the values of P   O for the
code of conduct and grievance treatments in the no conflict treatment are comparable. Since
these treatments are otherwise identical (same code of conduct), this finding shows that the
"framing" of the conflict decision (grievance procedure) does not impact principal behavior
a lot.
   In addition to comparing coefficients, we can also compare the overall fit of the models.
The logit reports the value of the likelihood function, which is a measure of the overall
goodness of fit, and provides us with a metric to rank models. Since each model corresponds
to a different set of cultural norms, this approach provides a way to measure how closely
a population of individuals comply with cultural norms. We use the non-nested likelihood
ratio test developed by Vuong (1989) to see if the overfits of the models differ significantly.
                                                             40
                            Table 14. Comparing Norms in Conflict Treatments

                                   Log Likelihood          Is a Norm Dominant at 1% significance levels?
                                  PO          PI/SI        PO                PI                  SI
          Baseline              -867.7      -1,010.16      Yes               No                 No
          (p-value)                                      (0.004)           (0.906)            (0.906)
          Communication          -887        -885.4        No                No                 No
          (p-value)                                      (0.544)           (0.456)            (0.456)
          Code of Conduct       -916.6       -986.5        Yes               No                 No
          (p-value)                                      (0.000)           (1.000)            (1.000)
          Grievance           -1,250.66     -1,444.25      Yes               No                 No
          (p-value)                                      (0.000)           (1.000)            (1.000)

            Notes: P-values based upon non-nested Vuong where the null hypothesis is that the two norms,
            PO and PI are indistinguishable. The SI norm is the same model as the PI norm, but with a
            change in the sign of the coefficient.


  In the no conflict treatments the R norm fits better than the P O norm in all treatments.
These observations are confirmed by the Vuong test (not reported). However, matters are
reversed with conflict. The log-likelihood values in Table 14 come from the logit estimates.
These provide a measure of the quality of the fit (bigger is better).15
                                                               R        PI
  The PI norm and the SI norm are the same model but with P      = -P      . For the treatments
baseline, Code of Conduct and Grievance the null is rejected in favor of the PO norm. In
the case of communication the null is not rejected, which implies that neither norm provides
a superior fit to the data.

The Worker's Norms. In the case of the Worker there are more information sets--
the Worker observes both his signal and the bonus choice. Moreover, the probability
of a bonus is likely to be correlated with the signal, though the signal can be assumed
to be exogenous as long as we condition on worker effort. Hence, in this case we have
                                T                                                          
norm  = [1  , B 0 , B 1 , norm ] , where 1 measures the probability of a high signal, B 0 mea-
                                                           
sures the probability of a bonus given a low signal, B       1 measures the probability of a bonus
                                      
given a high signal, and, finally, norm measures the probability of the worker following the
norm  {P O, P I, R}. We run a multinomial logit model with standard errors clustered at
the session level:
                                      P rob [z ] = logit (Xz  ) ,
where z  ZW orker and Xz are defined in Table 15.
   Workers know the effort level they have chosen, and so the question we ask is what norm
does a worker who has high or low effort adopt. The results of the estimation are shown
in Table 16. In the low effort case the workers are shirking, and hence presumably do not
expect a bonus for their efforts. In this case, except for the Communication treatment, SI
15The  Vuoug test provides a way to compare two non-nested models. The null hypothesis is that the models
are indistinguishable. The null is rejected when one model fits better than the other.
                                                        41
                                Table 15. Empirical Norm Model for Workers

    ZW orker   Worker Signal   Bonus Paid?    Principal Punished?           XZPO              XZ PI              XZ SI

      Z1          High            Yes                 No                 (1, 0, 1, 1)      (1, 0, 1, 1)       (1, 0, 1, 1)
      Z2          High             No                 No               (1, 0, -1, -1)    (1, 0, -1, -1)      (1, 0, -1, 1)
      Z3           Low            Yes                 No                (-1, 1, 0, 1)     (-1, 1, 0, 1)      (-1, 1, 0, 1)
      Z4           Low             No                 No               (-1, -1, 0, 1)   (-1, -1, 0, -1)     (-1, -1, 0, 1)
      Z5          High            Yes                 Yes               (1, 0, 1, -1)     (1, 0, 1, -1)      (1, 0, 1, -1)
      Z6          High             No                 Yes               (1, 0, -1, 1)     (1, 0, -1, 1)     (1, 0, -1, -1)
      Z7           Low            Yes                 Yes              (-1, 1, 0, -1)    (-1, 1, 0, -1)     (-1, 1, 0, -1)
      Z8           Low             No                 Yes             (-1, -1, 0, -1)    (-1, -1, 0, 1)    (-1, -1, 0, -1)


choice does fit better. However, it is not perfect, implying that there are also individuals
who choose low effort and pay the cost of punishing the Principal who does not pay a bonus.
Since effort is zero, this does not fit with a theory of reciprocity, but does suggest that there
are individuals who shirk and get utility from punishing others who do not pay them. This
effect is particularly prominent in the communication treatment.
   In the case of high effort in the baseline experiment all three norms have similar coefficients.
With communication we see that the PI norm has the largest weight. The PO norm provides
the best fit for both the code of conduct treatment and the grievance treatment, with the
grievance treatment having a particularly large effect, going from 0.542 to 0.811. This result
highlights the fact that Principals and Workers have different concerns. Above we saw that
the code of conduct treatment did push the principals towards the PO norm, but here we see
that the effect on workers is more muted. Adding a formal grievance procedure provided for
many individuals a mechanism that appears to legitimize imposing a cost upon a principal.
   For the communication treatment the PI norm provides the best fit to the data, suggesting
that in the absence of other coordinating information individuals appear to focus upon
reciprocal norms, even though they are not self-enforcing.
                     Table 16. Estimated Adherence of Behavior to a Worker's Norm

                                         Low Effort                                     High Effort
                                 SI          PI              PO               SI             PI               PO
       Baseline              0.780         -0.057         0.466           0.336           0.521            0.536
                              (0.067)      (0.051)         (0.057)         (0.057)         (0.061)          (0.061)
       Communication         0.569        0.639           0.608           0.617           0.890            0.709
                              (0.070)      (0.072)         (0.071)         (0.060)         (0.072)          (0.064)
       Code of Conduct       0.793         -0.038         0.543           0.481           0.461            0.542
                              (0.072)      (0.054)         (0.062)         (0.058)         (0.057)          (0.059)
       Grievance             0.876          0.070         0.740           0.682           0.595            0.811
                              (0.073)      (0.052)         (0.067)         (0.048)         (0.046)          (0.052)
         Observations          1,588        1,588           1,588           2,319           2,319            2,319
        Log Likelihood      -3,864.113   -4,150.913      -3,971.681      -5,837.546      -5,790.553       -5,691.499

        Notes : p<0.1;    p<0.05;  p<0.01,   clustered by session


  Next we assess norm compliance using the Vuong test. In this case we have three models,
rather than two as in the Principal case. The Vuong test allows for only two models. We
                                                           42
deal with this by comparing models to the top ranked model (and hence the top ranked
model gets compared to the second ranked, and not the third). In the zero effort case SI
choice is the dominant norm, and so again we do not report those results here. The effects
of the treatments are reported in Table 17.
   Under baseline the best fit is PO, while the second best is PI. The next column reports
the test of the null hypothesis that norms SI and PO are indistinguishable relative to norm
SI. Given the p-value of 0.998 we cannot reject the null. Next norm PI is compared to the
null hypothesis that PO and PI are indistinguishable and again we cannot reject the null.
Finally, PO, the best fitting norm is compare to the null that SI and PO are indistinguishable
and again the null is not rejected. Thus, in the absence of any coordination there does not
seem to be convergence upon any norm.


                            Table 17. Comparing Norms in Conflict Treatments

                                  Log Likelihood                 Is a Norm Dominant at 1% significance levels?
                           SI          PI         PO              SI           PI                PO
      Baseline           -949.0      -925.9     -923.8           No            No                No
      (p-value)                                                (0.998)       (0.595)          (0.405)
      Communication      -971.3      -923.5     -955.4           No            Yes               No
      (p-value)                                                (0.999)       (0.005)          (0.995)
      Code of Conduct    -998.7      -1001.6   -989.5            No            No                No
      (p-value)                                                (0.822)       (0.897)          (0.178)
      Grievance         -1,703.5    -1,729.1   -1,664.8          No            No               Yes
      (p-value)                                                (0.992)       (1.000)          (0.008)

       Notes : P-values based upon non-nested Vuong test where the null hypothesis is that two norms are indis-
       tinguishable compared to a single norm. The comparison is always made to the best alternative model as
       measured by the likelihood value.




   In the case of the communication treatment the P I norm provides the best fit (as measured
by the log likelihood), followed by the PO norm. We reject the null hypothesis that PO and
PI are indistinguishable relative to the PI norm at the 0.5% level. Both the PO norm and
SI norms are rejected as potential best fits. However, even though there is communication,
the results for the Principal show that they do not adopt PI. In this case there is a clear
incentive for the workers to cheat, with the consequence that Principals often deviate from
paying a bonus when they receive the low signal.
   The interesting result is that under the code of conduct, in contrast to the results for the
principal, no norm dominates. This reinforces the earlier observation that the code of conduct
alone failed to coordinate workers. Finally, we find that in the case of the grievance treatment
we can reject the hypothesis that PO and the second best norm, SI, are indistinguishable
relative to PO alone. Though the fit is better the likelihood function is quite small relative
to the other cases indicating that there is still quite a bit of noise in workers' choice.
                                                          43
Culture. In this section we apply the same methodology, except now to the full population.
The number of end nodes for the full game, denoted by Z , is 32 = 25 . These are found by
combining all the possible binary choices: effort (e  {0, 1}), Principal's signal (sP  {0, 1}),
Agent's signal (sA  {0, 1}), bonus pay (b  {0, B }) and conflict (d  {0, 1}). We do not
need to consider the effect of productivity given by r since it is not observed by parties. The
effect it has upon the signals is estimated endogenously. Thus, we run a model of the form:
                                                                                       

(4.3)                              norm
         P rob [z ] = logit  norm Xz    +                        esP
                                                            esP Xz   +                              ebsA 
                                                                                              ebsA Xz     .
                                                  E {0,1}                 E {0,1},b{0,B }

   The first term estimates the weight,  norm , for the cultural norm. If all members of the
population follow the norm perfectly then  norm  . Since perfection is not attainable,
this value is always finite. Its size can be used to see how closely the population follows a
particular norm. The remaining terms estimate the behavior of Nature in this relationship.
Since the random draws are independent, these terms are unbiased estimates of the probabil-
ities of the signals workers observe. Table 18 reports the estimate of  norm for each conflict
treatment. In the absence of communication, the SI culture provides the best description.
When there is communication the PI culture dominates, followed by the PO culture. For
the next two treatments the PO culture provides the best description.


                  Table 18. Estimated Adherence of Behavior to a Work Culture

                                                     Cultural Fits with Conflict
                                       (Self-Interest)   (Pay-for-input)   (Pay-for-output)
                  Baseline               0.462***           0.391***             0.427***
                                           (0.059)           (0.047)              (0.047)
                  Communication           -0.265**           0.845**             0.698***
                                           (0.074)           (0.044)              (0.044)
                  Code of Conduct        0.438***           0.458***             0.578***
                                           (0.047)           (0.046)              (0.045)
                  Grievance              0.240***           0.711***             0.889***
                                           (0.044)           (0.034)              (0.034)
                   Notes:  p<0.1;    p<0.05;  p<0.01




   We can get a sense of the quality of the fit by formally testing one culture against the
other using a non-nested hypothesis test, as we have done above. These results are reported
in Table 19. In contrast to the case of norms, we have a clear winner for each treatment.
It is worth highlighting the point that we are estimated the same model for each treatment.
Notice that in the Grievance case the PO culture best describes the behavior relative to
the other cultures, however the likelihood values are smaller than in the other cases, which
indicates that there is a great deal of noise in individual behavior.
                                                      44
                              Table 19. Comparing Cultures in Conflict Treatments

                                   Log Likelihood                     Is a Culture Dominant at 1% significance levels?
                           SI           PI         PO               SI              PI               PO
     Baseline           -2,346.5     -2,364.8    -2,358.2           Yes             No                No
     (p-value)                                                     (0.1)          (0.90)            (0.78)
     Communication      -2,186.4     -2,023.7    -2,082.4           No             Yes                No
     (p-value)                                                    (1.00)          (0.00)            (1.00)
     Code of Conduct    -2,264.0     -2,259.4   -2,229.2            No              No               Yes
                                                                  (0.98)          (1.00)            (0.02)
     Grievance          -3,384.3     -3,208.1   -3,086.5            No              No               Yes
                                                                  (1.00)          (1.00)            (0.00)

      Notes: P-values based upon non-nested Vuong test where the null hypothesis is that two norms are indistinguishable
      compared to a single norm. The comparison is always made to the best alternative model as measured by the
      likelihood value or p-value.



                                                     5. Discussion

   Our experiment shows that in addition to affecting the allocation of resources, potential
conflict can also increase overall performance. Potential conflict provides a self-help mech-
anism to implement agreements. This general point has been made many times within the
context of the repeated prisoner's dilemma where conflict is represented by playing "defect"
for several periods. In those games defection is perfectly observable, so that it is clear when
breach of agreement has occurred. In our experiment, in contrast, a Worker who receives
a good self evaluation of performance is not sure whether or not the Principal has received
a similar signal. These creates ambiguity regarding what is "fair" behavior, and what is a
"breach" of an agreement for which the Worker should impose a cost upon the Principal.
   To analyze the stability and effectiveness of different plausible fairness norms in our setting,
we introduce the notion of a "norm equilibrium". We show that in our principal-worker
relationship with potential conflict there are two norm equilibria, self-interested play and
pay-for-output. The pay-for-output equilibrium provides higher payoffs than the rational
play equilibrium, and hence it is a reasonable hypothesis that either party would play this
equilibrium, and--if permitted to communicate--would recommend this equilibrium.16
   It turns out that this hypothesis receives little support. In the baseline experiment self-
interest provides the best (but imperfect) fit to the data, whereas in the communication
experiment parties tend to coordinate upon pay-for-input. However, norm compliance is
very limited, and workers in the communication treatment still choose low effort in more
than 40% of the pairs. We do know that context matters. For example, Cohn et al. (2014)
find that bank employees are honest or not depending upon the work culture indicating that
honesty is not a person specific immutable trait. After having observed the surprising results
of our first two experiments, we therefore reasoned that the parties needed more nudging

16
 The idea that parties would play the most efficient Nash equilibrium goes back to Schelling (1980).
                                                             45
towards the pay-for-output equilibrium. In our third experiment parties enter into an explicit
code of conduct agreement. This additional element does move the culture towards pay-for-
output to some extent (mostly on the side of principals), but average effort does not rise. The
final experiment formalizes employment expectations and makes violations of the pay-for-
output norm a "breach" event that gives workers' the right to use a grievance procedure. This
results in a significant increase in effort, and suggests that contracts, and formal procedures
in an organization have a role to play in improving performance.
   Our analysis highlights important challenges in the application of the principal-agent ap-
proach in practice.17 Whereas principal-agent theory focuses upon the impact of information
quality on contract design, the aspect of the theory that has been emphasized most in prac-
tice is the need to link compensation to performance.18 We explore the arguably realistic
case in which subjectivity in performance evaluations complicates using performance pay.
We show that another important ingredient to high performance entails providing formal
power and voice to employees. Firms are often reluctant to do that because of the fear
that it will result in rent seeking and lower performance. Our results do not dispute that
observation, but suggest that with appropriate design, providing worker with more power in
an organization can lead to enhanced performance. However, it is a delicate balance. Our
framework provides a way to explore this question experimentally, and provides a way to
quantify "culture" in a simple manner.
   The term "culture" has many different meanings (Alesina and Giuliano, 2015). Our exper-
imental setting allows for a crisp definition of "culture" as a collection of interacting norms
of behavior broadly consistent with the notions of culture as used by Kreps (1990) and Greif
(1994). One of the implications of our analysis is that even though the material payoffs
remain fixed across our experiments, we nevertheless observe a great deal of variation in
behavior and performance. This may help explain some of the heterogeneity in organiza-
tional performance, even for firms in the same industry (Syverson, 2011; Bloom et al., 2012).
Obviously, this paper is only the beginning of a research agenda. We need much more work
exploring different parameter values and different organizational reforms to eventually better
understand the full role of culture in organizational performance.




17
  See Gibbons (1997) and Eisenhardt (1989) for thought assessments of the strengths and weaknesses of
agency theory for understanding organizations.
18
  This oversimplification has created many examples of dysfunctional employment relationship (Kerr, 1975;
Hall, 2000).
                                                   46
                                      References

Akerlof, G. A. (1980). A theory of social custom of which unenployment May be one conse-
  quence. Quarterly Journal of Economics 94, 749­775. 1, 2
Akerlof, G. A. and R. Kranton (2010). Identity economics. The Economists' Voice 7. 1, 2
Akerlof, G. A. and R. E. Kranton (2000). Economics and identity. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 115 (3), 715­753. 1, 2
Alesina, A. and P. Giuliano (2015). Culture and institutions. Journal of Economic Litera-
  ture 53 (4), 898­944. 5
Ambrus, A. and B. Greiner (2012). Imperfect public monitoring with costly punishment:
  An experimental study. American Economic Review 102 (7), 3317­32. 1
Axelrod, R. (1981). The emergence of cooperation among egoists. American Journal of
  Political Science 75 (2), 306­318. 2
Binmore, K., J. Swierzbinski, S. Hsu, and C. Proulx (1993). Focal points and bargaining.
  International Journal of Game Theory 22 (4), 381­409. 1
Bloom, N., C. Genakos, R. Sadun, and J. V. Reenen (2012). Management practices across
  firms and countries. NBER Working Papers 17850, NBER. 5
Brandts, J. and D. J. Cooper (2007). It's what you say, not what you pay: An experimental
  study of manager-employee relationships in overcoming coordination failure. Journal of
  the European Economic Association 5 (6), 1223­1268. 3, 9
Brandts, J., M. Ellman, and G. Charness (2015). Let's talk: How communication affects
  contract design. Journal of the European Economic Association 14 (4), 943­974. 9
Brandts, J. and W. B. MacLeod (1995). On the strategic stability of equilibria in experi-
  mental games. Games and Economics Behavior 11, 36­63. 3
Cason, T. N. and V.-L. Mui (2007). Communication and coordination in the laboratory
  collective resistance game. Experimental Economics 10 (3), 251­267. 3
Chaudhuri, A. (2011). Sustaining cooperation in laboratory public goods experiments: a
  selective survey of the literature. Experimental Economics 14 (1), 47­83. 1
Cohn, A., E. Fehr, and M. A. Marechal (2014). Business culture and dishonesty in the
  banking industry. Nature 516 (7529), 86­U190. 5
Coleman, P. T., M. Deutsch, and E. C. Marcus (2014). The handbook of conflict resolution:
  Theory and practice. John Wiley Sons. 1
Cooper, D. and J. Kagel (2016). Other regarding preferences: A selective survey of experi-
  mental results. The handbook of experimental economics 2, 217­289. 4, 2
Cooper, R., D. V. DeJong, R. Forsythe, and T. W. Ross (1992). Communication in coordi-
  nation games. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (2), 739­771. 3


                                            47
De Dreu, C. K., M. J. Gelfand, et al. (2008). The psychology of conflict and conflict man-
  agement in organizations. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates New York. 1
DeGroot, M. H. (1972). Optimal Statistical Decisions. NY: McGraw-Hill Book C. 4
Dreber, A., D. G. Rand, D. Fudenberg, and M. A. Nowak (2008). Winners don't punish.
  Nature 452 (7185), 348. 1
Egas, M. and A. Riedl (2008). The economics of altruistic punishment and the maintenance
  of cooperation. Proceedings of the Royal Society 275 (1637), 871­878. 1
Eisenhardt, K. M. (1989). Agency theory: An assessment and review. The Academy of
  Management Review 14 (1), 57­74. 17
Falk, A., E. Fehr, and U. Fischbacher (2003). On the nature of fair behavior. Economic
  Inquiry 41 (1), 20­26. 2
Fehr, E. and U. Fischbacher (2003). The nature of human altruism. Nature 425 (6960). 1
Fehr, E. and U. Fischbacher (2004). Social norms and human cooperation. Trends in cognitive
  sciences 8 (4), 185­190. 1
Fehr, E., O. Hart, and C. Zehnder (2011). Contracts as reference points: Experimental
  evidence. American Economic Review 101, 493­525. 1
Fehr, E. and K. M. Schmidt (1999). A theory of fairness, competition, and cooperation.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (3), 817­68. 1, 2
Fischbacher, U. (2007). z-tree: Zurich toolbox for ready-made economic experiments. Ex-
  perimental Economics 10 (2), 171­178. 3
Gächter, S. and E. Fehr (2000). Cooperation and Punishment in Public Goods Experiments.
  American Economic Review 90 (4), 980­994. 1
Gächter, S., E. Renner, and M. Sefton (2008). The long-run benefits of punishment. Sci-
  ence 322 (5907), 1510­1510. 1
Gibbons, R. (1997). Incentives and careers in organizations. In D. M. Kreps and K. F.
  Wallis (Eds.), Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications, pp.
  1­37. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 17
Gneezy, U. (2005). Deception: The role of consequences. The American Economic Re-
  view 95 (1), 384­394. 3
Gneezy, U., B. Rockenbach, and M. Serra-Garcia (2013). Measuring lying aversion. Journal
  of Economic Behavior and Organization 93, 293­300. 3
Grechenig, K., A. Nicklisch, and C. Thöni (2010). Punishment despite reasonable doubt--a
  public goods experiment with sanctions under uncertainty. Journal of Empirical Legal
  Studies 7 (4), 847­867. 1
Greif, A. (1994). Cultural beliefs and the organization of society: A historical and theoretical
  reflection on collectivist and individualist societies. Journal of Political Economy 102 (5),

                                               48
  912­950. 13, 5
Greiner, B. (2015). Subject pool recruitment procedures: organizing experiments with orsee.
  Journal of the Economic Science Association 1 (1), 114­125. 3
Güth, W., R. Schmittberger, and B. Schwarze (1982). An experimental-analysis of ultimatum
  bargaining. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 3 (4), 367­388. 1
Hall, B. (2000). Compensation and performance evaluation at arrow electronics. Technical
  Report 9-800-290, Harvard Business School. 18
Homans, G. C. (1961). Social Behavior Its Elementary Forms. New York, NY: Harcout,
  Brace & World, Inc. 14
Kagel, J. H., C. Kim, and D. Moser (1996). Fairness in ultimatum games with asymmetric
  information and asymmetric payoffs. Games and Economic Behavior 13 (1), 100­110. 1
Kahneman, D., J. L. Knetsch, and R. H. Thaler (1986). Fairness and the assumptions of
  economics. Journal of business 59 (4), S285­S300. 1
Kerr, S. (1975). On the folly of rewarding A, while hoping for B. Academy of Management
  Journal 18 (4), 769­783. 18
Koszegi, B. (2014). Behavioral contract theory. Journal of Economic Literature 52 (4),
  1075­1118. 1
Kreps, D. M. (1990). Corporate culture and economic theory. In J. E. Alt and K. A.
  Shepsle (Eds.), Perspectives on Positive Political Economy, pp. 90­143. Cambridge, U.K.:
  Cambridge University Press. 13, 5
Krupka, E. L., S. Leider, and M. Jiang (2017). A meeting of the minds: informal agreements
  and social norms. Management Science 63 (6), 1708­1729. 1
Lazear, E. P. (1986). Salaries and piece rates. Journal of Business 59, 405­431. 3, 2
Leibbrandt, A. and R. López-Pérez (2012). An exploration of third and second party pun-
  ishment in ten simple games. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 84 (3), 753
  ­ 766. 1
Lundquist, T., T. Ellingsen, E. Gribbe, and M. Johannesson (2009). The aversion to lying.
  Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 70 (1­2), 81­92. 3
MacLeod, W. B. (2003). Optimal contracting with subjective evaluation. American Eco-
  nomic Review 93 (1), 216­240. 2
MacLeod, W. B. and J. M. Malcomson (1989). Implicit contracts, incentive compatibility,
  and involuntary unemployment. Econometrica 57 (2), 447­480. 13
MacLeod, W. B. and J. M. Malcomson (1998). Motivation and markets. American Economic
  Review 88 (3), 388­411. 2, 13
McAdams, R. H. (2017). The Expressive Powers of Law. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
  Press. 1

                                            49
Ostrom, E., J. Walker, and R. Gardner (1992). Covenants with and without a sword: Self-
  governance is possible. American political science Review 86 (2), 404­417. 1
Prasnikar, V. and A. E. Roth (1992). Considerations of fairness and strategy: Experimental
  data from sequential games. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (3), 865­888. 1
Rubinstein, A. (1998). Modeling bounded rationality. MIT press. 2
Schelling, T. C. (1980). The Strategy of Conflict. Harvard University Press. 16
Selten, R. (1975). Re-Examination of the perfectness concept for equilibrium points in
  extensive games. International Journal of Game Theory 4, 25­55. 4
Simon, H. A. (1982). Models of Bounded Rationality. MIT Press. 5
Simon, H. A. (1997). Models of bounded rationality: Empirically grounded economic reason,
  Volume 3. MIT press. 2
Syverson, C. (2011). What determines productivity?. Journal of Economic Literature 49 (2),
  326­365. 5
Tjosvold, D., A. S. Wong, and N. Y. Feng Chen (2014). Constructively managing conflicts
  in organizations. Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 1 (1), 545­568. 1
Townsend, R. (2007). Up the Organization. San Francisco, CA: John Wiley & Sons. (docu-
  ment)
Vuong, Q. H. (1989). Likelihood ratio tests for model selection and non-nested hypotheses.
  Econometrica 57 (2), 307­333. 4
Weber, M. (1947). The Theory of Social and Economic Organization. New York, NY: The
  Free Press. 1




                                            50
                               ONLINE APPENDIX
                           Instructions for Participants

  In this section we present an English translation of the originally French instructions
that the participants received before the experiment. There were separate instructions for
employers and workers in each experiment. We first provide the version for employers and
then the version for workers.
  The black text corresponds to the Baseline instructions. The colored paragraphs include
text that we added in the other versions of the experiment. The blue paragraphs were only
present in the communication experiment, the red paragraphs were only present in the agree-
ment experiment, and the teal paragraphs were only present in the grievance experiment. In
some cases the added paragraphs changed the numeration in a list of paragraphs. In those
cases the numeration of the colored paragraphs shows where the paragraphs were placed.




                                            51
                              Instructions for Employers


Introduction

You are about to participate in an experiment of the University of Lausanne. During this
experiment you have the opportunity to earn a sum of money that will be paid to you at
the end of the experiment. The amount of money you earn may be more significant if

     · you read the instructions carefully.
     · you think carefully about the decisions you make.

If you have any questions while reading the instructions or while the experiment is in
progress, feel free to call us by raising your hand. By contrast, any communication between
participants--except through the channels offered as part of the experiment--is prohibited.
In the event of non-compliance with these instructions, we will be obliged to exclude you
from the experience without any payment.

In today's experiment, you will interact with other participants via your computer. The
decisions you make will have an impact on your profit. Your decisions will also influence the
profit of other participants, just as the decisions of other participants may influence your
profit.

Your profit is calculated in points. At the end of the experiment your points will be con-
verted into Swiss Francs according to the following exchange rate:


                               70 points = 1 Swiss Franc

Regardless of your decisions in the experiment, you will also receive a fixed amount of CHF
10 for your participation.

The experiment consists of several identical rounds. At the end of the session, your remu-
neration will be calculated as the sum of your income obtained in all these rounds.




                                             52
                              Summary of the Experiment

There are two types of participants in today's experiment: employers and workers. Each
participant is randomly assigned to one of the two roles.

You will be an EMPLOYER for the whole duration of the experiment.

The experiment consists of a total of 15 periods. At the beginning of each period you are
randomly matched with a new worker. In each period you have the possibility to interact
with the worker you are paired with. These interactions will be governed by the same rules
in each period. However, since you are randomly assigned a new worker in each period, you
will interact with many different trading partners over the duration of the experiment.

Interaction between employers and workers
In what follows we summarize how the interaction between an employer and a worker takes
place. In each period the employer and the worker go through the same six stages. At this
point we only provide a very brief and general description of each stage. The purpose of this
first part of the instructions is to give you an overview of what will happen in the experiment.
In the second part of the instructions we provide a much more detailed description of each
stage and we also illustrate how you can enter your decisions into the computer.

(1) Assignment of a new worker
At the beginning of every period you are randomly assigned a new worker. The compensation
of the worker is regulated in the following way:
     · You pay the worker a fixed wage that he receives with certainty. The fixed wage is
       the same in each period and you cannot change it.
     · In addition, you have the possibility to pay the worker a bonus. You decide whether
       or not to pay the bonus after you have received some information about the return
       that the worker has produced for you in this period.
(1-2) Communication between employer and worker
At the beginning of each period you have the opportunity to send a message to your worker.
In this message you can indicate your strategy regarding the bonus payment.
At the same time, your worker has the opportunity to send you a message in which he can
indicate his strategies regarding the effort level and the potential decision to reduce the
return.


                                               53
(1-2) Message exchange between employer and worker
At the beginning of each period you must make the decision to accept a proposed working
agreement or not. At the same time, your worker has to make the same decision - accepting
the proposed working agreement or not.
It is necessary for both parties ­ your worker and you ­ to accept the agreement for it to be
in place during the interactions.
Two situations can arise:
   (1) If your worker AND you both decide to accept the agreement, the subsequent inter-
       actions will follow with the agreement in place.
   (2) If your worker OR you decide not to accept the agreement, the subsequent interactions
       will follow without the agreement in place.
(1-2) Message exchange between employer and worker
At the beginning of each period you must make the decision to accept a proposed working
agreement or not. At the same time, your worker has to make the same decision - accepting
the proposed working agreement or not.
It is necessary for both parties ­ your worker and you ­ to accept the agreement. Otherwise,
the interactions will cease and you will receive a fixed amount of 40 points for this period.
In the case that both your worker and you accept the agreement, the interactions will proceed
as stated in the agreement.
(2) Worker's effort choice
Your worker produces a return for you. The return that the worker produces can be either
large or small. The worker can influence the probability with which the return is high by
choosing his effort level.
     · If the worker chooses to exert high effort, it is very likely that he produces a large
       return and not very likely that he produces a low return.
     · If the worker chooses to provide low effort, in contrast, it is very likely that the return
       is low and not very likely that the return is high.
For the worker providing high effort is more costly than providing low effort. Once the
worker has determined his effort level a computerized random device determines whether
the return is large or small.
(3) Information about the quality of the worker's output
Neither you as the employer nor your worker can directly observe the return. However, you
and your worker both receive separate and subjective pieces of information about the return.
It is important to understand two facts about these subjective pieces of information:
                                               54
     · The subjective information is not always correct. Your subjective information may
       indicate a large return although the true return is small (or vice versa).
     · The same is also true for your worker's information.
     · In addition, it is also possible that your information differs from the information of
       the worker, i.e., you may get the subjective information that the return is small,
       while your worker gets the information that the return is large (or vice versa).
(4) Employer's bonus payment
After you have received your subjective information about the return produced by the worker,
you need to decide whether you would like to pay a bonus to the worker or not.
     · If you decide to pay the bonus, the worker receives his fixed wage plus the bonus as
       compensation.
     · If you decide not to pay the bonus, the worker receives only his fixed wage as com-
       pensation.
(5) Worker's decision to reduce the return
The worker observes your decision regarding the bonus payment and can then decide whether
or not he would like to reduce the return he has produced for you. If the worker would like
to reduce the return this is also costly to him.
Important : The worker does not know with certainty whether the return is large or small.
He makes his decision solely based on his knowledge about your bonus payment and his
subjective information about the return.
(5-6) Decision to file a complaint
The worker observes your bonus payment decision and can then decide whether to file a
complaint or not. Filing a complaint imposes a cost on you and it is also costly for the
worker.
Important : The worker does not know with certainty whether the return is large or small.
He makes his decision solely based on his knowledge about your bonus payment and his
subjective information about the return.
(6) Profits
After the worker's return reduction decision, the period is over. At this point you are
informed about the true return that the worker has produced and your profit for this period
is displayed on your screen.
The worker also receives information about his profit on the screen. However, the worker is
never informed about the true return which he has produced and therefore does not know
how much profit you made as employer.
                                             55
You as the employer do not receive any information about the worker's effort choice and
therefore you do not know the profit of the worker.
Subsequently, the next period begins.
Remember : At the beginning of each new period each employer is randomly assigned a
new worker.

                     Detailed Description of the Experiment

You are an EMPLOYER for the whole duration of the experiment.

The experiment is computerized. All decisions that you make during the experiment need
be entered in the computer in front of you.

In this second part of the instructions we explain in detail which decision you and the other
participants can make, how you can enter these decisions in the computer, and how these
decisions affect your own payoff and the payoffs of other participants.

If you have questions while reading the instructions, please raise your hand. An experimenter
will come to your workplace and answer your question in private.

(1) Assignment of a new worker
At the beginning of each period you are randomly assigned a new worker who works for you
in the current period. The employment relationship adheres to the following rules:
     · You pay the worker a fixed wage of 100 points that he gets with certainty. This wage
       is the same in every period and you cannot change it.
     · In addition, you have the possibility to pay the worker a bonus of 50 points after
       you have received subjective information about the the return that the worker has
       generated for you. Whether you you pay the bonus or not is completely up to you.

(1-2) Communication between employer and worker
At the beginning of each period you have the opportunity to send a message to your worker.
In this message you can indicate your strategy regarding the bonus payment. You can choose
any of the following messages:

   (1) I will pay the bonus with certainty.
   (2) I will pay the bonus with high probability.
   (3) I will pay the bonus if I have the impression that you exerted high effort.
                                             56
   (4) I pay the bonus if my private information indicates a high return.
   (5) I will not pay the bonus.
   (6) I prefer not to send a message.

Important : The message you send is not binding. always full discretion to decide whether
to pay the bonus to your worker or not. If you rather not send a message to your worker,
you also have the option to do so.
Likewise, your worker also has the opportunity to send you a message indicating his strategy
regarding effort level and the potential reduction of return. The workers messaging options
regarding the effort level are:

   (1) I will exert high effort.
   (2) I will exert low effort.
   (3) I prefer not to send a message.
The workers messaging options regarding the decision to reduce the return are:
   (1)   I   will always reduce the return.
   (2)   I   will reduce the return if I do not get the bonus.
   (3)   I   will reduce the return if I do not get the bonus although I got a good signal.
   (4)   I   will never reduce the return.
   (5)   I   prefer not to send a message.
The message of the worker is not binding. The worker is always free to decide the level
of effort and whether to reduce the return or not. If the worker prefers not to send you a
message, he also has the option to do so.

(1-2) Message exchange between employer and worker
At the beginning of each period you are given the option to accept a working agreement.
This agreement specifies the optimal strategy. You can find an example of this agreement
below.
In order to begin the interaction, your worker and you need to take a decision whether to
accept the agreement or not. Furthermore, It is necessary for both parties ­ your worker and
you ­ to accept the agreement for it to be in place during the interactions. Two situations
can occur:

   (1) If your worker AND you both decide to accept the agreement, the subsequent inter-
       actions will follow with the agreement in place.
   (2) If your worker OR you decide not to accept the agreement, the subsequent interactions
       will follow without the agreement in place.
                                                 57
Important: The agreement is not binding. You have always full discretion to pay the bonus.
Likewise, the worker is not obliged to comply with the terms of the agreement. The worker
has full discretion on the level of effort exerted and he can decide freely whether to initiate
conflict or not.
(1-2) Message exchange between employer and worker
At the beginning of each period you are given the option to accept a working agreement.
This agreement specifies the optimal strategy. You can find an example of this agreement
below.
In order to begin the interaction, your worker and you need to take a decision whether to
accept the agreement or not. Furthermore, it is necessary for both parties ­ your worker and
you ­ to accept the agreement for it to be in place during the interactions. Otherwise, the
interactions will cease and you will receive a fixed amount of 40 points for this period.
Important: The agreement is not binding. You have always full discretion to pay the bonus.
Likewise, the worker is not obliged to comply with the terms of the agreement. The worker
has full discretion on the level of effort exerted and he can decide freely whether to initiate
conflict or not.




(2) Worker's effort choice
Your worker produces a return for you. There are two possibilities:
                                              58
     · The return can be large: 350 Points
     · The return can be small: 150 Points
Your worker cannot directly choose the return. However, he can influence the probability
with which the return will be large by choosing his level of work effort on the job. The
worker can either provide high effort or low effort. Choosing high effort creates a cost for
the worker:
     · If the worker decides to provide high effort his effort costs are equal to 10 points.
     · If the worker decides to provide low effort his effort costs are equal to 0 points.
The worker's effort choice affects the probability that the return is large as follows:
     · If the worker provides high effort, the return is large with a probability of 85% and
       the return is low with a probability of 15%
     · If the worker provides low effort, in contrast, the return is large with a probability of
       only 15% and the return is small with a probability of 85%.
Once the worker has made his effort choice a computerized random device determines the
return.

(3) Information about the quality of the worker's output
Neither you nor your worker can directly observe whether the return is large or small at
this point in time. However, you will get a subjective piece of information about the return.
Likewise your worker also gets a subjective piece of information. The subjective information
is private, i.e., you only get to know your information and you never observe the worker's
information. At the same time your worker only observes his information and never learns
about your information.
Important : The subjective information does not always reflect the truth:
     · It is possible that your subjective information indicates a high value although the
       true value is low (and vice versa). The same is also true for the information of the
       worker.
     · In addition, you and the worker may receive different information, i.e., it is possi-
       ble that you get the information that the value is high, while the worker gets the
       information that the value is low (or vice versa).
Details on subjective information :
Your subjective information as the employer depends on the true return:
     · If the true return is large, your subjective information indicates a large return with
       a probability of 75% and a small return with a probability of 25%.
                                              59
     · If the true return is small, your subjective information indicates a small return with
       a probability of 75% and a large return with a probability of 25%.
Your subjective information as the employer depends on the true return:
     · If your subjective information indicates a large return, the probability that the worker
       receives the same subjective information is 75%. However, with a probability of 25%
       the worker's subjective information indicates a small return.
     · If your subjective information indicates a small return, the probability that the worker
       receives the same subjective information is 75%. However, with a probability of 25%
       the worker's subjective information indicates a large return.

(4) Employer's bonus payment
After you have received your subjective information about the return, you need to decide
whether you would like to pay a bonus of 50 points to the worker.

     · If you decide to pay the bonus the worker not only receives his fixed wage of 100
       points, but also the bonus of 50 points. Thus, in this case the worker's total com-
       pensation amounts to 150 points.
     · If you decide not to pay the bonus, the worker receives only the fixed wage of 100
       points as compensation in this period.

(5) Worker's return reduction decision
The worker is informed about your decision regarding the bonus payment. Then the worker
can decide whether or not he would like to reduce the return which he has produced for
you as the employer. The worker can reduce your return by at most 80 points. However,
reducing the return is also costly to the worker: for each point that he deducts from the
return the worker has to pay 0.1 points out of his own profit. For example, if the worker
decides to reduce the return by 50 points, he needs to give up 5 points of his own profit.
If the worker decides not to reduce the return, nothing happens and your profit and the
worker's profit are unaffected.
The worker's return reduction decision concludes the period. In the third part of the in-
structions we explain in detail how your choices and the choices of the worker influence your
profit as an employer and the profit of the worker.

(5-6) Decision to file a complaint
The worker is informed about your decision regarding the bonus payment. Then the worker
can decide whether or not he would like to file a complaint that will impose a cost on you of
100 points. Filing the complaint is also costly for the worker: he needs to pay 10 points.
                                              60
In order to file a complaint correctly, the worker needs to accept the reasons behind filing
the complaint. If the worker decides not to file a complaint, nothing happens and your profit
and the worker's profit are unaffected.
The worker's return reduction decision concludes the period. In the third part of the in-
structions we explain in detail how your choices and the choices of the worker influence your
profit as an employer and the profit of the worker.

                Calculation of Incomes at the End of the Period

Your profit as an employer
Your profit as employer is determined as follows:

      Your profit = Return produced by the worker
                       - fixed wage to the worker
                       - bonus payment to the worker if you decide to pay the bonus
                       - return reduction if the worker decides to reduce the return
Thus, your profit increases if the return is high instead of low. Paying a bonus to the worker
reduces your profit. In addition, your profit is also reduced if the worker decides to reduce
the return at the end of the period.
Warning : It is possible that your profit becomes negative in certain periods. For example,
assume that you have decided to pay the bonus to the worker, the worker has decided to not
reduce the return, but it turns out that the return produced by the worker is small. In this
case your profit is ­ 50 (Profit = Return ­ Wage ­ Bonus = 150 ­ 100 ­ 50 = ­ 50). You
have to pay for these negative profits with accumulated profits from previous periods, and,
if necessary, with your show-up fee.

The worker's profit
Your profit as worker is determined as follows:

   Worker's profit = Fixed wage from employer
                        + bonus from employer if the employer decides to pay the bonus
                        - cost of effort, if the worker decides to provide high effort
Thus the worker's profit is higher if you decide to pay him the bonus. Choosing a high effort
reduces the profit of the worker.
After the payoff screen disappears a new period begins in which you are randomly rematched
with a new worker.
                                              61
In the fourth part of these instructions we will ask you to answer a series of control questions.
Please fill in the necessary calculations in the empty spaces provided on the exercise sheets.
Once you have found the final result for a question, you can enter the result on your computer
screen and the computer will tell you whether your answer is correct or not.
If you have questions, please raise your hand and wait until an experimenter comes to your
workplace to answer your question in private.
The following list summarizes all the important parameters of the experiment. You need
these numbers to answer the control questions.
Return
     · Large return = 350 Points
     · Small return = 150 Points
Cost of worker's effort
     · Cost of high effort = 10 Points
     · Cost of low effort = 0 Points
Worker's compensation
     · Fixed wage = 100 Points
     · Bonus = 50 Points
Probabilities that a small or large return is realized:

                       Worker's effort   Large return (300 Points)    Small return (100 Points)

                       High              85%                          15%
                       Low               15%                          85%



Probabilities that your subjective information indicates a small or large return:

                   True return     Subjective information: large     Subjective information: small

                   Large           75%                               25%
                   Small           25%                               75%



Probabilities that the worker's subjective information indicates a small or large return:

               Your subjective Information     Worker's subj. info: large    Worker's subj. info: small

               Large                           75%                           25%
               Small                           25%                           75%



Cost of return reduction: The worker can reduce your return by 100 points which as a cost
of 10 points.
                                                         62
                                         Control Questions

To check if you comprehended the consequences of your decisions during this experiment,
we ask you to answer the following question. You can use the piece of paper to solve the
questions. To check whether you've reached the right solution, please, enter your responses
in the computer.

Exercise 1
Assume that the true return is large:
  What is the probability that your subjective information indicates a large return:
  What is the probability that your subjective information indicates a small return:
Assume that the true return is small:
  What is the probability that your subjective information indicates a large return:
  What is the probability that your subjective information indicates a small return:
Assume that your subjective information indicates a large return:
  What is the probability that your worker has the same subjective information:
  What is the probability that your worker's subjective information is different:
Assume that your subjective information indicates a small return:
  What is the probability that your worker has the same subjective information:
  What is the probability that your worker's subjective information is different:

Exercise 2
For this exercise assume that your worker chooses to provide high effort.

   (1) What is the probability that a large (350 points) return is realized?
   (2) What is the probability that a small return (150 points) is realized?
   (3) Assume that you do NOT pay the bonus and the worker does NOT reduce the return



                                         Large return (350 points)   Small return (150 points)

                 Your profit
                 Profit of your worker



   (4) Assume that you pay the bonus and the worker does NOT reduce the return
                                                      63
                                         Large return (350 points)   Small return (150 points)

                 Your profit
                 Profit of your worker



   (5) Assume that you do NOT pay the bonus and the worker reduces the return by 100
       points

                                         Large return (350 points)   Small return (150 points)

                 Your profit
                 Profit of your worker



   (6) Assume that you pay the bonus and the worker reduces the return by 100 points

                                         Large return (350 points)   Small return (150 points)

                 Your profit
                 Profit of your worker



Exercise 3
For this exercise assume that your worker chooses to provide low effort.
   (1) What is the probability that a large (350 points) return is realized?
   (2) What is the probability that a small return (150 points) is realized?
   (3) Assume that you do NOT pay the bonus and the worker does NOT reduce the return


                                         Large return (350 points)   Small return (150 points)

                 Your profit
                 Profit of your worker



   (4) Assume that you pay the bonus and the worker does NOT reduce the return

                                         Large return (350 points)   Small return (150 points)

                 Your profit
                 Profit of your worker



   (5) Assume that you do NOT pay the bonus and the worker reduces the return by 100
       points

                                         Large return (350 points)   Small return (150 points)

                 Your profit
                 Profit of your worker


                                                      64
   (6) Assume that you pay the bonus and the worker reduces the return by 100 points

                                         Large return (350 points)   Small return (150 points)

                 Your profit
                 Profit of your worker



Exercise 4
For this exercise assume that both your worker and you have accepted the working agreement.
   (1) According to the agreement, what level of effort should the worker exert?
                                                    High or Low
   (2) If your subjective information indicates a low return, should you pay the bonus
       according to the agreement?
                                                     Yes or No
   (3) If your subjective information indicates a high return, should you pay the bonus
       according to the agreement?
                                                     Yes or No
   (4) If you haven't paid the bonus and the subjective information of the worker indicates
       a high return, should the worker reduce your return according to the agreement?
                                                     Yes or No
   (5) If you haven't paid the bonus and the subjective information of the worker indicates
       a low return, should the worker reduce your return according to the agreement?
                                                     Yes or No




                                                      65
                                Instructions for Workers


Introduction

You are about to participate in an experiment of the University of Lausanne. During this
experiment you have the opportunity to earn a sum of money that will be paid to you at
the end of the experiment. The amount of money you earn may be more significant if

     · you read the instructions carefully.
     · you think carefully about the decisions you make.

If you have any questions while reading the instructions or while the experiment is in
progress, feel free to call us by raising your hand. By contrast, any communication between
participants--except through the channels offered as part of the experiment--is prohibited.
In the event of non-compliance with these instructions, we will be obliged to exclude you
from the experience without any payment.

In today's experiment, you will interact with other participants via your computer. The
decisions you make will have an impact on your profit. Your decisions will also influence the
profit of other participants, just as the decisions of other participants may influence your
profit.

Your profit is calculated in points. At the end of the experiment your points will be con-
verted into Swiss Francs according to the following exchange rate:


                               70 points = 1 Swiss Franc

Regardless of your decisions in the experiment, you will also receive a fixed amount of CHF
10 for your participation.

The experiment consists of several identical rounds. At the end of the session, your remu-
neration will be calculated as the sum of your income obtained in all these rounds.




                                             66
                              Summary of the Experiment

There are two types of participants in today's experiment: employers and workers. Each
participant is randomly assigned to one of the two roles.

You will be an WORKER for the whole duration of the experiment.

The experiment consists of a total of 15 periods. At the beginning of each period you are
randomly matched with a new employer. In each period you have the possibility to interact
with the employer you are paired with. These interactions will be governed by the same rules
in each period. However, since you are randomly assigned to a new employer in each period,
you will interact with many different trading partners over the duration of the experiment.

Interaction between employers and workers
In what follows we summarize how the interaction between an employer and a worker takes
place. In each period the employer and the worker go through the same six stages. At this
point we only provide a very brief and general description of each stage. The purpose of this
first part of the instructions is to give you an overview of what will happen in the experiment.
In the second part of the instructions we provide a much more detailed description of each
stage and we also illustrate how you can enter your decisions in the computer.

(1) Assignment to a new employer

At the beginning of every period you are randomly assigned to a new employer. Your
compensation as worker is regulated in the following way:

     · You receive a fixed wage that the employer has to pay with certainty. The fixed wage
       is the same in each period and the employer cannot change it.
     · In addition, the employer has the possibility to pay you a bonus. The employer
       decides whether or not to pay the bonus after he has received some information
       about the return that you (as the worker) have produced for him in this period.

(1-2) Communication between employer and worker

At the beginning of each period you have the opportunity to send a message to your employer.
In this message you can indicate your strategy regarding the effort level and the potential
decision to reduce the return. At the same time, your employer has the opportunity to send
you a message in which he can indicate his strategies regarding the bonus payment.

(1-2) Message exchange between employer and worker
                                               67
At the beginning of each period you must make the decision to accept a proposed working
agreement or not. At the same time, your employer has to make the same decision - accepting
the proposed working agreement or not.
It is necessary for both parties ­ your employer and you ­ to accept the agreement for it to
be in place during the interactions.
Two situations can arise:
   (1) If your employer AND you both decide to accept the agreement, the subsequent
       interactions will follow with the agreement in place.
   (2) If your employer OR you decide not to accept the agreement, the subsequent inter-
       actions will follow without the agreement in place.
(1-2) Message exchange between employer and worker
At the beginning of each period you must make the decision to accept a proposed working
agreement or not. At the same time, your worker has to make the same decision - accepting
the proposed working agreement or not.
It is necessary for both parties ­ your employer and you ­ to accept the agreement. Otherwise,
the interactions will cease and you will receive a fixed amount of 40 points for this period.
In the case that both your employer and you accept the agreement, the interactions will
proceed as stated in the agreement.
(2) Worker's effort choice
As a worker you produce a return for your employer. The return that you produce can be
either large or small. As a worker you can influence the probability with which the return is
high by choosing your effort level.
     · If you choose to exert high effort, it is very likely that you produce a large return
       and not very likely that you produce a low return.
     · If you choose to provide low effort, in contrast, it is very likely that the return is low
       and not very likely that the return is high.
For you providing high effort is more costly than providing low effort. Once you have
determined your effort level a computerized random device determines whether the return
is large or small.
(3) Information about the quality of the worker's output
Neither you as the worker nor your employer can directly observe the return. However,
you and your employer both receive separate and subjective pieces of information about the
return.
It is important to understand two facts about these subjective pieces of information:
                                               68
     · The subjective information is not always correct. Your subjective information may
       indicate a large return although the true return is small (or vice versa).
     · The same is also true for your employer's information.
     · In addition, it is also possible that your information differs from the information of
       the employer, i.e., you may get the subjective information that the return is small,
       while your employer gets the information that the return is large (or vice versa).
(4) Employer's bonus payment
After your employer has received his subjective information about the return that you have
produced, he needs to decide whether he would like to pay a bonus to you or not.
     · If the employer decides to pay the bonus, you receive the fixed wage plus the bonus
       as compensation.
     · If the employer decides not to pay the bonus, you receives only the fixed wage as
       compensation.
(5) Worker's return reduction decision
As a worker you observe the employer's decision regarding the bonus payment and you can
then decide whether or not you would like to reduce the return that you have produced for
the employer. If you would like to reduce the return this is slightly costly to you.
Important : You do not know with certainty whether the return is large or small. You make
your decision solely based on your knowledge about the bonus payment of the employer and
your subjective information about the return.
(5-6) Decision to file a complaint
As a worker you observe the employer's decision regarding the bonus payment and you can
then decide whether you would like or not to file a complaint. Filing a complaint imposes a
cost on your employer of 100 points and it also costs you 10 points. Instead, if you decide
not to file a complaint, neither your employer or you would need to pay the associated cost.
(6) Profits
After your return reduction decision, the period is over.At this point you receive information
about your profit on the screen. However, you are never informed about the true return which
you have produced and therefore you do also not know how much profit your employer made.
The employer is informed about the true return that you have produced as a worker and
his profit for this period is displayed on his screen. The employer does not receive any
information about your true effort choice and therefore the employer does not know how
much profit you made as a worker.

                                              69
                         Detailed description of the experiment

You are a WORKER for the whole duration of the experiment.

The experiment is computerized. All decisions that you make during the experiment need
be entered in the computer in front of you.

In this second part of the instructions we explain in detail which decision you and the other
participants can make, how you can enter these decisions in the computer, and how these
decisions affect your own payoff and the payoffs of other participants.

If you have questions while reading the instructions, please raise your hand. An experimenter
will come to your workplace and answer your question in private.

(1) Assignment to a new employer
At the beginning of each period you are randomly assigned to a new employer who works
for you in the current period. The employment relationship adheres to the following rules:
     · The employer pays you a fixed wage of 100 points with certainty. This wage is the
       same in every period and the employer cannot change it.
     · In addition, the employer has the possibility to pay you a bonus of 50 points after
       he has received subjective information about the return that you have generated for
       him. Whether the employer pays the bonus or not is completely up to him.
(1-2) Communication between employer and worker
At the beginning of each period you have the opportunity to send you a message to your
employer indicating your strategy regarding effort level and the potential reduction of return.
At the beginning of each period you have the opportunity to send a message to your worker.
In this message you can indicate your strategy regarding the bonus payment. You can choose
any of the following messages:
   (1)   I   will pay the bonus with certainty.
   (2)   I   will pay the bonus with high probability.
   (3)   I   will pay the bonus if I have the impression that you exerted high effort.
   (4)   I   pay the bonus if my private information indicates a high return.
   (5)   I   will not pay the bonus.
   (6)   I   prefer not to send a message.
Important : The message you send is not binding. You are always free to decide whether
to pay the bonus to your worker or not. If you rather not send a message to your worker,
                                                 70
you also have the option to do so. You can choose any of the following messages regarding
effort:
   (1) I will exert high effort.
   (2) I will exert low effort.
   (3) I prefer not to send a message.
You can choose any of the following messages regarding the decision to reduce the employer's
return:
   (1)   I   will always reduce the return.
   (2)   I   will reduce the return if I do not get the bonus.
   (3)   I   will reduce the return if I do not get the bonus although I got a good signal.
   (4)   I   will never reduce the return.
   (5)   I   prefer not to send a message.
Important: The messages you choose are not binding. You have full discretion to decide the
level of effort and whether to reduce the return or not. If you prefer to not send a message
to your employer, you also have the option to do so .
Simultaneously, your employer also has the opportunity to send you a message indicating
his strategy regarding bonus payment:
   (1)   I   will pay the bonus with certainty.
   (2)   I   will pay the bonus with high probability.
   (3)   I   will pay the bonus if I have the impression that you exerted high effort.
   (4)   I   pay the bonus if my private information indicates a high return.
   (5)   I   will not pay the bonus.
   (6)   I   prefer not to send a message.
The message of the employer is not binding. The employer is always free to decide the final
bonus payment decision. If the employer prefers not to send you a message, he also has the
option to do so.
(1-2) Message exchange between employer and worker
At the beginning of each period you are given the option to accept a working agreement.
This agreement specifies the optimal strategy. You can find an example of this agreement
one Figure 8.
In order to begin the interaction, your employer and you need to take the decision of whether
to accept the agreement or not. Furthermore, it is necessary for both parties ­ your employer
and you ­ to accept the agreement for it to be in place during the interactions. Two situations
can occur:
                                                 71
   (1) If your employer AND you both decide to accept the agreement, the subsequent
       interactions will follow with the agreement in place.
   (2) If your employer OR you decide not to accept the agreement, the subsequent inter-
       actions will follow without the agreement in place.
Important: The agreement is not binding. You have always full discretion to choose the
level of effort and the reduce the return of your employer. Likewise, the employer is not
obliged to comply with the terms of the agreement. The employer has full discretion on
decision to pay the bonus.


                                    Figure 8. Agreement




(2) Worker's effort choice +
As a worker you produce a return for your employer. There are two possibilities:
     · The return can be large: 350 Points
     · The return can be small: 150 Points
You cannot directly choose the return. However, you can influence the probability with
which the return will be large by choosing your level of work effort on the job. You can
either provide high effort or low effort. Choosing high effort creates a cost for you:

     · If you decide to provide high effort your effort costs are equal to 10 points.
                                              72
     · If you decide to provide low effort your effort costs are equal to 0 points.
Your effort choice affects the probability that the return is large as follows:
     · If you provide high effort, the return is large with a probability of 85% and the return
       is low with a probability of 15%.
     · If you provide low effort, in contrast, the return is large with a probability of only
       15% and the return is small with a probability of 85%.
(3) Information about the quality of the worker's output

Neither you nor your employer can directly observe whether the return is large or small at
this point in time. However, you will get a subjective piece of information about the return.

Likewise your employer also gets a subjective piece of information. The subjective infor-
mation is private, i.e., you only get to know your information and you never observe the
employer's information. At the same time your employer only observes his information and
never learns about your information.

Important :
The subjective information does not always reflect the truth:
     · It is possible that your subjective information indicates a high value although the
       true value is low (and vice versa). The same is also true for the information of the
       employer.
     · In addition, you and the employer may receive different information, i.e., it is possible
       that you get the information that the value is high, while the employer gets the
       information that the value is low (or vice versa).
Details on subjective information :
The employer's subjective information depends directly on the true return:
     · If the true return is large, your subjective information indicates a large return with
       a probability of 75% and a small return with a probability of 25%.
     · If the true return is small, your subjective information indicates a small return with
       a probability of 75% and a large return with a probability of 25%.
Your own subjective information as the worker depends on the subjective information of the
employer:
     · If the employer's subjective information indicates a large return, the probability that
       you receive the same subjective information is 75%. However, with a probability of
       25% your subjective information indicates a small return.
                                               73
     · If the employer's subjective information indicates a small return, the probability that
       you receive the same subjective information is 75%. However, with a probability of
       25% your subjective information indicates a large return.
(4) Employer's bonus payment
After the employer has received his subjective information about the return, he needs to
decide whether he would like to pay you a bonus of 50 points.
     · If the employer decides to pay the bonus you not only receive the fixed wage of 100
       points, but also the bonus of 50 points. Thus, in this case your total compensation
       amounts to 125 points.
     · If the employer decides not to pay the bonus you receive only the fixed wage of 100
       points as compensation in this period.
After the employer has made his bonus payment decision, you are informed about his deci-
sion.
(5) Worker's return reduction decision
After you have been informed about the employer's bonus decision, you can decide whether
or not you would like to reduce the return which you have produced for the employer. You
can reduce the return by at most 100 points. However, reducing the return is also costly
for you: for each point that you deduct from the return you have to pay 0.1 points out of
your own profit. For example, if you decide to reduce the return by 50 points, you need to
pay 5 points out of your own profit.Instead, if you decide not to reduce the return, nothing
happens and the profits of the employer and your own profit are unaffected.
Your return reduction decision concludes the period. In the third part of the instructions we
explain in detail how your choices and the choices of the employer influence your profit as a
worker and the profit of the employer.
(5-6) Decision to file a complaint
After you have been informed about the employer's bonus decision, you can decide whether
or not you would like to file a complaint. Filing a complaint imposes a cost on your employer
of 100 points and it also costs you 10 points.
Instead, if you decide not to file a complaint, nothing happens and the profits of the employer
and your own profit are unaffected.
Your return reduction decision concludes the period. In the third part of the instructions we
explain in detail how your choices and the choices of the employer influence your profit as a
worker and the profit of the employer.

                                              74
                Calculation of incomes at the end of the period

Your profit as an employer
Your profit as employer is determined as follows:

     Your profit = Fixed wage from employer
                      + bonus from employer if the employer decides to pay the bonus
                      - cost of effort, if you decide to provide high effort
Thus your profit is higher if your employer decides to pay you the bonus. Choosing a high
effort reduces your profit.

The employer's profit
Your profit as worker is determined as follows:

   Employer's profit = Return produced by the worker
                          - fixed wage to the worker
                          - bonus payment to the worker if you decide to pay the bonus
                          - return reduction if the worker decides to reduce the return
Thus, the employer's profit increases if the return is high instead of low. Paying a bonus
educes the employer's profit. In addition, the employer's profit is also reduced if you decide
to reduce the return at the end of the period.

Warning: It is possible that the employer's profit becomes negative in certain periods. For
example, assume that the employer has decided to pay the bonus, you have decided not to
reduce the return, but it turns out that the return is small. In this case the employer's profit
is -50 (Profit = Return ­ Wage ­ Bonus = 100 - 100 - 50 = -50). The employer has to pay
for these negative profits with accumulated profits from previous periods, and, if necessary,
with his show-up fee.

You are never informed about the true return which you have produced and therefore you
do also not know how much profit your employer made.

The employer is informed about the true return that you have produced as a worker and
his profit for this period is displayed on his screen, but the employer does not receive any
information about your true effort choice and therefore the employer does not know how
much profit you made as a worker.

After the payoff screen disappears a new period begins in which you are randomly rematched
with a new worker.
                                               75
In the fourth part of these instructions we will ask you to answer a series of control questions.
Please fill in the necessary calculations in the empty spaces provided on the exercise sheets.
Once you have found the final result for a question, you can enter the result on your computer
screen and the computer will tell you whether your answer is correct or not.
If you have questions, please raise your hand and wait until an experimenter comes to your
workplace to answer your question in private.
The following list summarizes all the important parameters of the experiment. You need
these numbers to answer the control questions.
Return
     · Large return = 350 Points
     · Small return = 150 Points
Your effort costs
     · Cost of high effort = 10 Points
     · Cost of low effort = 0 Points
Your compensation
     · Fixed wage = 100 Points
     · Bonus = 50 Points
Probabilities that a small or large return is realized:

                       Worker's effort   Large return (300 Points)    Small return (100 Points)

                       High              85%                          15%
                       Low               15%                          85%



Probabilities that the employer's subjective information indicates a small or large return:

                    True return    Subjective information: large     Subjective information: small

                    Large          75%                               25%
                    Small          25%                               75%



Probabilities that your subjective information indicates a small or large return:

               Your subjective Information     Worker's subj. info: large    Worker's subj. info: small

               Large                           75%                           25%
               Small                           25%                           75%



Cost of return reduction: The worker can reduce your return by 100 points. For each point
that he deducts from the return he has to pay 0.1 Points out of his own profit.
                                                         76
                                          Control Questions

To check your if you comprehended the consequences of your decisions during this exper-
iment, we ask you to answer the following question. You can use the piece of paper to
solve the questions. To check whether you've reached the right solution, please, enter your
responses in the computer.

Exercise 1
Assume that the true return is large:

   (1) What is the probability that the employer's subjective information indicates a large
       return?
   (2) What is the probability that the employer's subjective information indicates a small
       return?

Assume that the true return is small:

   (1) What is the probability that the employer's subjective information indicates a large
       return?
   (2) What is the probability that the employer's subjective information indicates a small
       return?
Suppose that the employer's subjective information indicates a large return:

   (1) What is the probability that you receive the same subjective information?
   (2) What is the probability that your subjective information is different?
Suppose that the employer's subjective information indicates a small return:

   (1) What is the probability that you receive the same subjective information?
   (2) What is the probability that your subjective information is different?
Exercise 2
For this exercise assume that your worker chooses to provide high effort.

   (1) What is the probability that a large (350 points) return is realized?
   (2) What is the probability that a small return (150 points) is realized?
   (3) Assume that the employer does NOT pay the bonus and you do NOT reduce the
       return

                                           Large return (350 points)   Small return (150 points)

                Your profit
                Profit of your employer


                                                       77
   (4) Assume that the employer pays the bonus and you do NOT reduce the return

                                          Large return (350 points)   Small return (150 points)

                Your profit
                Profit of your employer



   (5) Assume that the employer does NOT pay the bonus and you reduce the return by
       100 points

                                          Large return (350 points)   Small return (150 points)

                Your profit
                Profit of your employer



   (6) Assume that the employer pays the bonus and you reduce the return by 100 points

                                          Large return (350 points)   Small return (150 points)

                Your profit
                Profit of your employer



Exercise 3
For this exercise assume that your worker chooses to provide low effort.
   (1) What is the probability that a large (350 points) return is realized?
   (2) What is the probability that a small return (150 points) is realized?
   (3) Assume that the employer does NOT pay the bonus and you do NOT reduce the
       return

                                          Large return (350 points)   Small return (150 points)

                Your profit
                Profit of your employer



   (4) Assume that the employer pays the bonus and you do NOT reduce the return

                                          Large return (350 points)   Small return (150 points)

                Your profit
                Profit of your employer



   (5) Assume that the employer does NOT pay the bonus and you reduce the return by
       100 points
                                                      78
                                          Large return (350 points)   Small return (150 points)

                Your profit
                Profit of your employer



   (6) Assume that the employer pays the bonus and you reduce the return by 100 points

                                          Large return (350 points)   Small return (150 points)

                Your profit
                Profit of your employer



Exercise 4-2
For this exercise assume that both your worker and you have accepted the working agreement.


   (1) According to the agreement, what level of effort should the worker exert?
                                                    High or Low
   (2) If your subjective information indicates a low return, should you pay the bonus
       according to the agreement?
                                                     Yes or No
   (3) If your subjective information indicates a high return, should you pay the bonus
       according to the agreement?
                                                     Yes or No
   (4) If you haven't paid the bonus and the subjective information of the worker indicates
       a high return, should the worker reduce your return according to the agreement?
                                                     Yes or No
   (5) If you haven't paid the bonus and the subjective information of the worker indicates
       a low return, should the worker reduce your return according to the agreement?
                                                     Yes or No

Exercise 4-2
For this exercise assume that both your worker and you have accepted the working agreement.
   (1) According to the agreement, what level of effort should the worker exert?
                                                    High or Low
   (2) If your subjective information indicates a low return, should you pay the bonus
       according to the agreement?

                                                      79
                                            Yes or No
   (3) If your subjective information indicates a high return, should you pay the bonus
       according to the agreement?
                                            Yes or No
   (4) If you haven't paid the bonus and the subjective information of the worker indicates
       a high return, should the worker reduce your return according to the agreement?
                                            Yes or No
   (5) If you haven't paid the bonus and the subjective information of the worker indicates
       a low return, should the worker reduce your return according to the agreement?
                                            Yes or No

  Columbia University, Department of Economics 420 West 118th, Mail Code 3308, New
York, NY 10027-7296.
  Email address : wbmacleod@wbmacleod.net

  University of Lausanne, UNIL-Chamberonne, Internef 496, CH-1015 Lausanne.
  Email address : victoria.vallelara@unil.ch

  University of Lausanne, UNIL-Chamberonne, Internef 412, CH-1015 Lausanne.
  Email address : christian.zehnder@unil.ch




                                            80
