                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  WHAT IS CEO OVERCONFIDENCE? EVIDENCE FROM EXECUTIVE ASSESSMENTS

                                     Steven N. Kaplan
                                     Morten Sorensen
                                  Anastasia A. Zakolyukina

                                     Working Paper 27853
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27853


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2020




Kaplan is with the University of Chicago Booth School of Business and NBER. Sørensen is with
the Tuck School of Business and CEPR. Zakolyukina is with the University of Chicago Booth
School of Business. We thank ghSMART for providing the data and for helpful discussions and
comments. We thank Geoffrey Tate (discussant), Yueran Ma, and seminar participants at Chicago
Booth, 10th Miami Behavioral Finance Conference, and Yale School of Management for helpful
comments. We thank Sehwa Kim, Jisoo Lee, Yuriy Olshanskiy, Michael Davis, Jacob Posner,
Nina Linchenko, Jingyu Zhang, and Kan Xu for outstanding research support. This study was
approved by the University of Chicago IRB protocol IRB20-0210. This research has been
supported by the Fama-Miller Center and the Center for Research in Security Prices. Zakolyukina
acknowledges financial support from the IBM Corporation Faculty Research Fund, William
Ladany Faculty Research Fund, and the University of Chicago Booth School of Business. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Steven N. Kaplan, Morten Sorensen, and Anastasia A. Zakolyukina. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What Is CEO Overconfidence? Evidence from Executive Assessments
Steven N. Kaplan, Morten Sorensen, and Anastasia A. Zakolyukina
NBER Working Paper No. 27853
September 2020
JEL No. G31,G41

                                          ABSTRACT

We use detailed assessments of CEO personalities to explore the option-based measure of CEO
overconfidence, Longholder, introduced by Malmendier and Tate (2005a) and widely used in the
behavioral corporate finance and economics literatures. Longholder is significantly related to
several specific characteristics and is negatively related to general ability. These relations also
hold for overconfidence measures derived from CEOs' earnings guidance. Investment-cash flow
sensitivities are larger for both Longholder and less able CEOs. Overall, Longholder CEOs have
many of the same characteristics traditionally associated with overconfident individuals,
including lower general ability, supporting the interpretation of this measure as reflecting
overconfidence.

Steven N. Kaplan                                 Anastasia A. Zakolyukina
Booth School of Business                         University of Chicago
The University of Chicago                        5807 S. Woodlawn Ave.
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue                       Chicago, IL 60637
Chicago, IL 60637                                aaz@chicagobooth.edu
and NBER
steven.kaplan@chicagobooth.edu

Morten Sorensen
Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth
100 Tuck Hall
Hanover, NH 03765
morten.sorensen@tuck.dartmouth.edu
1. Introduction

       Academics and practitioners increasingly believe that CEO personalities, abilities,
and characteristics matter for corporate performance. CEO overconfidence has received
particular attention in corporate finance and economics research because it might lead to
suboptimal corporate decisions. Malmendier and Tate (2005a) find that investments by
firms led by overconfident CEOs are significantly more sensitive to their cash flows, which
is often interpreted as a sign of managerial myopia. Malmendier and Tate (2008) find
that overconfident CEOs are more likely to make value-destroying mergers, particularly
diversifying ones.
   In their survey of CEO and managerial overconfidence, Malmendier and Tate (2015)
note that "the most common approach to measuring CEO overconfidence has been to
use decisions that the executive makes on his or her personal portfolio of company stock
options." The variable, named Longholder by Malmendier and Tate (2005a), classifies CEOs
as overconfident when they hold vested options that are at least 40% in the money until the
year the options expire. The intuition is that risk averse CEOs would exercise deep in-the-
money options well before expiration to reduce their exposure to company-specific risks
and to obtain the benefits of diversification, and that leaving such options outstanding
therefore signals overconfidence about the prospects of their firms. Many subsequent
papers have used this measure of overconfidence.
   There may be other reasons, however, for CEOs not to exercise in-the-money options.
For example: (1) Risk-neutral or less risk averse CEOs may choose to take advantage of the
tax deferral in options. (2) CEOs can hedge the value of their equity holdings rather than
engage in an outright sale of shares or exercise of options. (3) CEOs may believe or know
the company stock is undervalued, and rationally do not exercise. (4) CEOs may not be
   For example, see Bertrand and Schoar (2003), Bloom and Van Reenen (2007), and Kaplan et al. (2012).
   Malmendier and Tate (2015) survey the literature on CEO (and managerial) overconfidence. See also
Guenzel and Malmendier (2020) who survey the behavioral corporate finance literature on CEOs.
   See Bettis et al. (2001), Jagolinzer et al. (2007), and Bettis et al. (2015).


                                                  1
able to exercise options because the board precludes them from doing so.
   Given these alternative motivations for not exercising options, we use detailed assess-
ments of executives who become public company CEOs to understand which managerial
characteristics are related to Longholder. This, in turn, allows us to consider whether the
Longholder measure can be interpreted as reflecting CEO overconfidence.
   We obtain personality assessments for more than 2,600 candidates for management
positions. The assessments are based on four-hour structured interviews performed by
ghSMART, primarily between 2001 and 2012. After each interview, ghSMART produces
a detailed description of the candidate's background and characteristics. The assessments
also rate each candidate for 30 specific characteristics and abilities that capture different
aspects of the executive's personality.        The assessed executives are typically candidates
for CEO, CFO, COO, and other top management positions. The firms requesting the
assessments are governed under a variety of different ownership forms, including venture
capital, private equity-owned, other privately owned, and publicly traded firms.
   We track each candidate's subsequent career to determine which candidates subse-
quently become a CEO of a public company and identify 67 such candidates. Of these 67
CEOs, nine (13%) are Longholders. This approach allows us to compare the personalities of
CEOs classified as Longholders and Non-Longholders.
   We find that Longholder CEOs have significantly lower scores on a number of charac-
teristics: having a strong network, being organized and calm under pressure, moving fast,
sticking to commitments, having strong analytical skills, being creative, having a strong
work ethic, having good listening skills, and being open to criticism. Personalities of CEOs
identified as overconfident by the Longholder measure thus exhibit these characteristics to
a lesser extent than other CEOs.
   This evidence is consistent with the typical characteristics of overconfident individuals
   Some firms adopt "hold to retirement" or "hold past retirement" requirements for equity awards (Larcker
and Tayan 2016).
   Botelho and Powell (2018) and Botelho et al. (2017) also analyze the ghSMART data.
   See Table A-1 in Kaplan and Sorensen (2019).


                                                    2
identified in the psychology literature. Overconfident individuals have been found to have
weaker networks (Burt 1997; Klayman et al. 1999; Hayward et al. 2006; Gudmundsson
and Lechner 2013), to be too optimistic with organization, planning, and commitments
(Larwood and Whittaker 1977; Vallone et al. 1990), to have lower analytical skills and
cognitive ability (Stango et al. 2017; Chapman et al. 2018), and to be worse listeners and
feedback seekers (Tost et al. 2012; Meikle et al. 2016). Given that Longholder CEOs exhibit
similar characteristics, our evidence is consistent with the interpretation of Longholder as
measuring overconfidence.
   Because the specific characteristics are highly correlated, Kaplan and Sorensen (2019)
use factor analysis to reduce the dimensionality and identify the main variation in the
data. In the sample of 2,600 executives, they identify four factors that explain 54% of the
variation across characteristics. They interpret these factors as (1) general talent, (2) exe-
cution (vs. interpersonal), (3) charisma (vs. analytical), and (4) strategic (vs. managerial).
Interestingly, Longholder is significantly negatively related to the first factor, suggesting
that overconfident CEOs tend to have less general talent or ability. This finding is consis-
tent with the classic study (in psychology) by Kruger and Dunning (1999) who show that
lower-ability individuals tend to be more overconfident.
   We perform three robustness analyses. First, we confirm that firms with Longholder
CEOs are similar to firms with non-Longholder CEOs. Second, it is possible that non-
Longholders never have a chance to become Longholders, because their options are never
sufficiently in-the-money. But we find that the average moneyness of non-Longholders'
options is not statistically different from that of Longholders. Third, in addition to the
Longholder measure, we explore two alternative measures of overconfidence, namely, the
extent to which CEOs provide optimistic earnings guidance and the extent to which earn-
ings guidance is overly precise. We find the former measure, overly optimistic earnings
guidance, is also negatively correlated with many individual characteristics and with our
measure of CEO ability.



                                              3
   Finally, we estimate the investment-cash flow regressions from Malmendier and Tate
(2005a, 2015) using our sample. We confirm that investments by firms with Longholder
CEOs are significantly more sensitive to cash flows. Moreover, we find investments by firm
with less talented CEOs are also significantly more sensitive to cash flows. The sensitivity
to Longholder remains when we include both variables in a regression.
   Combined, then, our findings are consistent with overconfidence being associated with
lower general ability, but with Longholder capturing an aspect of overconfidence over and
above lower general ability.
   One limitation of this study is the small sample. Although we obtain statistically sig-
nificant results for the main relationships, we are unable to include additional explanatory
variables. Another limitation is that ghSMART does not explicitly rate the candidates'
overconfidence, and we are not able to relate the Longholder measure to a more direct
assessment of each candidate's overconfidence. Despite these limitations, we believe our
study is useful, given that our data contain unusually, if not uniquely, rich information
about the personalities of public company CEOs.
   The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes our data, the assessments, and the
measurement of overconfidence. Section 3 explores the correlation between the Longholder
measure, measures based on earnings guidance and the assessments. Section 4 explores
the correlation with Kaplan and Sorensen (2019) factors. Section 5 considers the relation
of investment to cash flow and its correlation with Longholder and the assessment factors.
Section 6 concludes.



2. Data

2.1 Assessments

   Our main data are a proprietary set of detailed personality assessments of candidates
for top management positions (see also Kaplan et al. 2012; Kaplan and Sorensen 2019). The


                                             4
assessments are performed by ghSMART, a consulting firm that is engaged by investors,
company boards, and company management teams to assess candidates for management
positions. Importantly, ghSMART is not an executive recruiting firm, and it does not
suggest which candidate(s) to consider for a given position. ghSMART does not receive
a fee contingent on whether a candidate is hired, and has no apparent incentives to de-
liver biased assessments. According to ghSMART, its main concern is to provide accurate
assessments to maintain its reputation and generate repeat business. Note that the assess-
ments are performed ex ante, typically before the candidate becomes CEO, which by itself
could influence the candidate's personality and overconfidence.
   ghSMART's assessments are based on extensive structured interviews. During the in-
terview, the interviewer asks for specific examples of the candidate's actions and behavior
at previous jobs and life stages, starting with the candidate's childhood and progressing
through the candidate's education and subsequent career path. The candidate's history
and behavior is summarized in a 20- to 40-page report, which is effectively a mini-biography
of the candidate.
   In addition to the narrative part, each report also includes ratings for 30 specific char-
acteristics across five general areas, which are classified by ghSMART as Leadership,
Personal, Intellectual, Motivational, and Interpersonal. Table A-1 in Kaplan and Sorensen
(2019) shows an excerpt from ghSMART's internal guidelines that describe the 30 charac-
teristics along with the behaviors that determine their scoring. Appendix A in this paper
lists the 30 characteristics and five general areas. In many of the assessments, the ratings
for oral and written communications are absent. Accordingly, we do not include these two
characteristics in our analyses. The reports sometimes include ratings for other character-
istics that are specific to a particular firm or situation, but because these characteristics are
    The ghSMART interviewers generally hold doctoral degrees or degrees from top MBA programs, and
have worked at consulting firms (e.g., McKinsey & Co., Bain, and Boston Consulting Group). ghSMART
reports a high degree of consistency of assessments across interviewers.
    Smart and Street (2008) provide additional information and detail about ghSMART's interviewing
methodology.



                                                5
not consistently reported across candidates, we do not include them in our analysis.
   An important concern is whether the candidates can "game" or "fake" the interviews
by providing answers they believe will help them be hired, even if they do not reflect
their actual personalities. The ghSMART assessments and ratings appear to be reliable
for a number of reasons. The assessments are formed using best practices from organiza-
tional psychology, including using external interviewers not self-assessments, and using
extensive structured interviews rather than questionnaires. In organizational psychology,
these practices have been found to produce assessments that are consistent across tests and
robust to gaming and faking by the test subjects. ghSMART charges more than $20,000
per assessment and has seen its business grow substantially, suggesting that ghSMART's
customers find the assessments useful.             Finally, it is difficult to reconcile the empirical
results with significant faking. If the assessments were uninformative, we would not see
the statistical relationships between the assessed characteristics and various outcomes that
are documented in Kaplan et al. (2012), Kaplan and Sorensen (2019) and this paper. For
example, Kaplan and Sorensen (2019) find that the scores predict which candidates later
become CEOs and CFOs, suggesting that the assessed characteristics are, at least some-
what, persistent and reflect the candidates' personalities as perceived in other hiring and
recruiting situations that do not involve ghSMART.
   It should be noted that at the time of the assessments, ghSMART and the candidates
would not have been aware of the factor structure and other results we report.


2.2 Factors

   The assessments grade the executives on the 28 specific characteristics we use, with
a rating from D (lowest) to A+ (highest), reflecting the extent to which the candidate's
     Additionally, albeit anecdotally, several PE firms told us they do not make any investments without a
CEO assessment of the type ghSMART provides. Although economic theory suggests it may be rational for
candidates to attempt to misrepresent their types, economic theory also prescribes that it would be irrational
for investors to rely on such assessments if they were uninformative. Assessments also are costly: in addition
to the fee charged by ghSMART, assessments require at least four hours of a candidate's time.



                                                      6
personality exhibit the specific characteristic. We convert these letter grades to numerical
scores by coding all grades of B or below as 1 (we combine these grades because we have
relatively few of them). We code grades of B+ as 2 and grades of A- as 3. We code grades
of A and A+ as 4, because we find relatively few A+'s. The results are not sensitive to the
coding scheme.
   The ratings for the characteristics are highly correlated, making it difficult to infer the
effects of individual characteristics in a multivariate analysis. Kaplan and Sorensen (2019)
use factor analysis to identify four factors with eigenvalues above one, which combined
capture most of the variation in the candidates' characteristics. The loadings of the indi-
vidual characteristics on the four factors are shown in Appendix B, and these loadings lend
themselves to natural interpretations of the factors. The first factor has positive loadings on
all the specific characteristics, and this factor can be interpreted as a CEO's general ability
in the spirit of Rosen (1981). This structure of this first factor is common in factor analysis,
dating back to Spearman's g-factor (Spearman 1904), and it reflects the general tendency
of characteristics to move together.
   The second factor loads on two distinct sets of characteristics. The more positive
loadings, in decreasing order, are for Respect, Open to criticism, Listening skills, and
Teamwork. These characteristics capture a candidate's communication and interpersonal
skills. By contrast, the more negative loadings are for Aggressive, Fast, Proactive, Holds
people accountable, and Removes underperformers. These characteristics arguably reflect
a candidate's execution ability. The second factor therefore sorts candidates into those
with better interpersonal skills versus those with greater execution ability. Those with
greater interpersonal skills have positive scores, and those with greater execution ability
have negative scores.
   The third factor has the most negative loadings for Enthusiasm, Persuasion, Aggressive,
Proactive, and Fast. These characteristics appear to describe more charismatic candidates.
By contrast, the most positive loadings are for Analytical skills, Attention to detail, Orga-



                                               7
nization, and Brainpower, which describe candidates with more analytical personalities.
The third factor can therefore be interpreted as sorting candidates into those with more
charismatic personalities, who have negative scores on this factor, versus candidates with
more analytical skills, who have positive scores on this factor.
   Finally, the fourth factor has the most positive loadings for Strategic vision, Brainpower,
Analytical skills, and Creative. These characteristics arguably describe candidates with
more high-level and strategic perspectives. It has the more negative loadings on Holds
people accountable, Efficiency, Attention to detail, and Organization, which are associated
with more managerial and detail-oriented personalities. The fourth factor thus differenti-
ates between candidates with a higher-level and strategic perspective, who have positive
scores on this factor, versus those with a managerial and detail-oriented personality, who
have negative scores.
   Kaplan and Sorensen (2019) compare the scores for CEO and CFO candidates. CEO
candidates score higher on the first factor (more general talent), more negatively on the
second factor (more execution), more negatively on the third factor (more charismatic),
and more positively on the fourth factor (more strategic). By contrast, the scores of CFO
candidates tend to have the opposite signs. CFOs tend to score lower on the first factor
(less general talent), higher on the second factor (more interpersonal), substantially higher
on the third factor (more analytical), and lower on the fourth factor (more detail-oriented
and managerial).


2.3 Overconfidence measures

   Managerial overconfidence has traditionally been defined in two ways (Malmendier
and Tate 2015; Bénabou and Tirole 2016): (a) as optimism, that is, overestimation of
one's absolute performance (overestimation) or relative performance (overplacement) (e.g.,
Heaton 2002; Malmendier and Tate 2005a; Ben-David et al. 2013); and (b) as overprecision,




                                              8
that is, excessive precision in one's beliefs (e.g., Hackbarth 2008; Ben-David et al. 2013).
   Because managerial overconfidence is difficult to measure directly outside of a survey
setting (as in Ben-David et al. 2013; Graham et al. 2013), the literature has used several
indirect measures. Overconfidence in terms of optimism--overestimation of the mean
outcome--has been measured using the option-based approach (e.g., Malmendier and
Tate 2005a,b, 2008), the earnings-forecast-based approach (e.g., Huang and Kisgen 2013;
Otto 2014), and the press-based approach (e.g., Malmendier and Tate 2008; Hirshleifer
et al. 2012).   The press-based approach requires an extensive search of media coverage for
each individual executive. By contrast, the option-based measures use executives' option
holdings data, and the earnings-forecast-based measures use firms' reported earnings and
earnings guidance data, which are available for public firms. The option-based Longholder
measure is probably the most widely used measure of overconfidence (Malmendier 2018).
   For overprecision, Ben-David et al. (2013) use a quarterly survey of CFOs' forecasts
of the S&P 500. Moreover, firms can specify a range forecast or a point estimate when
disclosing their earnings guidance, and more confident CEOs might provide a narrower
forecast range or a point estimate. Indeed, about two-thirds of firms provide a range
forecast (e.g., Otto 2014), and Huang and Kisgen (2013) suggest that the width of this range
reflects the confidence in the forecast.


2.3.1. Longholder measure

   To relate the CEOs' assessed personalities to measures of overconfidence, we manually
augment the assessment data with information about each candidate's subsequent career,
using LinkedIn, Bloomberg, and other web searches. We identify 67 individuals who
eventually become public company CEOs. Figure 1 shows the industries of the 78 firms
that these candidates worked for. Most of the firms are in information technology, health
care, consumer discretionary, and industrials.
    Moore and Healy (2008) reconciles these definitions of overconfidence.
    Malmendier (2018) discusses these measures in detail.


                                                    9
   For the candidates identified as public company CEOs, we obtain their equity and option
portfolio holdings from DEF 14A filings in the SEC EDGAR database, which enables us
to compute the Longholder measure from Malmendier and Tate (2015). Longholder is an
indicator that equals 1 for CEOs who hold an option to the last year before expiration,
provided it was at least 40% in-the-money entering the final year. Nine of the 67 CEOs
(13%) are Longholders.


2.3.2. Measures based on earnings guidance

   We collect earnings (EPS) forecasts and realizations from IBES. Our sample contains 31
CEOs with multiple quarters per CEO, providing a total of 216 CEO-quarter observations.
We create two additional measures of overconfidence from these observations. As in Otto
(2014), we create an indicator variable, High Forecast, that equals 1 when a firm's EPS
forecast exceeds realized EPS. If a firm provides an EPS range forecast rather than a point
estimate, High Forecast equals 1 if the lower bound of the range exceeds the realized EPS.
High Forecast therefore provides a measure of a CEO being optimistic about earnings.
   We also follow Huang and Kisgen (2013) and create another indicator, called Point
Estimate, that equals 1 when a firm provides a point EPS forecast, and equals 0 when it
provides a range EPS forecast.


2.4 Endogeneity of longholders

   A concern is that Longholder firms and Longholder CEOs are endogenously matched,
and that differences between Longholder and other CEOs may partly be due to differences
in their firms rather than differences in their overconfidence. In Table 1, we compare firm
characteristics of Longholder and non-Longholder firms. The table shows that the two sets
of firms do not differ statistically on firm characteristics--including market value, sales,
ROA, Q, investment, and leverage.
   The only exception is that Longholder CEOs hold a greater fraction of equity in their


                                             10
firms both in stock and vested options, consistent with the interpretation that Longholder
reflects overconfidence. Indeed, the model in Gervais et al. (2011) shows that an overcon-
fident manager is more likely to accept a highly convex compensation contract because
the manager is more likely to overvalue it. Humphery-Jenner et al. (2016) provide sup-
portive empirical evidence by finding that overconfident CEOs are more likely to receive
incentive-based pay that relies on stock options.
   Another concern is whether non-Longholder CEOs actually have an opportunity to
exercise in-the-money options and choose not to do so. The Longholder measure would
be noisier if the options of CEOs classified as non-Longholder were never actually in-the-
money. Accordingly, Table 2 reports the vested options and their average moneyness for
both groups of CEOs. Longholder CEOs have less vested option holdings, in terms of
both their Black-Scholes and intrinsic values. However, the average moneyness of non-
Longholders options is not statistically different from that of Longholders, even for the vested
options that are at least 40% in-the-money. Hence, non-Longholders did have a chance to
become Longholders. Moreover, the dollar value of option tranches that Longholders hold
for too long is not negligible. For the vested options at least 40% in-the-money in the last
year before expiration, the mean (median) Black-Scholes values is $1.29 ($1.15) million and
the intrinsic value is $2.08 ($1.24) million.



3. Individual characteristics

   In this section, we consider how the Longholder measure and other measures of over-
confidence relate to individual characteristics and aspects of personalities. Table 3 com-
pares ratings on the characteristics for Longholder and non-Longholder CEOs. We see that
Longholder is negatively related to most of the specific characteristics. The differences are
significant for having a strong network, being organized, calm under pressure, moving fast,
sticking to commitments, having strong analytical skills, being creative, having a strong
work ethic, good listening skills, and being open to criticism. Longholder CEOs therefore

                                                11
exhibit these characteristics to a lesser extent than non-Longholder CEOs.


3.1 Characteristics and behavior of overconfident individuals

   An extensive psychology literature examines the typical characteristics and behavior of
overconfident individuals. Below, we review this literature. Appendix A lists the expected
relations between overconfidence and the specific characteristics in our assessments.
   Overconfident individuals tend to search too little for ideas and information (Haran et al.
2013; Moore et al. 2015). They have more "constrained" social networks that are smaller and
more interconnected with weaker connections to outsiders (Burt 1997; Klayman et al. 1999;
Hayward et al. 2006; Gudmundsson and Lechner 2013), which can reinforce overconfident
leaders being less likely to see flaws and having inflated expectations of positive outcomes
(Shipman and Mumford 2011). Consistent with this literature, we find that overconfident
CEOs are less likely to have a strong network.
   Overconfident individuals also tend to be less organized, to plan less, and to be less
likely to stick to commitments. Their limited ability to see deficiencies and to expect positive
outcomes can lead to less time and effort invested in learning and planning (Shipman and
Mumford 2011). Indeed, Vancouver and Kendall (2006) find that high self-efficacy--one's
belief in his or her capacity to perform--has a negative effect on preparation. Similar
negative effects of overconfidence on organization and planning are also found elsewhere
(Larwood and Whittaker 1977; Vallone et al. 1990). For instance, Larwood and Whittaker
(1977) find that the general belief among managers that their own firms would possess
unusually high growth rates led to overly optimistic planning. Our findings are consistent
with this literature.
   Despite overly optimistic planning, overconfident individuals score high on social po-
tency, which includes being forceful and decisive, and low on stress reaction (Burks et al.
2013). This finding suggests that overconfident CEOs should score high on being calm
under pressure and moving fast. We do not find these positive associations.


                                              12
   Overconfident individuals tend to rank lower on analytical skills and cognitive ability.
Pallier et al. (2002) suggest that higher intelligence is associated with less overconfidence.
Supporting this result, Chapman et al. (2018) find a negative correlation between IQ (and
cognitive ability) and overconfidence; and Stango et al. (2017) find a positive correlation
with math biases, such as non-belief in the law of large numbers (Benjamin et al. 2013),
gambler's fallacy/hot-hand fallacy (Benjamin et al. 2013), exponential-growth bias (Stango
and Zinman 2009; Banks and Oldfield 2007), and overconfidence. Consistent with this
literature, we find overconfident CEOs rank lower on analytical skills.
   Although overconfidence is found to be negatively correlated with analytical skills and
cognitive ability, the evidence for creativity (Hirshleifer et al. 2012; Stock et al. 2019) and a
strong work ethic (Bénabou and Tirole 2002; Heidhues et al. 2018) is mixed. Overconfidence
has been found to be related to proactiveness (Pallier et al. 2002) and extraversion (Schaefer
et al. 2004). These traits are arguably related to enthusiasm and optimistic expectations. In
studying entrepreneurship, Hayward et al. (2006) argue that greater overconfidence pro-
vides venture founders with the bravado to persist. Indeed, overconfident individuals with
high self-esteem tend to persist for too long even when this persistence is not productive
(McFarlin et al. 1984). This persistence can be supported by working harder. For instance,
theoretical work on overconfidence has emphasized that if ability and effort are comple-
ments, overconfidence can lead to higher effort (Bénabou and Tirole 2002; Gervais et al.
2011). By contrast, a model by Heidhues et al. (2018) suggests that if the complementarity
between ability and effort is low or ability and effort have separable effects, overconfidence
can lead to lower effort. We find a negative association for both creativity and work ethic.
   The literature has also found robust evidence for overconfidence being negatively re-
lated to listening skills and being open to criticism. Overconfident individuals tend to
underinvest in information acquisition, such as seeking advice, and often blame failures
on uncontrollable factors (Meikle et al. 2016). Moreover, a feeling of power leads them
to discount advice and exacerbates the feelings of higher optimism, control, and over-



                                               13
confidence (Tost et al. 2012). To the extent that research findings for narcissism apply to
overconfidence, these individuals dismiss advice because they think others are incompe-
tent and because they fail to reduce their self-enhancement when expecting to be assessed
(Kausel et al. 2015; Littrell et al. 2019). Consistent with this literature, we find a negative
relation between overconfidence and listening skills.


3.2 Earnings forecasts and individual characteristics

   Table 4 reports regression results of the two EPS-based measures of overconfidence
against the specific characteristics. Because this sample contains several quarterly observa-
tions for each CEO, we cluster standard errors by CEO. Similar to Longholder, High Forecast
is negatively related to most of the individual characteristics and significantly so to several
of them. Sticking to commitments, brainpower, and being creative are significantly nega-
tive for both Longholder and High Forecast, consistent with Larwood and Whittaker (1977),
Vallone et al. (1990), Stango et al. (2017), Chapman et al. (2018), and Stock et al. (2019).
   Unlike Longholder, Point Estimate is sometimes positively and negatively related to the
individual characteristics.
   Overall, this evidence suggests that the notion of overconfidence that is captured by
Longholder is closer to that of High Forecast. They both appear to differ markedly from the
overprecision captured by Point Estimate.



4. Overconfidence and general ability

   As mentioned earlier, Kaplan and Sorensen (2019) show that the variation in the specific
characteristics can be summarized by four factors. Table 5 reports the means and distribu-
tions for the four factors for all CEOs, and for non-Longholder and Longholder CEOs. Table
6 reports the correlations between Longholder and the four factors.
     For example, see Campbell et al. (2004), Shipman and Mumford (2011), Macenczak et al. (2016), and
Littrell et al. (2019).


                                                 14
   Both in univariate and multivariate regressions, Longholder is negatively related to all
four factors, but is significantly negatively correlated with only the first factor. The first
factor has positive loadings on all specific characteristics. Kaplan et al. (2012) interpret it as
a measure of general talent or ability. They also find that it is correlated with subsequent
CEO success.
   Interestingly, this finding that overconfident CEOs (as measured by Longholder) have
lower general ability is consistent with the well-known Dunning-Kruger effect in psychol-
ogy. Kruger and Dunning (1999) document that less competent people tend to overesti-
mate their abilities more than those who are more skilled.         The stronger overestimation
by less competent people can occur because their lack of competence deprives them of
the metacognitive ability to realize they make mistakes. As Kruger and Dunning (1999)
write, "When people are incompetent in the strategies they adopt to achieve success and
satisfaction, they suffer a dual burden: Not only do they reach erroneous conclusions and
make unfortunate choices, but their incompetence robs them of the ability to realize it"
(p. 1121). This positive relation between overconfidence and the lack of skill persists
even when people receive accurate feedback on their performance (Simons 2013) and are
held accountable for their self-assessments (Ehrlinger et al. 2008). The Dunning-Kruger
effect has been found not only among students and laymen, but also among professionals
with specialized knowledge. For instance, high-performing medical doctors significantly
underestimate their performance, whereas low-performing medical doctors significantly
overestimate their performance (Hodges et al. 2001; Davis et al. 2006; Mehdizadeh et al.
2014). Our results suggest that this effect holds for CEOs as well.
   In Table 7, High Forecast, like Longholder, is significantly negatively related to Factor
1 both in univariate and multivariate regressions, suggesting, again, that overconfidence
is related to lower overall ability (Kruger and Dunning 1999). High Forecast is signifi-
cantly negatively related to Factor 3 (positively related to charisma), but this relation is
   Dunning (2011) reviews research on the Dunning-Kruger effect.



                                                 15
insignificant in a multivariate regression. In the multivariate regression, High Forecast is
marginally significantly related to Factor 2 (lower execution skills) and Factor 4 (greater
creative / strategic). The result for Factor 2 is consistent with overconfidence being related
to lower execution ability.



5. Investment-cash flow sensitivities

   The relationships we document between managerial overconfidence--as captured by
Longholder and High Forecast--and executive characteristics are consistent with two different
interpretations of the empirically documented behavior of Longholder CEOs. Longholder is
related to variables that are associated with overconfidence, and it may capture behavior
of overconfident CEOs, as it is typically interpreted. At the same time, Longholder and
overconfidence are also related to lower general ability, so Longholder may also capture
behavior of less able CEOs.
   Although our limited data make this part of our analysis somewhat tentative and sug-
gestive, we try to distinguish between these two interpretations by revisiting the empirical
findings on investment-cash flow sensitivities from Malmendier and Tate (2005a) and Mal-
mendier and Tate (2015). Following their analyses, we collect information about investment
and cash flow, along with a number of other accounting variables, for the public firms with
CEOs in our sample. Descriptive statistics for these variables are in Table 8. Table 9 reports
the estimates of the investment-cash flow regression (used in the Malmendier and Tate
papers) for our sample.
   The first column of Table 9 shows that, despite the small sample, we replicate the main
Longholder results, and we confirm that investments in companies with Longholder CEOs
are significantly more sensitive to their cash flows, although the significance is only at
the 10% level. In the second column of Table 9, we see that investments are less sensitive
to cash flows when CEOs have greater general talent (higher Factor 1), which suggests
that investments are more sensitive to cash flow when CEOs have less general talent and

                                             16
ability. Columns three to five in Table 9 estimate the investment-cash flow sensitivities
for the remaining three factors individually. Interestingly, the results indicate that the
investment-cash flow sensitivities are also greater for firms with more analytical CEOs
(positive Factor 3) and with more operational and managerial CEOs (negative Factor 4).
   In the multivariate specification, only the third factor remains statistically significant.
Importantly, however, the coefficient for Longholder also remains significant even when the
other factors are included. This result suggests that the empirical effect of Longholder is not
merely an artifact of this variable being related to other aspects of managerial personalities,
as captured by the four factors, but that Longholder captures a distinct aspect of individual
overconfidence as it is usually interpreted in the literature.



6. Conclusion

   We use detailed assessments of CEOs to explore the nature of Longholder, the option-
based measure of CEO overconfidence introduced by Malmendier and Tate (2005a) and
now commonly used in the corporate finance and economics literatures. We document
a pattern of correlations between the Longholder measure and individual characteristics
that prior literature has found to be related to overconfidence. Longholder CEOs are less
likely to have strong networks (e.g., Burt 1997; Klayman et al. 1999; Hayward et al. 2006).
They are less likely to be well organized and to honor commitments (e.g., Larwood and
Whittaker 1977; Vallone et al. 1990). They tend to have lower analytical skills and cognitive
ability (e.g., Stango et al. 2017; Chapman et al. 2018), and tend not to be good listeners or
feedback seekers (e.g., Tost et al. 2012; Meikle et al. 2016). Finally, Longholder and a measure
of overconfidence based on high earnings forecasts are negatively related to overall CEO
ability/talent; that is, less talented CEOs appear to be more overconfident (Kruger and
Dunning 1999).
   These results provide solid evidence that Longholder measures a quality that is related
to overconfidence and adds to our understanding of the nature of that overconfidence.

                                              17
References
Banks, James, and Zoë Oldfield, 2007, Understanding pensions: Cognitive function, nu-
  merical ability and retirement saving, Fiscal Studies 28, 143­170.

Ben-David, Itzhak, John R. Graham, and Campbell R. Harvey, 2013, Managerial miscali-
  bration, Quarterly Journal of Economics 128, 1547­1584.

Bénabou, Roland, and Jean Tirole, 2002, Self-confidence and personal motivation, Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 117, 871­915.

Bénabou, Roland, and Jean Tirole, 2016, Mindful economics: The production, consumption,
  and value of beliefs, Journal of Economic Perspectives 30, 141­64.

Benjamin, Daniel, Don Moore, and Matthew Rabin, 2013, Misconceptions of chance: Evi-
  dence from an integrated experiment, Working Paper .

Bertrand, Marianne, and Antoinette Schoar, 2003, Managing with style: The effect of
  managers on firm policies, Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 1169­1208.

Bettis, Carr, John Bizjak, and Swaminathan Kalpathy, 2015, Why do insiders hedge their
  ownership? An empirical examination, Financial Management 44, 655­683.

Bettis, J. Carr, John M. Bizjak, and Michael L. Lemmon, 2001, Managerial ownership,
  incentive contracting, and the use of zero-cost collars and equity swaps by corporate
  insiders, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 36, 345­370.

Bloom, Nicholas, and John Van Reenen, 2007, Measuring and explaining management
  practices across firms and countries, Quarterly Journal of Economics 122, 1351­1408.

Botelho, Elena, and Kim Powell, 2018, The CEO Next Door: What It Takes to Get to the Top and
  Succeed. (Dickens Books).

Botelho, Elena Lytkina, Kim Rosenkoetter Powell, Stephen Kincaid, and Dina Wang, 2017,
  What sets successful CEOs apart?, Harvard Business Review 95, 70­77.

Burks, Stephen V., Jeffrey P. Carpenter, Lorenz Goette, and Aldo Rustichini, 2013, Over-
  confidence and social signalling, Review of Economic Studies 80, 949­983.

Burt, Ronald S., 1997, The contingent value of social capital, Administrative Science Quarterly
  339­365.

Campbell, W Keith, Adam S Goodie, and Joshua D Foster, 2004, Narcissism, confidence,
  and risk attitude, Journal of behavioral decision making 17, 297­311.

Chapman, Jonathan, Mark Dean, Pietro Ortoleva, Erik Snowberg, and Colin Camerer, 2018,
 Econographics, NBER Working Paper No. 24931 .




                                              18
Davis, David A., Paul E. Mazmanian, Michael Fordis, Rtke Van Harrison, Kevin E. Thorpe,
 and Laure Perrier, 2006, Accuracy of physician self-assessment compared with observed
 measures of competence: a systematic review, JAMA 296, 1094­1102.

Dunning, David, 2011, The Dunning­Kruger effect: On being ignorant of one's own igno-
 rance, in Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, volume 44, 247­296 (Elsevier).

Ehrlinger, Joyce, Kerri Johnson, Matthew Banner, David Dunning, and Justin Kruger, 2008,
  Why the unskilled are unaware: Further explorations of (absent) self-insight among the
  incompetent, Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 105, 98­121.

Gervais, Simon, James B. Heaton, and Terrance Odean, 2011, Overconfidence, compensa-
 tion contracts, and capital budgeting, Journal of Finance 66, 1735­1777.

Graham, John R., Campbell R. Harvey, and Manju Puri, 2013, Managerial attitudes and
  corporate actions, Journal of Financial Economics 109, 103­121.

Gudmundsson, Sveinn Vidar, and Christian Lechner, 2013, Cognitive biases, organization,
 and entrepreneurial firm survival, European Management Journal 31, 278­294.

Hackbarth, Dirk, 2008, Managerial traits and capital structure decisions, Journal of Financial
 and Quantitative Analysis 43, 843­881.

Haran, Uriel, Ilana Ritov, and Barbara A. Mellers, 2013, The role of actively open-minded
 thinking in information acquisition, accuracy, and calibration, Judgment and Decision
 Making 8, 188­201.

Hayward, Mathew L.A., Dean A. Shepherd, and Dale Griffin, 2006, A hubris theory of
 entrepreneurship, Management Science 52, 160­172.

Heaton, James B., 2002, Managerial optimism and corporate finance, Financial Management
 33­45.

Heidhues, Paul, Botond Kszegi, and Philipp Strack, 2018, Unrealistic expectations and
 misguided learning, Econometrica 86, 1159­1214.

Hirshleifer, David, Angie Low, and Siew Hong Teoh, 2012, Are overconfident CEOs better
  innovators?, Journal of Finance 67, 1457­1498.

Hodges, Brian, Glenn Regehr, and Dawn Martin, 2001, Difficulties in recognizing one's
 own incompetence: Novice physicians who are unskilled and unaware of it, Academic
 Medicine 76, S87­S89.

Huang, Jiekun, and Darren J. Kisgen, 2013, Gender and corporate finance: Are male
 executives overconfident relative to female executives?, Journal of Financial Economics
 108, 822­839.

Humphery-Jenner, Mark, Ling Lei Lisic, Vikram Nanda, and Sabatino Dino Silveri, 2016,
 Executive overconfidence and compensation structure, Journal of Financial Economics 119,
 533­558.

                                             19
Jagolinzer, Alan D., Steven R. Matsunaga, and P. Eric Yeung, 2007, An analysis of insiders'
  use of prepaid variable forward transactions, Journal of Accounting Research 45, 1055­1079.

Kaplan, Steven N., Mark M. Klebanov, and Morten Sorensen, 2012, Which CEO character-
  istics and abilities matter?, Journal of Finance 67, 973­1007.

Kaplan, Steven N., and Morten Sorensen, 2019, Are CEOs different? Characteristics of top
  managers, NBER Working Paper No. 23832 .

Kausel, Edgar E., Satoris S. Culbertson, Pedro I. Leiva, Jerel E. Slaughter, and Alexander T.
  Jackson, 2015, Too arrogant for their own good? Why and when narcissists dismiss
  advice, Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 131, 33­50.

Klayman, Joshua, Jack B. Soll, Claudia Gonzalez-Vallejo, and Sema Barlas, 1999, Overconfi-
  dence: It depends on how, what, and whom you ask, Organizational Behavior and Human
  Decision Processes 79, 216­247.

Kruger, Justin, and David Dunning, 1999, Unskilled and unaware of it: How difficulties
  in recognizing one's own incompetence lead to inflated self-assessments., Journal of
  Personality and Social Psychology 77, 1121.

Larcker, David, and Brian Tayan, 2016, Corporate governance matters: A closer look at organi-
  zational choices and their consequences (Pearson education).

Larwood, Laurie, and William Whittaker, 1977, Managerial myopia: Self-serving biases in
  organizational planning., Journal of Applied Psychology 62, 194.

Littrell, Shane, Jonathan Fugelsang, and Evan F. Risko, 2019, Overconfidently underthink-
  ing: Narcissism negatively predicts cognitive reflection, Thinking & Reasoning 1­29.

Macenczak, Lee A., Stacy Campbell, Amy B. Henley, and W. Keith Campbell, 2016, Di-
 rect and interactive effects of narcissism and power on overconfidence, Personality and
 Individual Differences 91, 113­122.

Malmendier, Ulrike, 2018, Behavioral corporate finance, NBER Working Paper No. 25162 .

Malmendier, Ulrike, and Geoffrey Tate, 2005a, CEO overconfidence and corporate invest-
 ment, Journal of Finance 60, 2661­2700.

Malmendier, Ulrike, and Geoffrey Tate, 2005b, Does overconfidence affect corporate in-
 vestment? CEO overconfidence measures revisited, European Financial Management 11,
 649­659.

Malmendier, Ulrike, and Geoffrey Tate, 2008, Who makes acquisitions? CEO overconfi-
 dence and the market's reaction, Journal of Financial Economics 89, 20­43.

Malmendier, Ulrike, and Geoffrey Tate, 2015, Behavioral CEOs: The role of managerial
 overconfidence, Journal of Economic Perspectives 29, 37­60.



                                             20
McFarlin, Dean B., Roy F. Baumeister, and Jim Blascovich, 1984, On knowing when to quit:
 Task failure, self-esteem, advice, and nonproductive persistence, Journal of Personality 52,
 138­155.

Mehdizadeh, Leila, Alison Sturrock, Gil Myers, Yasmin Khatib, and Jane Dacre, 2014,
 How well do doctors think they perform on the General Medical Council's Tests of
 Competence pilot examinations? A cross-sectional study, BMJ open 4, e004131.

Meikle, Nathan L., Elizabeth R. Tenney, and Don A. Moore, 2016, Overconfidence at work:
 Does overconfidence survive the checks and balances of organizational life?, Research in
 Organizational Behavior 36, 121­134.

Moore, Don A., and Paul J. Healy, 2008, The trouble with overconfidence., Psychological
 Review 115, 502.

Moore, Don A., Elizabeth R. Tenney, and Uriel Haran, 2015, Overprecision in judgment,
 The Wiley Blackwell Handbook of Judgment and Decision Making 182­209.

O'Reilly III, Charles A., and Bernadette Doerr, 2020, Conceit and deceit: Lying, cheat-
  ing, and stealing among grandiose narcissists, Personality and Individual Differences 154,
  109627.

O'Reilly III, Charles A, Bernadette Doerr, and Jennifer A Chatman, 2018, "See you in court":
  How CEO narcissism increases firms' vulnerability to lawsuits, The Leadership Quarterly
  29, 365­378.

Otto, Clemens A., 2014, CEO optimism and incentive compensation, Journal of Financial
  Economics 114, 366­404.

Pallier, Gerry, Rebecca Wilkinson, Vanessa Danthiir, Sabina Kleitman, Goran Knezevic,
  Lazar Stankov, and Richard D. Roberts, 2002, The role of individual differences in the
  accuracy of confidence judgments, The Journal of General Psychology 129, 257­299.

Rosen, Sherwin, 1981, The economics of superstars, American Economic Review 71, 845­858.

Schaefer, Peter S., Cristina C. Williams, Adam S. Goodie, and W. Keith Campbell, 2004,
  Overconfidence and the Big Five, Journal of Research in Personality 38, 473­480.

Schrand, Catherine M., and Sarah L.C. Zechman, 2012, Executive overconfidence and the
  slippery slope to financial misreporting, Journal of Accounting and Economics 53, 311­329.

Schwardmann, Peter, and Joel Van der Weele, 2019, Deception and self-deception, Nature:
  Human Behaviour 3, 1055­1061.

Shipman, Amanda S., and Michael D. Mumford, 2011, When confidence is detrimental:
  Influence of overconfidence on leadership effectiveness, The Leadership Quarterly 22, 649­
  665.

Simons, Daniel J., 2013, Unskilled and optimistic: Overconfident predictions despite cali-
  brated knowledge of relative skill, Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 20, 601­607.

                                             21
Smart, Geoff, and Randy Street, 2008, Who: The A Method for Hiring (Ballantine Books).

Smith, Megan K., Robert Trivers, and William von Hippel, 2017, Self-deception facilitates
  interpersonal persuasion, Journal of Economic Psychology 63, 93­101.

Solda, Alice, Changxia Ke, Lionel Page, and William Von Hippel, 2019, Strategically delu-
  sional, Experimental Economics 1­28.

Spearman, Charles, 1904, 'general intelligence,' objectively determined and measured, The
  American Journal of Psychology 15, 201­293.

Stango, Victor, Joanne Yoong, and Jonathan Zinman, 2017, The quest for parsimony in
  behavioral economics: New methods and evidence on three fronts, NBER Working Paper
  No. 23057 .

Stango, Victor, and Jonathan Zinman, 2009, Exponential growth bias and household fi-
  nance, Journal of Finance 64, 2807­2849.

Stock, Ruth, Matthias Groß, and Katherine R. Xin, 2019, Will self-love take a fall? Effects of
  top executives' positive self-regard on firm innovativeness, Journal of Product Innovation
  Management 36, 41­65.

Tang, Yi, Jiatao Li, and Hongyan Yang, 2015, What I see, what I do: How executive hubris
  affects firm innovation, Journal of Management 41, 1698­1723.

Tost, Leigh Plunkett, Francesca Gino, and Richard P. Larrick, 2012, Power, competitiveness,
  and advice taking: Why the powerful don't listen, Organizational Behavior and Human
  Decision Processes 117, 53­65.

Vallone, Robert P., Dale W. Griffin, Sabrina Lin, and Lee Ross, 1990, Overconfident predic-
  tion of future actions and outcomes by self and others, Journal of Personality and Social
  Psychology 58, 582.

Vancouver, Jeffrey B., and Laura N. Kendall, 2006, When self-efficacy negatively relates to
  motivation and performance in a learning context, Journal of Applied Psychology 91, 1146.

Yin, Xile, Jianbiao Li, and Te Bao, 2019, Does overconfidence promote cooperation? Theory
  and experimental evidence, Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Economics 79, 119­133.




                                             22
     A. Individual characteristics and overconfidence
        This table summarizes predictions for individual ghSMART characteristics and overconfidence discussed in section 3.
     Individual characteristics are from Table A-1 in Kaplan and Sorensen (2019).

                                                                              Predicted association
      Characteristics           Description                                                           References for the association
                                                                              with overconfidence

      Leadership
      Hires A players           Sources, recruits, and hires A players.       Negative                Haran et al. (2013), Moore et al. (2015)
      Develops people           Coaches people in their current roles to      Negative                Haran et al. (2013), Moore et al. (2015)
                                improve performance, and prepares them
                                for future roles.
      Removes underperformers   Removes C players within 180 days.            Negative                Haran et al. (2013), Moore et al. (2015)
                                Achieves this through coaching-out, re-
                                deployment, demotion, or termination.
      Respect                   Values others, treating them fairly and       Negative                Schaefer et al. (2004), Macenczak et al. (2016)
                                showing concern for their views and feel-




23
                                ings.
      Efficiency                Able to produce significant output with       Negative                Shipman and Mumford (2011), Haran et al.
                                minimal wasted effort.                                                (2013), Moore et al. (2015)
      Network                   Possesses a large network of talented         Negative                Burt (1997), Klayman et al. (1999), Hayward
                                people.                                                               et al. (2006), Gudmundsson and Lechner
                                                                                                      (2013)
      Flexible                  Adjusts quickly to changing priorities        Negative                Haran et al. (2013), Moore et al. (2015)
                                and conditions. Copes with complexity
                                and change.
      Personal
      Integrity                 Does not cut corners ethically. Earns trust   Negative                Schrand and Zechman (2012), O'Reilly III
                                and maintains confidences.                                            et al. (2018), O'Reilly III and Doerr (2020)
      Organization              Plans, organizes, schedules, and budgets      Negative                Larwood and Whittaker (1977), Vallone et al.
                                in an efficient, productive manner.                                   (1990), Shipman and Mumford (2011), Van-
                                                                                                      couver and Kendall (2006)
      Calm                      Maintains stable performance when un-         Positive                Burks et al. (2013)
                                der heavy pressure or stress.
     Aggressive              Moves quickly and takes a forceful stand     Positive         Vallone et al. (1990), Burks et al. (2013)
                             without being overly abrasive.
     Fast                    Takes action quickly without getting         Positive         Vallone et al. (1990), Burks et al. (2013)
                             bogged down by obstacles.
     Commitments             Lives up to verbal and written agree-        Negative         Larwood and Whittaker (1977), Vallone et al.
                             ments, regardless of personal cost.                           (1990), Shipman and Mumford (2011), Van-
                                                                                           couver and Kendall (2006)
     Intellectual
      Brainpower             Learns quickly. Demonstrates ability to      Negative         Pallier et al. (2002), Chapman et al. (2018)
                             quickly understand and absorb new info.
     Analytical skills       Structures and processes qualitative or      Negative         Stango et al. (2017)
                             quantitative data and draws conclusions.
     Strategic vision        Able to see and communicate the big          Positive         Shipman and Mumford (2011)
                             picture in an inspiring way.
     Creative                Generates new and innovative ap-             Ambiguous        Hirshleifer et al. (2012), Tang et al. (2015),
                             proaches to problems.                                         Stock et al. (2019)
     Attention to detail     Does not let important details slip          Negative         Shipman and Mumford (2011)




24
                             through the cracks or derail a project.
     Motivational
     Enthusiasm              Exhibits passion and excitement over         Positive         Schaefer et al. (2004)
                             work. Has a "can do" attitude.
     Persistence             Demonstrates tenacity and willingness to     Positive         McFarlin et al. (1984), Hayward et al. (2006)
                             go the distance to get something done.
     Proactive               Acts without being told what to do.          Positive         Pallier et al. (2002)
                             Brings new ideas to company.
     Work ethic              Possesses a strong willingness to work       Ambiguous        Bénabou and Tirole (2002), Gervais et al.
                             hard and long hours to get the job done.                      (2011), Heidhues et al. (2018)
     High standards          Expects personal performance and team        Positive         Shipman and Mumford (2011)
                             performance to be the best.
     Interpersonal
      Listening skills       Lets others speak and seeks to under-        Negative         Meikle et al. (2016), Tost et al. (2012), Kausel
                             stand their viewpoints.                                       et al. (2015), Littrell et al. (2019)
     Open to criticism       Often solicits feedback and reacts calmly    Negative         Meikle et al. (2016), Tost et al. (2012), Kausel
                             to receiving criticism.                                       et al. (2015), Littrell et al. (2019)
     Written communication   Writes clearly and articulately using cor-   Not considered
                             rect grammar.
     Oral communication         Speaks clearly and articulately without    Not considered
                                being overly verbose or talkative.
     Teamwork                   Reaches out to peers and cooperates with   Ambiguous        Yin et al. (2019)
                                supervisors to establish relationship.




25
     Persuasion                 Able to convince others to pursue a        Positive         Shipman and Mumford (2011), Smith et al.
                                course of action.                                           (2017), Schwardmann and Van der Weele
                                                                                            (2019), Solda et al. (2019)
     Holds people accountable   Sets goals for team and follows up to      Positive         Shipman and Mumford (2011)
                                ensure progress toward completion.
          Table 5: Factor Loadings Panel A presents factor loadings for the four first factors. Loadings
          with an absolute value less than 0.15 are left blank. Panel B shows eigenvalues and variation
          explained by the first six factors. Panel C shows pairwise correlations between factor scores,
B. Kaplan gender,and     Sorensen
                   and subjective       (2019)
                                  ratings. By construction,  loadings
                                                   factor factors   are orthogonal, and their correlations are
          omitted. In Panel C, statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels are indicated with *,
   This appendix   shows Table 5 (Panel A) from Kaplan and Sorensen (2019) with factor
          **, and ***.
loadings for the first four factors. Loadings with an absolute value less than 0.15 are left
blank.    Panel A: Factor loadings (|loadings| < 0.15 are blank)

                                           Factor 1   Factor 2   Factor 3   Factor 4
            Hires A Players                  0.59
            Develops People                  0.56       0.25
            Removes Underperformers          0.53      -0.17                  -0.22
            Respect                          0.31       0.73
            Efficiency                       0.71                             -0.22
            Network                          0.64
            Flexible                         0.54       0.38
            Integrity                        0.30       0.31
            Organization                     0.50                  0.44       -0.23
            Calm                             0.44       0.33
            Aggressive                       0.68      -0.43      -0.26
            Fast                             0.69      -0.37      -0.18
            Commitments                      0.70                             -0.21
            Brainpower                       0.52                  0.33        0.43
            Analytical Skills                0.54                  0.56        0.25
            Strategic Vision                 0.58      -0.16                   0.46
            Creative                         0.52                              0.39
            Attention to Detail              0.40                  0.46       -0.27
            Enthusiasm                       0.55       0.24      -0.44
            Persistence                      0.66      -0.16
            Proactive                        0.74      -0.26      -0.20
            Work Ethic                       0.57
            High Standards                   0.73      -0.17
            Listening Skill                  0.39       0.62
            Open to Criticism                0.41       0.65
            Oral Communication               0.49       0.16      -0.16       0.19
            Teamwork                         0.48       0.61
            Persuasion                       0.60                 -0.37       0.18
            Holds People Accountable         0.66      -0.21                  -0.27




                                                            42


                                               26
                              Figure 1: Distribution across industries

This figure depicts the distribution of 78 firms by industrial sectors according to the Global Industry Classi-
fication Standard (GICS) by MSCI.




                 Information Technology


                           Health Care


                Consumer Discretionary


                             Industrials


                     Consumer Staples


                             Financials


                           Real Estate


                              Materials

                                           0                 10                  20




                                                      27
                                                                           Table 1:
                                                                      Firm characteristics

     This table presents descriptive statistics for firm characteristics. The sample is based on ghSMART, Equilar, CRSP, Compustat, and form DEF14A
     filings from the SEC EDGAR database. The sample covers the period from 2001 to 2016. Firm characteristics are from Compustat. Compustat data
     codes are in parentheses. Longholder is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the CEO held an option to the last year before expiration, provided it was at
     least 40% in-the-money entering the final year as in Malmendier and Tate (2015). Market value ($bn) is computed as the product of common shares
     outstanding (CSHO) and fiscal-year closing price (PRCC_F). Assets ($bn) is total assets (AT). Sales ($bn) is sales (SALE). ROA is computed as operating
     income before depreciation (OIBDP) divided by lagged total assets (AT). Return, 12-month is the annual return from CRSP. Q is Tobin's Q defined as
     the market value of assets divided by total assets (AT). The market value of assets is defined as the book value of assets (AT) plus market value minus
     the book value of equity. The book value of equity is defined as stockholders' equity (SEQ or, if missing, CEQ + PSTK, or, if missing, AT - LT) minus
     preferred stock (PSTKL or, if missing, PSTKRV, or, if missing, PSTK) plus deferred taxes and investment tax credit (TXDITC or, if missing, 0). Investment
     is capital expenditures (CAPX) divided by the lag of net property plants and equipment (PPENT). Leverage is computed as the total debt (DD1 + DLTT)
     divided by total assetes (AT). Volatility, 12-month is the annualized volatility of returns from CRSP. Stock ownership (%) is the percentage of company
     stock held by a CEO. Vested options (%) is the percentage of vested options held by a CEO as the number of common shares outstanding. The t-test
     is for the difference in means between Longholder and non-Longholder executives calculated using robust standard errors clustered by executive. *, **,




28
     and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                            Full Sample                         Longholder = 0                        Longholder = 1
                                 Obs.   Mean     Median     Std.Dev    Obs.   Mean     Median     Std.Dev    Obs.   Mean     Median     Std.Dev    t-test
         Market value ($bn)      362    2.229    0.869      3.547      284    2.246    0.903      3.491      78     2.168    0.760      3.767      -0.072
         Assets ($bn)            398    3.758    0.682      8.519      317    4.025    0.606      9.156      81     2.711    0.816      5.254      -0.580
         Sales ($bn)             388    2.431    0.555      5.540      307    2.738    0.591      6.091      81     1.269    0.481      2.195      -1.381
         ROA                     382    0.057    0.109      0.295      303    0.037    0.107      0.318      79     0.132    0.119      0.167      1.573
         Return, 12-month        330    0.210    0.117      0.665      257    0.183    0.111      0.644      73     0.305    0.190      0.731      1.605
         Q                       362    2.069    1.622      1.270      284    2.064    1.657      1.261      78     2.086    1.545      1.307      0.058
         Investment              393    0.359    0.237      0.365      314    0.356    0.249      0.349      79     0.369    0.176      0.427      0.118
         Leverage                398    0.223    0.163      0.229      317    0.214    0.139      0.230      81     0.261    0.245      0.224      0.747
         Volatility, 12-month    330    0.486    0.410      0.258      257    0.487    0.411      0.261      73     0.484    0.407      0.248      -0.046
         Stock ownership (%)     353    2.373    0.301      6.102      275    0.989    0.248      2.931      78     7.250    0.581      10.427     2.003
         Vested options (%)      354    0.678    0.291      0.904      276    0.524    0.241      0.768      78     1.221    0.993      1.121      2.223
                                                                             Table 2:
                                                                          Vested options

     This table presents descriptive statistics for vested option holdings. The sample is based on ghSMART, Equilar, CRSP, and form DEF14A filings
     from the SEC EDGAR database. Each observation corresponds to a vested option tranche as reported annually in DEF14A. Longholder is an indicator
     variable equal to 1 if the CEO held an option to the last year before expiration, provided it was at least 40% in-the-money entering the final year as in
     Malmendier and Tate (2015). Black-Scholes value ($mn) is the Black-Scholes value of an option tranche at the end of the fiscal year. Intrinsic value ($mn)
     is the intrinsic value of an option tranche at the end of the fiscal year. Moneyness is option tranche moneyness computed as the difference between the
     stock price and the exercise price scaled by the exercise price at the end of the fiscal year. The t-test is for the difference in means between Longholder
     and non-Longholder executives calculated using robust standard errors clustered by executive. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and
     1% level, respectively.


                                                Full Sample                          Longholder = 0                         Longholder = 1
                                    Obs.    Mean     Median     Std.Dev    Obs.    Mean    Median     Std.Dev     Obs.   Mean     Median     Std.Dev     t-test
      Vested options




29
      Black-Scholes value ($mn)     290     2.589    1.021      5.563      115     4.578   1.213      8.274       175    1.281    1.016      1.490       -1.716
      Intrinsic value ($mn)         411     2.208    0.606      4.913      141     3.740   0.178      7.773       270    1.408    0.754      1.863       -1.358
      Moneyness                     411     8.665    1.370      25.841     141     4.608   0.576      17.869      270    10.784   1.497      28.956      0.863
      Vested options, in-the-money
      Black-Scholes value ($mn)     240     3.103    1.253      5.990      92      5.699   2.216      8.911       148    1.488    1.159      1.531       -1.810
      Intrinsic value ($mn)         328     2.767    1.160      5.359      94      5.610   2.134      8.964       234    1.625    1.125      1.912       -1.720
      Moneyness                     328     11.000   1.854      28.463     94      7.223   1.760      21.445      234    12.517   1.854      30.747      0.623
      Vested options, at least 40% in-the-money
      Black-Scholes value ($mn)     219     3.367    1.384      6.207      77      6.730   2.611      9.404       142    1.544    1.198      1.539       -2.036
      Intrinsic value ($mn)         305     2.963    1.188      5.507      77      6.804   2.589      9.504       228    1.666    1.147      1.920       -1.985
      Moneyness                     305     11.814   1.961      29.359     77      8.765   2.896      23.440      228    12.844   1.928      31.083      0.450
      Vested options, at least 40% in-the-money in the last year before expiration
      Black-Scholes value ($mn)     12      1.294    1.147      0.943      0                                      12     1.294    1.147      0.943
      Intrinsic value ($mn)         16      2.075    1.235      2.078      0                                      16     2.075    1.235      2.078
      Moneyness                     16      7.487    1.201      10.751     0                                      16     7.487    1.201      10.751
                                                                       Table 3:
                                                               Individual characteristics

     This table presents descriptive statistics for CEO traits. The sample is based on ghSMART, Equilar, CRSP, and form DEF14A filings from the SEC
     EDGAR database. Longholder is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the CEO held an option to the last year before expiration, provided it was at least
     40% in-the-money entering the final year as in Malmendier and Tate (2015). The ghSMART characteristics are defined in Kaplan and Sorensen (2019),
     Table A-1. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively, under the assumption of a single test.


                                               Full Sample                        Longholder = 0                       Longholder = 1
                                    Obs.   Mean    Median     Std.Dev   Obs.    Mean    Median     Std.Dev   Obs.    Mean    Median     Std.Dev   t-test
      Hires A players               67     3.405   3.300      0.442     58      3.415   3.300      0.445     9       3.344   3.300      0.445     -0.441
      Develops people               67     3.358   3.300      0.445     58      3.357   3.300      0.456     9       3.367   3.300      0.391     0.061
      Removes underperformers       66     3.330   3.300      0.547     57      3.354   3.300      0.554     9       3.178   3.300      0.507     -0.894
      Respect                       67     3.602   3.700      0.420     58      3.613   3.700      0.423     9       3.533   3.700      0.418     -0.526
      Efficiency                    64     3.695   3.700      0.402     55      3.723   3.850      0.386     9       3.522   3.700      0.474     -1.398




30
      Network                       65     3.578   3.700      0.475     56      3.642   3.700      0.420     9       3.178   3.300      0.620     -2.870
      Flexibile                     65     3.540   3.700      0.419     56      3.568   3.700      0.415     9       3.367   3.300      0.427     -1.346
      Integrity                     67     3.914   4.000      0.227     58      3.918   4.000      0.209     9       3.889   4.000      0.333     -0.361
      Organization                  65     3.564   3.700      0.445     56      3.624   3.700      0.398     9       3.189   3.300      0.560     -2.871
      Calm                          67     3.656   3.700      0.388     58      3.696   3.775      0.373     9       3.400   3.300      0.406     -2.189
      Aggressive                    65     3.745   4.000      0.339     56      3.763   4.000      0.324     9       3.633   3.700      0.427     -1.070
      Fast                          65     3.684   3.850      0.409     56      3.727   4.000      0.386     9       3.411   3.300      0.465     -2.221
      Commitments                   67     3.850   4.000      0.276     58      3.889   4.000      0.208     9       3.600   3.700      0.490     -3.107
      Brainpower                    66     3.716   3.700      0.354     57      3.746   3.700      0.315     9       3.522   3.700      0.526     -1.794
      Analytical skills             67     3.615   3.700      0.380     58      3.661   3.700      0.332     9       3.322   3.300      0.538     -2.597
      Strategic vision              66     3.505   3.700      0.419     57      3.542   3.700      0.395     9       3.267   3.000      0.515     -1.866
      Creative                      67     3.590   3.700      0.431     58      3.629   3.700      0.384     9       3.333   3.300      0.628     -1.957
      Attention to detail           65     3.496   3.700      0.477     56      3.533   3.700      0.457     9       3.267   3.300      0.559     -1.573
      Enthusiasm                    67     3.545   3.700      0.494     58      3.560   3.700      0.503     9       3.444   3.300      0.442     -0.653
      Persistent                    67     3.813   4.000      0.329     58      3.824   4.000      0.325     9       3.744   4.000      0.368     -0.673
      Proactive                     67     3.792   4.000      0.376     58      3.816   4.000      0.350     9       3.633   4.000      0.507     -1.369
      Work ethic                    67     3.928   4.000      0.226     58      3.954   4.000      0.170     9       3.756   4.000      0.422     -2.551
      High standards                67     3.747   4.000      0.391     58      3.747   4.000      0.398     9       3.744   4.000      0.368     -0.021
      Listening skills              65     3.447   3.300      0.472     56      3.508   3.700      0.448     9       3.067   3.000      0.464     -2.731
      Open to criticism             67     3.411   3.300      0.479     58      3.454   3.300      0.462     9       3.133   3.300      0.524     -1.905
      Teamwork                      67     3.605   3.700      0.388     58      3.635   3.700      0.370     9       3.411   3.300      0.465     -1.636
      Persuasion                    65     3.543   3.700      0.425     56      3.571   3.700      0.409     9       3.367   3.300      0.502     -1.351
      Holds people accountable      65     3.631   3.700      0.404     56      3.648   3.700      0.394     9       3.522   3.700      0.474     -0.866
                                             Table 4:
                            Individual characteristics and EPS forecasts

Each entry presents a linear regression of the CEO overconfidence measure--Longholder, High Forecast, or
Point Estimate--on the specified characteristic. We present regression results for Longholder for comparability.
High Forecast is an indicator variable that equals 1 when a firm's EPS forecat exceeds the realized EPS as
in Otto (2014). If a firm provides an EPS range forecast, this indicator variable is 1 when the lower bound
of the range exceeds the realized EPS. Point Estimate is an indicator variable that equals 1 when a firm
provides a point EPS forecast, and 0 when it provides a range EPS forecast. EPS forecasts and realizations
are from IBES. Beta is the coefficient on the characteristic. The p -value is the statistical significance of this
coefficient calculated using robust standard errors clustered by executive. The number of observations in
each regression is indicated in square brackets. The ghSMART characteristics are defined in Kaplan and
Sorensen (2019), Table A-1. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively, under
the assumption of a single test.


                                      Longholder                 High Forecast               Point Estimate
                              Beta        Obs     p -val Beta         Obs     p -val Beta         Obs      p -val
 Hires A players                -0.042    [67]    0.661     -0.093   [216]    0.072    -0.021    [216]    0.788
 Develops people                 0.006    [67]    0.952     -0.043   [212]    0.447    -0.051    [212]    0.614
 Removes underperformers        -0.070    [66]    0.375     -0.115   [216]   0.004      0.057    [216]    0.416
 Respect                        -0.053    [67]    0.600      0.004   [212]    0.935    -0.057    [212]    0.384
 Efficiency                     -0.152    [64]    0.167     -0.220   [216]   0.000      0.054    [216]    0.594
 Network                        -0.249    [65]   0.006      -0.058   [216]    0.397     0.104    [216]    0.378
 Flexibile                      -0.139    [65]    0.183     -0.058   [216]    0.188    -0.006    [216]    0.927
 Integrity                      -0.068    [67]    0.719     -0.122   [216]    0.464    -0.087    [216]    0.575
 Organization                   -0.266    [65]   0.006      -0.080   [216]    0.133    -0.073    [216]    0.496
 Calm                           -0.232    [67]   0.032      -0.010   [216]    0.896     0.068    [216]    0.411
 Aggressive                     -0.137    [65]    0.289     -0.159   [216]    0.121     0.064    [216]    0.640
 Fast                           -0.230    [65]   0.030      -0.037   [216]    0.632     0.262    [216]   0.002
 Commitments                    -0.448    [67]   0.003      -0.327   [216]    0.065     0.224    [216]    0.240
 Brainpower                     -0.213    [66]    0.078     -0.240   [216]   0.000     -0.038    [216]    0.784
 Analytical skills              -0.277    [67]   0.012      -0.094   [216]    0.340     0.006    [216]    0.970
 Strategic vision               -0.187    [66]    0.067     -0.035   [216]    0.566     0.186    [216]   0.033
 Creative                       -0.188    [67]    0.055     -0.251   [216]   0.006     -0.129    [216]    0.387
 Attention to detail            -0.142    [65]    0.121     -0.192   [216]   0.000     -0.057    [216]    0.618
 Enthusiasm                     -0.056    [67]    0.516      0.006   [212]    0.932     0.064    [212]    0.485
 Persistent                     -0.087    [67]    0.504     -0.291   [216]   0.010     -0.050    [216]    0.707
 Proactive                      -0.153    [67]    0.176     -0.347   [216]   0.000     -0.190    [216]    0.288
 Work ethic                     -0.458    [67]   0.013      -0.503   [216]    0.154     0.317    [216]   0.043
 High standards                 -0.002    [67]    0.983     -0.571   [216]   0.000     -0.388    [216]    0.059
 Listening skills               -0.240    [65]   0.008       0.018   [212]    0.658     0.010    [212]    0.873
 Open to criticism              -0.165    [67]    0.061      0.005   [216]    0.918    -0.012    [216]    0.863
 Teamwork                       -0.176    [67]    0.107      0.005   [216]    0.938     0.027    [216]    0.761
 Persuasion                     -0.138    [65]    0.181     -0.027   [216]    0.756     0.163    [216]    0.106
 Holds people accountable       -0.093    [65]    0.390     -0.231   [212]   0.001     -0.221    [212]    0.073




                                                       31
                                                                         Table 5:
                                                             Kaplan and Sorensen (2019) factors

     This table presents descriptive statistics for Kaplan and Sorensen (2019) factors for CEOs. The sample is based on ghSMART, Equilar, CRSP, and
     form DEF14A filings from the SEC EDGAR database. Longholder is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the CEO held an option to the last year before
     expiration, provided it was at least 40% in-the-money entering the final year as in Malmendier and Tate (2015). *, **, and *** denote significance at the
     10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                     Full Sample                         Longholder = 0                        Longholder = 1
                          Obs.   Mean     Median     Std.Dev    Obs.   Mean     Median     Std.Dev    Obs.   Mean     Median     Std.Dev    t-test
               Factor 1   64     0.417    0.618      0.824      55     0.523    0.633      0.682      9      -0.229   -0.247     1.290      -2.655
               Factor 2   64     -0.143   -0.082     0.790      55     -0.103   0.014      0.806      9      -0.389   -0.331     0.670      -1.005
               Factor 3   64     -0.016   0.156      0.746      55     0.030    0.168      0.732      9      -0.296   -0.155     0.810      -1.219
               Factor 4   64     0.049    0.143      0.783      55     0.085    0.175      0.821      9      -0.171   -0.229     0.466      -0.910




32
                                        Table 6:
                CEO overconfidence and Kaplan and Sorensen (2019) factors

This table reports estimates of the linear regressions of CEO overconfidence on Kaplan and Sorensen (2019)
factors. The variables are defined in Table 3. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.



                                                       Longholder
                                      (1)        (2)      (3)          (4)       (5)
                         Factor 1   -0.136                                      -0.125
                                    (0.051)                                     (0.052)
                         Factor 2              -0.056                           -0.043
                                               (0.056)                          (0.054)
                         Factor 3                           -0.072              -0.054
                                                            (0.059)             (0.057)
                         Factor 4                                     -0.051    -0.051
                                                                      (0.056)   (0.054)
                         R2          0.102     0.016        0.023     0.013     0.137
                         Obs.         64        64           64         64        64




                                                       33
                                                                    Table 7:
                                              Forecasting EPS and Kaplan and Sorensen (2019) factors

     This table reports estimates of the linear regressions of CEO forecasting EPS behavior on Kaplan and Sorensen (2019) factors. The variables are
     defined in Table 4. Robust standard errors clustered by executive are in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level,
     respectively.



                                                       High Forecast                                         Point Estimate
                                     (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)         (8)          (9)      (10)
                        Factor 1    -0.137                                       -0.129     0.025                                        0.051
                                    (0.039)                                      (0.047)   (0.062)                                      (0.059)
                        Factor 2                0.027                             0.059              -0.012                              0.035
                                               (0.027)                           (0.032)             (0.036)                            (0.039)
                        Factor 3                          -0.056                 -0.023                          -0.061                 -0.056
                                                          (0.028)                (0.025)                         (0.047)                (0.043)




34
                        Factor 4                                        0.059     0.117                                        0.168     0.229
                                                                       (0.056)   (0.065)                                      (0.076)   (0.097)
                        R2          0.062      0.007       0.014       0.006     0.090     0.002     0.001       0.018        0.050     0.084
                        Obs.         212        212         212         212       212       212       212         212          212       212
                                            Table 8:
                     Summary statistics for investment sensitivity analyses

This table presents descriptive statistics for the investment-cash flow sensitivity analyses. The sample is
based on ghSMART, Equilar, CRSP, Compustat, and form DEF14A filings from SEC EDGAR database. The
sample covers the period from 2001 to 2016. Firm characteristics are from Compustat. Compustat data
codes are in parentheses. The top panel reports average firm characteristics. Obs. per firm is the number of
observations by firm. Avg. Market value ($bn) is the average market capitalization by firm computed as the
product of common shares outstanding (CSHO) and fiscal-year closing price (PRCC_F). Avg. Leverage is the
average leverage by firm computed as the total debt (DD1 + DLTT) divided by total assetes (AT). Avg. ROA is
the average return on assets by firm computed as operating income before depreciation (OIBDP) divided by
lagged total assets (AT). Longholder and Factor 1­4 are defined in Table 3. The investment-cash flow sensitivity
analyses variables are defined as in Malmendier and Tate (2015). Investment is capital expenditures (CAPX)
divided by the lag of net property plants and equipment (PPENT). Q is Tobin's Q defined as the market
value of assets divided by total assets (AT). The market value of assets is defined as the book value of assets
(AT) plus market value minus the book value of equity. The book value of equity is defined as stockholders'
equity (SEQ or, if missing, CEQ + PSTK, or, if missing, AT - LT) minus preferred stock (PSTKL or, if missing,
PSTKRV, or, if missing, PSTK) plus deferred taxes and investment tax credit (TXDITC or, if missing, 0). Size is
the logarithm of total assets (AT). Cash flow is the sum of earnings (IB) and depreciation (DP) divided by the
lag of net property plants and equipment (PPENT). Stock ownership is the fraction of company stock held by a
CEO. Vested options is the number of vested options held by a CEO divided by the number of common shares
outstanding. Efficient board size is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the board has between 4 and 12 members.
Investment, Q, Size, Cash flow, Stock ownership, Vested options are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles.

                                   Obs.    Mean     Std.Dev    p5        p25      p50      p75     p95
                                          Average firm characteristics
       Obs.   per firm             78      4.500    3.194      1.000     2.000    4.000    6.000   10.150
       Avg.   Market value ($bn)   78      1.808    2.803      0.030     0.230    0.656    2.013   6.033
       Avg.   Leverage             78      0.247    0.237      0.000     0.043    0.216    0.361   0.719
       Avg.   ROA                  78      0.053    0.314      -0.480    0.057    0.114    0.182   0.303
                      Summary statistics for investment-cash flow sensitivity analyses
       Longholder                  317     0.237    0.426      0.000     0.000    0.000    0.000   1.000
       Factor 1                    351     0.333    0.837      -1.188    -0.218   0.517    1.018   1.485
       Factor 2                    351     -0.123   0.911      -1.379    -0.814   -0.079   0.603   1.337
       Factor 3                    351     -0.163   0.818      -1.399    -0.642   -0.155   0.413   0.995
       Factor 4                    351     0.184    0.866      -0.993    -0.227   0.236    0.502   1.559
       Investment                  351     0.407    0.364      0.037     0.141    0.290    0.598   1.131
       Q                           351     2.098    1.212      0.942     1.206    1.677    2.620   4.641
       Size                        351     6.436    1.727      3.226     5.347    6.374    7.527   9.270
       Cash flow                   351     0.460    4.965      -5.405    0.144    0.779    1.699   4.931
       Stock ownership             351     0.036    0.076      0.000     0.001    0.004    0.016   0.244
       Vested options              351     0.006    0.010      0.000     0.000    0.002    0.008   0.024
       Efficient board size        335     1.000    0.000      1.000     1.000    1.000    1.000   1.000




                                                      35
                                        Table 9:
   The sensitivity of investment to cash flow and Kaplan and Sorensen (2019) factors

This table reports estimates of the linear regressions of investment on cash flow, CEO traits, cash flow
interacted with CEO traits, control variables, control variables interacted with cash flow, year fixed effects,
and year fixed effects interacted with cash flow. The variables are defined in Tables 3 and 8. Robust standard
errors clustered by firm are in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level,
respectively.



                                                               Investment
                                         (1)        (2)       (3)      (4)         (5)        (6)
           Q                             0.054   0.051   0.049   0.045   0.045               0.037
                                        (0.029) (0.026) (0.028) (0.025) (0.029)             (0.030)
           Size                         -0.065 -0.074 -0.070 -0.073 -0.066                  -0.058
                                        (0.026) (0.023) (0.022) (0.024) (0.022)             (0.030)
           Stock ownership               0.064  -0.441  -0.436  -0.393  -0.413               0.258
                                        (0.592) (0.373) (0.371) (0.448) (0.373)             (0.653)
           Vested options               -2.569  -2.390  -3.061  -2.658  -3.962              -3.272
                                        (3.820) (3.924) (3.806) (3.699) (4.035)             (3.195)
           Cash flow                    -0.011   0.126   0.116   0.134   0.186               0.104
                                        (0.044) (0.083) (0.097) (0.092) (0.085)             (0.090)
           Longholder                   -0.095                                              -0.127
                                        (0.093)                                             (0.104)
           Longholder × Cash flow        0.039                                               0.046
                                        (0.021)                                             (0.023)
           Factor 1                             -0.004                                      -0.066
                                                (0.034)                                     (0.048)
           Factor 1 × Cash flow                 -0.015                                       0.010
                                                (0.005)                                     (0.009)
           Factor 2                                      0.002                               0.015
                                                        (0.029)                             (0.039)
           Factor 2 × Cash flow                          0.007                              -0.000
                                                        (0.009)                             (0.013)
           Factor 3                                             -0.010                       0.001
                                                                (0.040)                     (0.051)
           Factor 3 × Cash flow                                  0.017                       0.027
                                                                (0.006)                     (0.012)
           Factor 4                                                      0.056               0.058
                                                                        (0.030)             (0.045)
           Factor 4 × Cash flow                                         -0.026              -0.027
                                                                        (0.010)             (0.017)
           Controls × Cash flow          Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes
           Year FE                       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes
           Year FE × Cash flow           Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes
           R2                           0.358      0.351     0.333      0.344     0.346      0.398
           Obs.                          317        351       351        351       351        317




                                                      36
