                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       TAPPING INTO TALENT:
  COUPLING EDUCATION AND INNOVATION POLICIES FOR ECONOMIC GROWTH

                                          Ufuk Akcigit
                                        Jeremy G. Pearce
                                           Marta Prato

                                       Working Paper 27862
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27862


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2020




We thank our discussants Miguel León-Ledesma and Fabian Waldinger, seminar participants at
Bocconi University, Bilkent University, Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, CEPR
Macroeconomics and Growth Meeting, Columbia University, Humboldt University, IFO
Research Seminar, IMF/INET Conference, Koc University, NBER Summer Institute, RIDGE
Montevideo, and the University of Chicago, as well as Thomas Blomgren-Hansen, Thomas
Bourany, Martin Junge, Johan Kuhn, and Lasse Nielsen for helpful comments and suggestions.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Ufuk Akcigit, Jeremy G. Pearce, and Marta Prato. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth
Ufuk Akcigit, Jeremy G. Pearce, and Marta Prato
NBER Working Paper No. 27862
September 2020
JEL No. J24,O31,O38,O47

                                         ABSTRACT

How do innovation and education policy affect individual career choice and aggregate
productivity? This paper analyzes the various layers that connect R&D subsidies and
higher education policy to productivity growth. We put the development of scarce talent and
career choice at the center of a new endogenous growth framework with individual-level
heterogeneity in talent, frictions, and preferences. We link the model to micro-level data from
Denmark and uncover a host of facts about the links between talent, higher education, and
innovation. We use these facts to calibrate the model and study counterfactual policy
exercises. We find that R&D subsidies, while less effective than standard models, can be
strengthened when combined with higher education policy that alleviates financial frictions
for talented youth. Education and innovation policies not only alleviate different frictions,
but also impact innovation at different time horizons. Education policy is also more effective in
societies with high income inequality.

Ufuk Akcigit                                    Marta Prato
Department of Economics                         University of Chicago
University of Chicago                           1126 E. 59th St
1126 East 59th Street                           Chicago, IL 60637
Saieh Hall, Office 403                          mprato@uchicago.edu
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
uakcigit@uchicago.edu

Jeremy G. Pearce
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60615
jgpearce@uchicago.edu
    Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


1    Introduction
Talent is a scarce resource. There are only a handful of people like Marie Curie and Isaac Newton with the
potential to transform the way we live. Similarly, certain occupations have greater potential of generating
significant spillovers to society. While some occupations (e.g. the production of goods) can be executed
by a wide range of people and have limited spillovers, other occupations, such as inventors in Research
and Development (R&D), require talent to raise the shoulders of giants for the next generation. Further,
inventive occupations require not just scarce talent but training in order to come up with effective new
ideas. These observations give rise to the following important questions: How do societies select which
individuals to educate to become inventors? What frictions prevent individuals from investing in human
capital to become an inventor? What policies can alleviate the potential talent misallocation? What are the
time horizons over which these policies show their full impact? The answers to these questions are crucial
to policy debates in innovation and economic growth and are central to addressing certain puzzles in the
literature. Our study is an attempt to address these questions theoretically, empirically, and quantitatively.
    To answer these questions, we build a novel endogenous growth model that centers on the development
of scarce talent. We connect this model to extensive individual level micro-data to explore the connection
between talent, human capital, and aggregate innovation. The theoretical framework stresses five main
elements: i) talent is necessary for innovation and heterogeneous in quality, ii) it takes time to turn talent
into inventive human capital, iii) some talented individuals, such as those born to poor families, may
not have enough resources to build inventive human capital, iv) regardless of access to resources, some
talented individuals may dislike research, and v) there are limited training slots at universities. The novel
elements of this model are motivated by facts in new micro-level data from Denmark.
    We turn to the Danish micro-data and uncover ten facts about the connections between talent, human
capital, and innovation. We use these ten facts to discipline our theoretical framework and calibrate the
model. This enables us to quantify the impact of policies on talent allocation and aggregate innovation.
This dataset includes detailed information on individuals, such as their educational attainment, employ-
ment and wages, age, IQ, parental background, and parent economic outcomes. We direct our attention
to higher education because of its important links to innovation. The IQ and parental background data
enable us to link key new elements of the model to the data. In order to speak to innovation and the effects
of policies, we match the dataset to external patent data from the European Patent Office (EPO) and policy
data from the Danish Ministry of Education. A unique feature of this dataset is detailed information on an
innovation and education policy change implemented in 2002, which introduced new R&D subsidies and
dramatically increased funding to universities and the level of PhD enrollment. We exploit this variation
to better isolate the links between talent, education and innovation. We stress ten facts in our framework
made possible by the extensive Danish dataset that shape our analysis:

Fact 1 Individuals with higher IQ are more likely to obtain a PhD.

Fact 2 Individuals with higher parental income are more likely to obtain a PhD.

Fact 3 Individuals' IQ is correlated with parental income, but not perfectly.

Fact 4 Only a fraction of people with high IQ and high parental income obtain a PhD.

Fact 5 PhDs are 20-times more likely to become inventors compared to the average person in society.


                                                          1
    Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


Fact 6 Conditional on education level, higher IQ people are more likely to innovate.

Fact 7 Inventors work in teams and team size is heterogeneous.

Fact 8 The probability of innovating as a team leader over an inventor's life-cycle follows an inverted-U shape.

Fact 9 An increase in the number of PhD slots is associated with a decline in the average IQ of PhDs.

Fact 10 The economy is open in the goods market but closed in the skills market: import and export accounted for
44% and 51% of GDP in 2010, but foreign migrants make up only 10% of inventors in Denmark.

    While the importance of education, IQ and parental background for innovation outcomes have been
emphasized in the literature before (Aghion et al., 2017; Akcigit et al., 2017; Bell et al., 2018), the novelty in
our study is two-fold. First, we direct our attention to higher education (Facts 1, 2, 4, 5) and evaluate the
importance of this factor in the setting of a policy intervention. Starting in 2002, the Danish government
required universities to double PhD enrollment in the span of 10 years, with the goal of expanding the pool
of scientists and inventors. As highlighted in Fact 9, the increase in PhD enrollment was associated with a
decline in average IQ of enrolled PhDs. This empirical finding illustrates constraints the government faces
when attempting to expand the pool of researchers and inventors due to the scarcity and heterogeneity
of talent, which is a key determinant of innovation outcomes. It also stresses the importance of tapping
into other sources of talent in the economy: attracting into research those talented individuals who are
financially constrained or work in other sectors.
    Second, we organize these facts systemically through the lens of a model and study their theoretical
and quantitative implications. In the model, individuals are born with heterogeneous talent, preferences,
and financial resources (Facts 1-4). They decide, depending on their talent and preferences, whether they
want to get higher education and become a researcher and contribute to aggregate innovation (Fact 5), or
enter the production sector. If they are credit constrained, they may not get the education necessary for
innovation even if they have sufficient talent and desire. Once in the research sector, individuals join a
research team led by a team leader to produce ideas, where the quantity of ideas produced depends on
the team leader's talent (Fact 6) and the size of the team (Fact 7). Individuals then continue to learn on
the job with the possibility of becoming a team leader (Fact 8). Schools have a fixed amount of PhD slots
and will give those slots to the most talented individuals who are not credit constrained and want to get
a PhD (Fact 9). A fundamental driving force in the model is that talent is local and scarce (Fact 10).
    The model is tractable and delivers certain intuitive results. Higher wages in research make individuals
more likely to work in the research sector. Innovation is limited by the availability of educational slots,
talent, and the forces that generate a match of talent to education. Talented people might not end up
going into research due to either a dislike of research or a lack of resources to afford education. The latter
of these two, financial constraints based on parental background, delivers an inefficiency in the allocation
of talent. This inefficiency is linked to economic growth through idea production in the research sector.
Our model also enables intuitive policy counterfactuals, as it delivers analytical solutions for the balanced
growth path impact of innovation and education policies.
    The framework is not only well-suited to connect to individual level data on talent and financial
frictions, but also to understand the outcomes of policy interventions from the Danish government. From
2002-2013, the Danish government pursued through a program "Innovation Danmark" aggressive policies
aimed at promoting innovation and education. We highlight that different policies affect the economy

                                                         2
    Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


through different channels. For instance, an R&D subsidy boosts profits in the research sector, pulling
talented and financially unconstrained individuals into research. A subsidy to education, on the other
hand, enables talented and interested, but financially constrained, individuals to enter the research sector.
The Danish government also required universities to increase their PhD slots. Our model highlights that
this type of policy introduces a trade-off between an increase in the pool of researchers in the economy
and a decline in average talent of researchers, because the marginal individual pulled into the research
sector is less talented than the existing pool of researchers. This is consistent with the empirical pattern
described in Fact 9.
    The model thus provides a framework to analyze the empirical facts in the Danish micro-data. Embed-
ding these facts about talent allocation and innovation into an endogenous growth framework not only
brings our theory closer to the data, it also rationalizes a puzzle in the literature on the role of innovation
policy. In the standard models of endogenous growth, the relationship between the aggregate growth of
an economy ( g) and the R&D subsidy rate can be approximated by the following formula:1

                                                         g
                                                                      g.                                    (1)
                                                    R&D subsidy rate

Yet, the empirical literature has not been supportive of this strong link between R&D subsidies and eco-
nomic growth and has given rise to a number of critiques (Goolsbee, 1998; Romer, 2000; Wilson, 2009). Our
framework introduces different margins that affect the relationship between R&D subsidies and economic
growth, in Equation (1), and makes it function of the following five ingredients, which have an impact in
both the short-run and long-run:

        g
                    = f (talent, time-to-build, parental income, preferences, limited training slots).
   R&D subsidy rate

   Before proceeding to policy counterfactuals, we validate our model by illustrating its ability to match
out of sample moments. First, the model delivers surprising results on selection into higher education
depending on parental income. Individuals who enroll in a PhD with wealthier parents have higher IQs
than individuals with poorer parents. This result from the model is confirmed in the data. Second, we
evaluate the introduction of policies introduced in the Danish education and innovation market. We run
these policies through the model and observe the predicted change in the IQ of PhDs. We then compare
the model predicted change in IQ to the data and find a close match. After confirming the ability of the
model to match out of sample moments, we proceed to innovation and education policy counterfactuals
that alter the policy mix. We highlight four main findings.
   First, we show that, in steady state, R&D policy has limited effectiveness compared to benchmark
models of endogenous growth. R&D policy has even more limited contemporaneous effects. A 10% R&D
subsidy only has a contemporaneous effect on the growth rate of about 0.6%, because of the time-to-build
component of human capital. Further, the long-run effects of R&D are smaller than standard models
due to the fact that the talent pulled into research is restricted by both educational capacity and financial
constraints. A 10% R&D subsidy has a long-run effect on the growth rate of 5%, compared to 10% in
standard models.
   Second, there is a pecking order between education and R&D policies. The optimal policy mix depends
on the size of the budget the government has to allocate to research. If the government has 0.5% of

   1 See   Appendix C.7 for a derivation of Equation (1).


                                                             3
Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth




                                              Figure 1: Summary of the Model
                                     Figure 1: Summary of the Model
                                                   space


                              Individuals born with heterogenous
                       talent (z), preferences ( ), financial resources (y)



                                                  Occupational Choice                                             More talented individuals
                                                                                                                   choose research, up to
                                              F (z)                                                                 financial constraints
                                                          Talent Distribution                                          and preferences



                                                                                     Researchers


                                                                                                                  School offers N PhD slots
                                                                                            Preferences               based on talent z
                                                                                            Financial Frictions
                                                                                              z
                                                                  ¯
                                                                  z
                                                                                                                     Researchers must
                                                                          Obtain PhD (Research)                        obtain PhD to
                                                                                                                   become team members
        Production Worker, wu (t)                                           Team Member, ws (t)
                                                                                                                       Time to Learn:
                                                                                                                      members become
                                                                                                                      leaders at rate 
                                                                           Team Leader,  H (z, t)

                                                                                                                  Team leaders create ideas
        Final Good Production:                                                   Idea Production:                     using their talent,
                                                                                                                       team members,
     Y (t) =
               L(t)     1
                            Aj   (t)  k       (t)1-  dj                         q ( z , t ) =  z 1 n 2 a 3
               1-      0                  j                                                                          and lab equipment


         Aggregate Productivity                                             Productivity Growth                         Growth =
               ¯ (t)         1
                                                                         g=      ~   
                                                                                              q(z, t) f (z)dz        endogenous ideas
               A            0    A j (t)dj                                      + µ ¯
                                                                                    z
                                                                                                                         by PhDs




                                                                2 4
    Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


GDP budget to allocate to research, our framework predicts it should allocate all of its resources towards
educational subsidies to improve the talent pool by enabling access to education for financially constrained
individuals. With a larger budget, the government should mix subsidies to education, subsidies to R&D,
and an expansion in the supply of education slots. Given a budget of 1% of GDP, the optimal allocation is
between education and R&D subsidies, with 50% of the budget for R&D subsidies and 50% to educational
subsidies. Given a budget of 2.5% of GDP, it is optimal to allocate 58% of the budget to R&D subsidies,
26% to education subsidies, and 16% to expanding the educational slots available. The fact that there is an
optimal mix highlights the role of the complementarities of the policies in their contribution to economic
growth.
    Third, our analysis suggests that education policy is more effective in more unequal societies in stim-
ulating innovation. We analyze the responsiveness of policy under different levels of financial frictions.
In an environment with lower financial frictions, fewer individuals are unable to pay for schooling; thus,
subsidizing the cost of education is less effective in stimulating economic growth. In an economy where
no one is constrained, educational subsidies have no effectiveness, as individuals who want to pursue a
career in research will do so regardless. In an economy with full frictions, educational subsidies are the
most effective policy tool for innovation.
    Fourth, we solve for the transitional dynamics of our model and find that it takes time for all of these
policies to show their full effect. We find that R&D policy is the most effective policy for innovation in the
short-run. On impact, R&D policy stimulates the purchase of R&D inputs other than human capital (e.g.
lab equipment) by the existing researchers, which translates into more innovation. Education policy, on
the other hand, has limited effectiveness in the short-run due to time-to-build human capital, but is more
effective in the medium to long-run. It takes around five years for educational subsidies to surpass R&D
policy in terms of its overall growth effect for equivalent expenditure of 0.5% of GDP.
    We highlight some overarching themes from these results. First, education policy is an integral compo-
nent of a policymaker's toolkit for overall innovation. It cannot be thought of separately from its impact
on the allocation of talent into research. Second, when observing the aggregate response to any policies,
policymakers need to exert patience as each of these policies takes time for their full effects to be real-
ized. Third, the model suggests a framework to think about how inequality and high-skilled immigration
interact with these policies. We will revisit these implications in the conclusion.
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. We complete this section with a review of the literature.
Section 2 discusses the institutional background in Denmark and why this is a good setting for our
analysis. Section 3 describes the theory, starting with the environment and equilibrium, and moving to
theoretical counterfactuals on the introduction of the three policies and the frictions they alleviate. Section
4 introduces the data and the ten facts discussed in the introduction and uses these facts to calibrate
the model. We further illustrate the ability of the calibrated model to match out of sample moments.
Section 5 performs the quantitative policy counterfactuals. Section 6 discusses robustness checks of these
counterfactuals. Section 7 concludes.


Related Literature

This paper primarily builds on and extends the theoretical and empirical literature on innovation and
endogenous growth. One of the main departures of our analysis is the focus on individuals instead of
firms. In our model, as in the classical endogenous growth models, ideas are the main source of economic



                                                      5
    Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


growth (Romer, 1990; Aghion and Howitt, 1992), and idea production is heterogeneous in terms of quality,
as in Akcigit and Kerr (2018). Alongside this, we stress that the idea creation and transmission process
happens through individuals with talent, as in Lucas and Moll (2014), and Perla and Tonetti (2014) and
link this talent to objects in the data.
    The relationship of scarce talent and aggregate innovation has received lively discussion in recent
papers. Aghion et al. (2017), Akcigit et al. (2017), and Bell et al. (2018) find that parental backgrounds
influence who becomes an inventor, in Finland, historical US, and modern US, respectively. Through
name-matching between modern and historical data, Celik (2015) also finds that a child's likelihood of
becoming an inventor correlates with family background. We verify this finding in the case of Denmark
in one of our main ten facts. The allocation of talent to innovative occupations has important implica-
tions for economic growth, as Waldinger (2016) finds that human capital is much more important than
physical capital for innovation in both the short and long-run. We put human capital at the center of this
framework, recognizing that human capital must be built from talent.
    Understanding the role of human capital in aggregate innovation can help enrich discussions on the
interaction between R&D policy and economic growth. Standard growth models of R&D in firms assume
the supply of scientists is elastic in steady state (Romer, 1990; Grossman and Helpman, 1991; Aghion
and Howitt, 1992; Klette and Kortum, 2004) and predict large effects of R&D subsidies on economic
growth. However, there is empirical evidence that the general equilibrium effects of R&D policy are
minimal (Goolsbee, 1998; Wilson, 2009). Our analysis enriches this discussion and provides a more micro-
founded analysis of the scientists in research. In particular, we introduce a framework that includes
matching and financial frictions (e.g., Jovanovic, 2014, Celik, 2015), talent heterogeneity (e.g., Jaimovich
and Rebelo, 2017), diffusion and social interaction (Kortum, 1997; Perla et al., 2015), and the delayed
process of skill accumulation (e.g. Arrow, 1962; Stokey, 1988; Benhabib et al., 2014; Konig et al., 2016).
These new ingredients can bring this theoretical literature closer to empirical studies of the impact of R&D
policy.
    Empirically, economists have found that R&D subsidies increase firm innovation levels (Bloom et al.,
2002; Hall and Van Reenen, 2000). Fiscal policies and public R&D investments also have positive effects
in partial equilibrium (Moretti and Wilson, 2014; Azoulay et al., 2018). However, there is also evidence
that this is much weaker in general equilibrium. For instance, Wilson (2009) finds that R&D subsidies
simply pull innovative activity away from states that do not have subsidies, creating small aggregate
effects. Moretti and Wilson (2014) find that R&D subsidies often simply lead to scientist reallocation
across states. Dimos and Pugh (2016) review the literature and find mixed effects of public expenditure on
R&D spending. Bloom et al. (2019) discuss this literature and suggest a potential combination of policies,
which this current paper explores. In particular, we find that innovation policy is much more effective
when combined with education policy.
    The elasticity of the supply of human capital in research is an important component for explaining the
interaction between innovation and R&D policy, as noted by Goolsbee (1998) and Romer (2000). Goolsbee
(1998) finds that R&D subsidies mostly transmit to scientist wages. With an inelastic supply of scientists,
this price effect does not transmit significantly to overall innovation. Even if human capital is elastic in the
long-run, it takes time to build and entering individuals may have different talent than the existing pool.
We build a model that formalizes these empirical observations.
    In formalizing the connection between education and aggregate innovation, we speak to a literature
on the role of universities for innovation. Previous papers have noted the importance of education for


                                                       6
    Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


innovation (Aghion et al., 2009, 2017; Toivanen and Vaananen, 2016), and the role of education and human
capital formation for long-run economic growth (Mincer, 1984; Barro, 2001). Grossman et al. (2017), for
instance, find that education and increased levels of schooling are a key component of sustaining balanced
growth. Higher education broadly serves two purposes. The first is the production of basic research
(Nelson, 1959; Stephan, 1996), which the private sector builds on directly (Ahmadpoor and Jones, 2017).
Second, and more central to this paper, is the crucial role higher education plays in training talent. College
graduates and PhDs make up a large share of inventors as Aghion et al. (2017) find in Finland, and which
we also find in the case of Denmark. However, individuals do not immediately innovate upon entering a
PhD program or graduation.
    Our model connects to empirical observations on how the human capital of researchers and inventors
builds (Jones, 2010; Jones and Weinberg, 2011) and depreciates (Aghion et al., 2020) over the life-cycle.
Individuals realize their innovative productivity in teams (Wuchty et al., 2007; Jones, 2009). In each team,
individuals take on different roles depending on their human capital (Pearce, 2020), and split the returns
to innovation depending on the role within the team (Aghion et al., 2018). In this paper, individuals who
serve as team members accumulate skills to become team leaders but also face the possibility of becoming
obsolete. This is disciplined by the Danish micro-data with specific attention to how inventive human
capital is built from talent.
    Given its scarcity, the allocation of talent to specific occupations is central to the production of ideas
and growth of an economy. Murphy et al. (1991) note how occupational choice is an important force in
economic growth in the context of rent-seeking versus entrepreneurship. Using survey data, Arts and
Veugelers (2020) show that individuals with a strong taste for science make better inventors. Rosen (1981)
discusses how, in a world without financial frictions or heterogeneous preferences, high ability individuals
will sort into careers with the highest returns to talent. Willis and Rosen (1979) show evidence based
on this fact and Topel and Ward (1992) study this in the context of early career occupational switches.
However, this is complicated by frictions in the allocation of individuals to occupations. Celik (2015)
finds that misallocation of talent to non-inventing occupations has a first-order effect on economic growth.
Hsieh et al. (2019) find that better occupational allocation for minorities and females over the last 50 years
has contributed to aggregate growth, which complements a literature that has addressed this with female
labor force participation (Greenwood et al., 2005). If frictions in occupational allocation are not addressed,
we find that expansion in the supply of researchers brings in less talented researchers, which will have a
smaller impact on growth.
    We unite these facts on skill, education, and innovation into an endogenous growth framework with
a span of control along the lines of Lucas (1978) and Akcigit et al. (2018). In addition to an otherwise
standard span of control model with talent heterogeneity, this paper builds in education, financial frictions,
time-to-build human capital, and physical capital for R&D (e.g., lab equipment). These forces enable
more realism when it comes to addressing how education and innovation policies interact with talent
and human capital in the economy. This realism enables evaluation of the transmission of policies to
innovation and economic growth at different horizons. We next turn to the institutional environment in
Denmark within which we do our analysis.




                                                      7
     Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


2     Institutional Background
This project is built on Danish micro-data with individuals and firms. We primarily make use of individ-
ual identifier data and extensive innovation and education policies in Denmark from Denmark's Statistics
Office (DST) and external data sources from 2002-2013. The policies in Denmark and individual outcomes
provide a laboratory to understand the effects of specific economic policies targeted towards higher ed-
ucation and R&D. This section provides details on the institutional background for higher education in
Denmark and the relevant education and innovation policies. We direct particular attention to PhDs, as
they are the main focus of this paper and also an important target in the policies introduced in this time
period.
    A PhD is the highest level of educational attainment in the Danish education system and the Danish
Ministry for Education and Research considers it a key element for supporting scientific capacity in Den-
mark (Ministry of Education, 2016). A typical PhD program has a duration of three years, and begins
after the completion of a 2 years Masters program. There are multiple ways of financing a PhD, including
University basic funding, external grants, and funding from research councils or foundations.
    The Danish Government has introduced a number of education and innovation policies since 2002.
These policies were united in order to build "a comprehensive strategy for the development of Denmark
into a leading global growth and knowledge society" (Jensen et al., 2012). On the education side, alongside
targets for education attainment at lower levels, the goal was to increase the provision of higher educa-
tion in order to establish a highly qualified recruitment base of researchers to both the private and public
sectors. On the innovation side, the objective of the new R&D programs was to make Danish companies
among the most innovative in the world. The "Innovation Danmark" database contains information on
several education, research, and innovation programs since 2002. Figure 2 displays the number of active
programs in the "Innovation Danmark" database by year. Each color code signifies a program that ad-
dresses a different element of the market for idea production ­ R&D subsidies (blue), educational slots
expansion (green), and educational subsidies (red).


    Figure 2: Research and Education Programs by year in the "Innovation Danmark" database

                                                                                                                                         P14
                                       10




                                                                                                                                         P13
                               Number of Programs




                                                                                                             P9     P9                   P12
                                                                                               P8     P8     P8     P8            P9     P11
                                                                                               P7     P7     P7     P7     P9     P8     P10           P16
                                                                                        P6     P6     P6     P6     P6     P8     P7     P8     P13 P13
                                    5




                                                                                        P5     P5     P5     P5     P5     P7     P5     P7     P12 P12
                                                           P3            P4             P4     P4     P4     P4     P4     P5     P4     P5     P10 P10
                                                           P1     P3     P3     P4      P3     P3     P3     P3     P3     P4     P3     P4     P7     P5
                                                    P1     P2     P1     P1     P1      P2     P2     P2     P2     P2     P2     P2     P2     P5     P15 P10
                                                    P0     P0     P0     P0     P0      P0     P0     P0     P0     P0     P0     P0     P0     P0     P0     P0
                                       0


                                                    2002

                                                           2003

                                                                  2004

                                                                         2005

                                                                                2006

                                                                                        2007

                                                                                               2008

                                                                                                      2009

                                                                                                             2010

                                                                                                                    2011

                                                                                                                           2012

                                                                                                                                  2013

                                                                                                                                         2014

                                                                                                                                                2015

                                                                                                                                                       2016

                                                                                                                                                              2017




                                                                                       Program Application Year
                                                            R&D Support                          Universities Funding                           PhD Programs

     Source: DST, Note: Each box represents an active program in the particular year. The identifiers inside each box represents the program
instrument listed in Appendix A. Color codes refer to the role of policies in terms of R&D support to firms (blue), grants for PhD students (red),
                                       and subsidies to universities to expand educational slots (green).




                                                                                                      8
     Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


    As part of the investment in higher education, the government required universities to increase PhD
enrollment. This feature of the institutional environment motivates our modeling choice of a fixed number
of university slots which can be expanded through government policy.


                                  Figure 3: Increase in PhD Enrollment in Denmark
                                                                                      Policy




                                                       2500




                                                                                                            12
                                                                                      Intervention


                                 Number of incoming PhDs
                                               2000




                                                                                                                 Funding DKK B (else)
                              1000   1500      500




                                                              1990   1995   2000            2005     2010
                                                                               Year

                      Source: DST, Note: This graph PhD
                                                    plotsEnrollment
                                                         the incoming PhDs by year in Denmark from 1990-2012.


Universities were required to increase the annual intake of PhD students to a target number of 2,400
students, particularly within natural science, technology, medical and health science, and ICT (Ministry of
Education, 2016). PhD enrollment, which had been relatively stable at about 1200 individuals in the years
prior to 2002, started to gradually increase and reached about 2400 in 2012, as displayed in Figure 3. This
was accompanied with increases in funding for universities in the form of educational and research grants.
     We will use these programs to discuss both qualitative and quantitative counterfactuals that resemble
these policies. In the process, we group the various programs into three main categories: (i) R&D subsidies,
(ii) subsidy to the cost of education, (iii) increase in PhD slots. In Section 5, we will discuss quantitative
implications of the policies, making use of a calibrated version of our model from Section 4. First, we
introduce the model and discuss how the model can be used to explore policy counterfactuals.


3    Model
We start by introducing a tractable endogenous growth model that puts human capital and occupational
choice at the center. Individuals are heterogeneous in talent, parental resources, and preference for re-
search. When individuals are born, they choose whether to enter the production sector or research sector
as in Figure 1. In order to enter the research sector, they must obtain a PhD. Universities have a fixed
number of slots which they give to individuals who (i) have a sufficiently high IQ, (ii) choose to take a
career in research, (iii) are able to afford the financial cost of education.2
    In the research sector, individuals form teams to produce ideas and maximize income. Upon entering
the research sector, individuals become members of a research team, until they stochastically accumulate
sufficient human capital to become team leaders. The economy is open to trade in the goods sector and
capital markets, which implies that the interest rate is exogenous, but the idea production sector is closed

    2 We interpret this cost more broadly than tuition, in that it includes the cost of foregone income that might be required by

individuals to support their families.


                                                                              9
      Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


to trade, as in Grossman and Helpman (1991).
    The model is both tractable and connects to the ten empirical facts discussed in the introduction and
explored in Section 4. We provide an analytical solution to the steady state of the model and then discuss
transitional dynamics from the introduction of subsidies. This framework is amenable to the introduction
of various policies which we explore theoretically in Section 3.2. In Section 4, we bring the model closer
to the data by matching its quantitative features in order to inform policy counterfactuals.


3.1    Environment and Equilibrium
In this section, we will describe the basic environment and equilibrium. Our focus will be on a balanced
growth path equilibrium where all aggregate variables are growing at the same rate g. There is a research
market, intermediate goods monopolists who buy ideas from researchers, and a competitive final good
production market. In order to discuss the main new features of the framework, we open the model
discussion with occupational and educational choice and then turn to a discussion of the research and
final goods markets, and close the model with the discussion of the balanced growth path.

Preferences and Career

A unit mass of individuals live in a small open economy. Time is continuous and individuals are born
and die at rate . Individuals garner hand-to-mouth log utility and attempt to maximize lifetime utility
with discount rate . Individuals consume the final good and make educational or career choices based
on the expected value of occupations.
    Individuals of a certain talent, preferences, and parental background sort into three types of occupa-
tions. There is a mass of production workers L P and two types of skilled researchers ­ team leaders or
head of team, H , and team members, M, such that:

                                                LP + H + M = 1

Individuals who obtain a PhD become researchers and will be either a team leader or team member,
while production workers work in final good production. We now set up the problem of individuals'
educational choice.

Education

Individuals are born with talent, family resources, and career preferences. When they are born, they
choose whether or not to apply for a PhD to enter the research sector. Individuals might not get a PhD
for three reasons. First, individuals with a low talent or IQ, denoted z, will not be able to get into a PhD
program because the school selects those with the highest IQ and has limited slots. Second, individuals
who are financially constrained cannot enroll in a PhD program, even if they have high talent. Third,
individuals who prefer working outside the research sector will not accept a PhD offer.
    The university offers a PhD slot to a share N of individuals born in each cohort. The university
attempts to offer the slots to the most talented individuals. In particular, the university admits individuals
that will accept the offer with talent z greater than an equilibrium threshold z  ¯ that fills a class of size N .
The school is aware of the distribution of preferences, financial constraints, and talent and the cutoff will
factor in each of them. Before turning to the school's cutoff, we characterize the individual's problem.

                                                       10
     Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


    We discuss the talent, financial constraints, and preferences in order. First, F (z) is the c.d.f. that the
talent distribution follows, z  F (z). We assume a Pareto distribution such that F (z) = 1 - zmin   z
                                                                                                         and we
normalize zmin = 1. Thus, the fraction of individuals of a given cohort above the school's threshold z     ¯ will
               ¯ - .
          ¯) = z
be 1 - F (z
    Second, whether or not an individual with talent z can afford education, µ        ~ (z), is determined by
parental resources. Upon starting a PhD, an individual must pay an upfront cost of education  . Individ-
uals rely on parental income to cover the cost. We assume that µ individuals have a positive assortative
match of IQ to parental income (i.e. more talented individuals are matched to richer parents).3 For the
remaining fraction (1 - µ) of individuals, parental resources are independent of their talent. For these
individuals, we assume that income is distributed as a Pareto with shape parameter         ~ and that if income
were equally distributed, all students could afford education. This is equivalent to assuming that the scale
                                                          ~ 1
parameter of the income Pareto distribution takes value  - ~  , and so the probability these individuals can
                                                           
                                          ~
afford education is (~ - 1) / ~  . Thus, the share of individuals in a given cohort that can afford education
is:
                                                                                      ~
                                                                               ~-1
                                                                               
                                                                                      
                                                     ~  µ + (1 - µ ) ×
                                                     µ                                                                             (2)
                                                                                ~
                                                                                

                                               ¯ and sufficient parental income may not choose to become
    Lastly, even an individual with talent z > z
a researcher. If she has sufficient talent and her parents can afford education, she will compare the
alternative of becoming a researcher and a production worker where the preference for being a production
worker enters additively as ln( ). Thus, the lifetime value function, V (z, , b), for an individual born in
cohort b with talent z and preference shock is given by:



                                      V (z, , b) = max{V phd (z, b), V worker (b) + ln( )},                                        (3)

where V phd (z, b) is the value of becoming a researcher for an individual with talent z and V worker (b) is the
value of becoming a production worker. The lifetime value of being a PhD for individuals with talent z in
cohort b is given by
                                      
                V phd (z, b) =           e-(+)(t-b) e-(t-b) ln(ws (t)) + (1 - e-(t-b) ) ln( H (z, t)) dt.                          (4)
                                  b

    Individuals observe the lifetime path of their income as a researcher discounting their lifetime income
which they consume with log utility hand-to-mouth. Individuals start off entering the PhD as a team
member getting paid a wage for working on a research team ws . Individuals transition to team leaders
at rate  and as team leaders their income  H depends on their talent z. The individual value of being a
production worker (without including the preference shock) is as follows:
                                                                   
                                              V worker (b) =          e-(+)(t-b) ln(wu (t))dt,
                                                               b


     3 Formally, for this share µ of individuals, parental resources are proportional to IQ by a constant  . For ease of exposition, we

present the case where  is large enough so that all individuals in this group can afford education. This will be true for the value of
 that we obtain from our calibration. In Appendix C.6, we derive key model equations for the case where some of the individuals,
in the left tail of IQ distribution, with assortatively matched parental resources cannot afford the cost of education.


                                                                        11
     Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


where wu indicates the wage earned as a production worker which we derive later in this section.
   A given individual compares the value of a research career against a career as a production worker,
discounting at  + . Given wages and profits, forward looking individuals decide whether they want
to obtain a PhD. Even if individuals prefer a PhD, they may not obtain it due to frictions or talent. To
understand the forces determining the individual decision and school cutoff, we turn to the research
production and labor market in order to characterize wages and profits.


Research Production

Once individuals make their career choice, those who pursue an advanced degree (PhD) work in research
teams composed of a team leader and team members. Upon enrolling in a PhD program, an individual
becomes a team member and earns a skilled wage ws . While she is a team member, she stochastically
transitions to being a team leader with Poisson rate . The arrival rate  captures the time required
to build human capital, which includes time for formal education to earn a PhD as well as time spent
learning on the job.
    At each time t, a team produces a set of ideas. A team leader with talent z  F (z) hires n team
members and purchases a units of lab equipment at the marginal cost A  ¯ . For each total quantity of ideas,
a fraction  are implemented successfully.4 This delivers a net quantity of ideas q:



                                                        q =  z 1 n 2 a 3 .

The number of the ideas produced is increasing in the team leader's productivity and in the number of
team members. The parameter 1  [0, 1] denotes the team leader's span of control as in Lucas (1978). The
parameters 2 and 3 are the team members and lab equipment shares respectively. Given the per unit
price p5 , a team leader with talent z chooses the number of members n and lab equipment a to maximize
her profits,

                                                                       ¯ .
                                        H (z) = max pz1 n2 a3 - ws n - Aa
                                                   n, a 0


We assume 1 + 2 + 3 = 1. The profit maximization of the team leader delivers, for a given z, optimal
team size n, lab equipment a, quantity of innovation q, and team leader profits  H :
                                                                     1 + 2              3
                                                          p           1             p   1
                                           n ( z ) = z 2                         3  ¯                                          (5)
                                                          ws                       A
                                                                     2              1 + 3
                                                           p         1       p       1
                                            a ( z ) = z 2                 3  ¯                                                 (6)
                                                           ws               A
                                                                      2                 3
                                                           p          1         p       1
                                           q ( z ) =  z 2                    3  ¯                                              (7)
                                                           ws                  A
                                                                             2              3
                                                              p              1       p      1
                                          H ( z ) = 1 p  z 2                      3  ¯                                         (8)
                                                              ws                    A

    4 Another way of interpreting  can be as the common R&D productivity in the economy.
    5 We close the model later in this section and find that the price p is independent of the intermediate good producer to whom a
research team sells the idea.


                                                                12
     Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


   These results deliver the value of being a team leader in the research sector and will inform an indi-
vidual's occupational choice.


Occupational Choice and Equilibrium in the Research Labor Market

Forward looking individuals observe the research and final good production market and make their
career choice as described in Equation (3).6 This equation governs how the research market influences
                                          ¯. We find that an individual of talent z is indifferent if:
occupational choice and the school cutoff z

                                                                    +
                                                             ^u
                                                             w          ^u
                                                                        w    
                                                    z=                          ,
                                                             ^s
                                                             w           ^
                             (+)(++)
where we define                    , and w^ u, w
                                               ^ s , and ^ z are the detrended values of being an unskilled
worker, skilled worker, and a team leader with talent z respectively.7 We assume   U (0, Ez), thus the
preference shock scales with individual talent with coefficient E. It follows that the fraction of individuals
in a given cohort who prefer the research sector, , is also time-invariant and independent of z:


                                                                                         +
                                              phd        worker             1       ^s
                                                                                    w         ^
                                    Pr V            >V            + ln( ) =                     .                               (9)
                                                                            E       ^u
                                                                                    w        ^u
                                                                                             w

   We return to the fixed set of slots N that the school holds for students, also recalling the three elements
that determine entry into PhD. Those with talent z  z   ¯, financially unconstrained, µ
                                                                                      ~ , and those who prefer
working in the research sector,  will enter the PhD:  8



                                                              ¯) × µ
                                                    N = Pr(z  z    ~ × .                                                       (10)

    The occupational choice and school cutoff determine the availability of researchers in the economy. In
the labor market of researchers, team leaders hire team members and wages and prices equate supply and
demand for team members in steady state. Recall that team members M become team leaders H at flow
rate  and individuals exit the economy at rate . In steady state, this implies the following flow equation:

                                                             M =  H.

Moreover, recalling that M + H = N 9 , we obtain that the number of workers in each occupation is:

                                                              
                                                          M=    N,                                                             (11)
                                                              +
                                                              
                                                           H=   N,                                                             (12)
                                                              +
                                                          LP = 1 - N.                                                          (13)


    6 Appendix    C.1 solves this equation and shows that the solution to the occupational choice problem is time-invariant.
    7 We   look for a balanced growth path of the economy where the growth rate of final output g is constant. Then, the expressions
for the detrended values w  ^ u, w
                                 ^ s , and                             ^ u A0 e gt ; ws (t) = w
                                           ^ z are such that: wu (t) = w                      ^ s A0 e gt ;  H (z, t) = ^ zA0 e gt .
     8 Financial constraints and preferences are independent of z.
     9 Notice that, given that population size is constant, along the balanced growth path the share of individuals in a cohort who

enroll in a PhD, N , is equal to the share of researchers in the population.


                                                                   13
     Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


    The demand for team members must take into account the distribution of team leaders in the economy.
This depends on the arrival rate to becoming a team leader, , the school's cutoff for PhDs which we will
                      ¯, the measure of financial frictions, µ
solve for explicitly, z                                      ~ , and the probability an individual with sufficient
talent and financial resources chooses a career in research, . The supply of team members and team
leaders depends on the arrival rate to becoming a team leader, , and the death rate, . The overall
equation governing the relationship is the following:

                                                                                             
                                                ~
                                                µ            n(z) f (z)dz =                    N                 .                (14)
                                    +                 ¯
                                                      z                                      +
                                # team leaders Demand for team members               supply of team members


Plugging in N from Equation (10) and n(z) from Equation (5), we solve for the wages of team members
as a function of the price of ideas, p:


                                                                       1                       3
                                         ws     ¯ 
                                                z                     1 + 2            p      1 + 2
                                            = 2                                     3  ¯                .                         (15)
                                         p       -1                                   A

    We can use these equations to get the expression for equilibrium profits for the team leader z:


                                                                                  2
                                                       3                                            1
                                                      1 + 2      -1              1 + 2     p      1 + 2
                                                                                                            ¯.
                                     H ( z ) = z 1 3                                       ¯                A                     (16)
                                                                ¯ 
                                                                z                         A

   These equations describe wages and profits in the research sector. We now turn to the final good
production to characterize the wages of production workers and then to intermediate goods producers
who buy ideas to characterize their prices.


Final Good Production

The final good Y (t) is competitively produced at time t using effective labor L and a continuum of inter-
mediate goods k j :

                                                     1                    1
                                          Y (t) =      L(t)                   A j (t)  k j (t)1-  dj,
                                                    1-                0

where A j (t) represents the quality of the intermediate good j at time t. The price of the final good is
normalized to 1. The time indices will be suppressed henceforth when it does not cause confusion.
    The profit of the final goods producer is equal to their total output minus the prices they pay for
intermediate goods Pj k j and wages paid to effective labor wu L. Each laborer provides units of labor
to final good producers such that L = L P .10 The standard maximization problem of the final goods
producers delivers a demand curve for intermediate inputs k j as follows:

                                                                           -
                                                             Pj = L  A j k j .                                                    (17)

    Each intermediate good is produced by a monopolist that holds the product line j. The marginal cost
    10 We introduce a parameter for labor efficiency units in production, , to help discipline the connection between wages and profits

in the intermediate goods and research sector in the calibration in Section 4.3.


                                                                    14
     Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


of producing each intermediate good is  in terms of the final good and the monopolist maximizes profits
subject to the demand curve as follows:

                                           j = max Pj k j - k j , subject to (17).
                                                  k j , Pj

The resulting equilibrium profits for the intermediate good producer can be shown to be linear in the
quality A j such that:
                                               j = I Aj,
                                 1- 
where  I   [(1 - ) /]                  L. We can then rewrite the demand for each intermediate good as:

                                                                          1
                                                     k j = [(1 - ) /]  LA j .

    Given this equilibrium demand for k j and the final good producer's optimal choice of labor, the wage
of the unskilled worker is then as follows:
                                                                               1- 
                                                                   1-           
                                                                                     ¯,
                                                 wu =                                A                                           (18)
                                                             1-     

      ¯          1
where A         0    A j dj is aggregate productivity of the economy. In addition, final good output is:

                                                                              1- 
                                                     1            1-           
                                                                                     ¯.
                                                 Y=                                 LA                                           (19)
                                                    1-             

    Given their profit  I A j , intermediate goods monopolists have incentives to invest in technology. They
can increase their productivity ( A j ) through buying ideas from research teams. We now turn to the process
of purchasing an idea to characterize prices.


The Market for Ideas

The intermediate goods monopolists buy ideas from research teams. Researchers produce a bundle of
ideas q that they sell to the intermediate goods monopolist. This idea bundle increases productivity by a
            ¯ , such that a monopolist with technology A j can move to technology A j + q A
step size q A                                                                             ¯.
   The surplus or change in value from buying an idea is appropriated by the research team. The inter-
mediate goods producers pay unit price p j for a bundle of ideas q that arrive at rate x.11 Without loss of
generality, we assume that teams are randomly matched to intermediate goods producers.12 Let us denote
the value of owning a product line A j as V ( A j ), which looks as follows:

                                                                ¯ - V Aj - pj q .
                                  rV A j =  I A j + x V A j + q A                                                                (20)

This continuous time Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman has the following interpretation: the left-hand side equates
the safe flow return rV ( A j ) to the risky return on the right-hand side. One right-hand side, the first term


   11 Therate x does not need to be pinned down in order to solve for the price of the idea.
   12 Theexact market structure in the market for ideas is irrelevant because the value function is linear in A j , so that the return
to an additional unit of productivity is the same across all intermediate good producers and independent of their current level of
productivity. See Akcigit et al. (2018).


                                                                  15
     Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


is the per-period profit flow  I A j ; the second term captures the change in firm value due to the increased
             ¯ minus the unit cost of the idea to the firm, p j multiplied by the bundle of ideas, q.
quality by q A

Proposition 1 The equilibrium value function of monopolist j takes the following form

                                                                   I
                                                      V ( Aj ) =     A,
                                                                   r j

and the unit price of an idea p j is equal to:
                                                                   I ¯
                                                      pj = p =       A.                                    (21)
                                                                   r
   Proof. Since the research team appropriates all of the surplus from the idea sale, then the surplus to
the intermediate goods producer from purchasing the idea is 0, i.e.

                                                    ¯ - V Aj - pj q = 0
                                           V Aj + q A                                                      (22)

Conjecture the following form of the value function from Equation (20): V ( A j ) = vA j +  A  ¯ . Substituting
the guess into Equation (20), it follows in a straightforward manner that v =      r and  = 0. Substituting
                                                                                    I


this result into Equation (22) delivers the unit price p j described in Equation (21).
    The flow gain associated with an idea bundle q is  I q A  ¯ and r encapsulates the discounted sum of this
gain. Note the price of an idea is independent of buyer j. The change in aggregate productivity equals the
sum of innovation produced by research teams. With the price of ideas characterized closing the model,
we can characterize the research pool and growth rate of the economy.

The Research Pool

We can now solve for the allocation of talent in the economy. Individuals with talent higher than z    ¯
who have sufficient financial resources and preferences for the research sector will become researchers.
The remaining individuals work in the production sector. We can obtain an expression for z ¯ solving for
Equation (10) and plugging in µ~ from Equation (2) and  from Equation (9):

                                                                    +
                                                                           1
                                                                            
                                                    µ~      ^s
                                                            w            ^ 
                                                 ¯=
                                                 z                           .                             (23)
                                                    NE      ^
                                                            wu          ^u
                                                                        w

    Given prices and wages, Equation (23) delivers an expression for z        ¯. Higher wages (ws ) and team
                 ^
leader profits ( ) in research pull in more talent and induce a higher cutoff for the university. One can
also observe how preferences and financial frictions can reduce the propensity of individuals to enter
the research market. The larger the mean of the preference shock for working outside the research sector
(through larger E), the lower the school has to make the cutoff. If there are fewer financially unconstrained
people above the cutoff (higher µ  ~ ), the school would have a higher cutoff for the same number of enrollees.
All these equilibrium prices and the fraction of people who can afford and prefer research affects the talent
cutoff as a function of the shape of the talent distribution  .
    Figure 4 illustrates the allocation of PhD slots which determine the research pool. The school accepts
lower quality students as a result of the financial frictions (low µ~ ) and heterogeneous preferences (high E).
If all individuals prefer a career in research and are not financially constrained, the school's cutoff would
be at the black vertical line (highest IQ pool). When some high talent people prefer a career in production,

                                                             16
      Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


due to a distaste for research, this shifts the cutoff to the red vertical dashed line. When, in addition, some
high talent people cannot afford education, this shifts the cutoff even further down to the blue vertical
dashed line (lowest IQ pool). This latter case generates the misallocation of talent in the society.


                                             Figure 4: The pool of educated researchers
                                F (z)




                                                                                        Researchers




                                                                                             Preferences
                                                                                             Financial Frictions
                                                                                               z
                                                                 ¯
                                                                 z


    The results in this section clarify the individual decision choice problem and the forces that influence
the composition of researchers. We will next turn to the general equilibrium characterization of z          ¯ which
links the composition of the research pool to fundamental parameters, which we then use to uncover the
balanced growth path.
    From Equations (15), (16) and (18) we obtain the values for the detrended variables w       ^ u, w
                                                                                                     ^ s , and  ^ .13
Plugging these three variables into Equation (23) allows to solve for the general equilibrium expression for
                                                                                   ~ , preferences E, slots N , as
the school's talent cutoff, which contains the elements of the financial frictions µ
well as the other fundamental parameters in research and final good production. The analytical solution
for the cutoff is the following:


                                                                                1+                                              1 + 2
                                    (1+  )                               1-                  1  - 2                       2 (  + 1 ) - 1 (  -  )
                                                                                                      3 ( 1 +  )
         µ~              I          1 + 2
                                             1 -                          
                                                                                             1 + 2
                                                                                                      1 + 2         
      ¯=
      z                                                                                               3            2 1                             ,        (24)
         NE             r                                1-                             -1


where   ( + )/. To make the research sector sufficiently desirable, we need to make a mild assump-
tion on the parameter structure. The intuition of the following condition is that individuals get enough
compensation for their time spent as a skilled worker. If individuals spend a lot of time as a skilled worker
                                                                               
(( + )/ large) then they must be compensated with a large enough share 2 ( + 1) +  . The condition
                                                                                1
is as follows:

                                                               +  
                                                                 < 2 (  + 1) +  .
                                                                  1
                                                                                                             3                  1
                                                                                                                                                     1
  13 The                                                                                                     + 2     ¯ 
                                                                                                                     z         1 + 2
                                                                ^ u, w
            equilibrium expressions for the detrended variables w    ^ s , and ^ are: w
                                                                                      ^ s = 2 3 1                      -1                r
                                                                                                                                          I        1 + 2
                                                                                                                                                            ^u =
                                                                                                                                                           ;w
             1-          3                       2
                                                               1
      1-                1 + 2           -1      1 + 2
                                                        
              
1-                 ;^ = 3       1     ¯ 
                                      z                 r
                                                         I   1 + 2
                                                                     .


                                                                                  17
    Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


    We verify this in all calibrations and robustness checks. Some remarks are in order on the parameters
that govern the school's cutoff z ¯. First, the cutoff is increasing in the probability an individual can afford
a PhD µ ~ , decreasing in the mean of the preference shock (E), and decreasing in the number of slots, N .
Second, z ¯ is more responsive to these three forces the larger 1 (share to team leader) is. This indicates that
as the returns to skills increase, financial constraints induce a larger decline in z   ¯. Having characterized
¯, we now move to characterizing the growth rate of the economy as the function of the research market
z
producing ideas.


Balanced Growth Path

The ideas produced by research teams shape the growth rate of aggregate productivity through A  ¯ (t). We
focus on growth exclusively coming from this endogenous innovation, but discuss an extension where
people outside the research market also produce ideas with an exogenous arrival rate in Section 6.

Proposition 2 The aggregate growth rate of the economy is given by:

                                                       1               3             1
                                   1
                                            (1 2 ) 1 +2                             1 + 2
                                                                3 I
                                                                      1 + 2
                              ¯
                            g=z   1 + 2
                                          N                                                 .                    (25)
                                             +                    r           -1

Proof. See Appendix C.2.
    Equation (25) delivers growth as a function of fundamental parameters and z      ¯. We note that g is
increasing in the quantity of researchers N and the quality of researchers which itself is a function of z ¯.
It is increasing in , which is the fraction of effective ideas in the economy, and the price of ideas. The
parameters , , 1 , 2 , 3 and  and financial frictions µ and distaste for research E all interact with g
                                                                                                       ¯.
through both the production of ideas conditional on the talent pool and its effect on the talent pool, z
    Recall from Equation (19) that aggregate final good output is linear in productivity. Thus, if aggregate
productivity grows at rate g, final good output also grows at rate g. We now summarize the characteristics
of the balanced growth path (BGP) of the economy, on which the economy's growth rate is constant and
the cutoff z¯ is time-invariant.

Definition 1 Balanced Growth Path. A balanced growth path consists of a constant growth rate g, paths for the
skilled wage ws , unskilled wage wu , team leaders' profits  H (z), team sizes n(z), new ideas q(z), price of ideas p,
individual allocation across occupations H, M, L P and cutoff z ¯ such that:

   1. Team size n(z), lab equipment a(z), idea qualities q(z), and profits  H (z), are given by Equations (5)-(8).

   2. The allocations of team members M, team leaders H, and production workers L P , are given by Equations (11)-
      (13);

   3. The path for the skilled wage clears the market for researchers and satisfies Equation (14);

   4. The path for the unskilled wage solves Equation (18);

   5. The price of ideas is given by Equation (21);

   6. The school's cutoff is given by Equation (24);

                             ¯ and aggregate output Y grow at rate g as in Equation (25).
   7. Aggregate productivity A


                                                           18
      Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


   This concludes the characterization of the balanced growth path equilibrium. Next, we will discuss the
implications of innovation and education policies.


3.2     Policy Intervention: Innovation and Education Policies
The balanced growth path equilibrium provides a framework to address the steady state response of
the economy to the introduction of policies.14 In Section 5, we discuss transitional dynamics as the
economy responds in the short-run from its initial steady state. We compare three types of interventions:
R&D subsidies, educational financing subsidies, and expanding university slots. Each subsidy affects the
economy through different channels. An R&D subsidy both stimulates innovation through expanding lab
equipment conditional on the existing talent pool and increases the returns to the research sector, pulling
in talented and financially unconstrained individuals into the research sector who would otherwise choose
production work. A subsidy to education enables talented but financially constrained individuals to enter
the research sector. Increasing the number of PhD slots expands the pool of researchers that create new
ideas in the economy. The government finances these policies with a proportional tax  on intermediate
firms profits.
    We now introduce each of the three types of policies (R&D subsidies, education subsidies, and univer-
sity slots expansion) and analyze how they affect the equilibrium growth rate of the economy. We will
then discuss the quantitative effect of these subsidies in Section 5.


3.2.1     R&D subsidy

The government can subsidize research effort. In our case, this amounts to subsidizing the price of ideas
that are being purchased by firms from research teams. The subsidy to the price of the idea will induce two
effects. First, given the existing pool of talent, team leaders will have an incentive to produce more ideas
by increasing the purchases of lab equipment. Second, it will increase the return to being a researcher
through both increasing profits and the salaries of skilled workers, hence making research more attractive.
This will induce a more talented pool of researchers who initially did not prefer research. However,
financially constrained individuals will still be unable to afford education and won't be affected by the
subsidy. The group of people who initially preferred the production sector and then decide on the margin
to enter research are indicated by the shaded green region in Figure 5.
    More formally, the R&D subsidy increases the school's cutoff as follows:15


                                                                            1+                                               1 + 2
                                        (1+  )                       1-                  1  - 2                        2 (  + 1 ) - 1 (  -  )
                                                                                                  3 ( 1 +  )
   µ~         (1 + s)(1 -  ) I          1 + 2
                                                 1 -                  
                                                                                         1 + 2
                                                                                                  1 + 2         
¯=
z                                                                                                 3            2 1                              ,   (26)
   NE                  r                                   1-                      -1

                                         1- 
where, recall  I = [(1 - ) /]                    (1 - N ). Then the growth rate is as follows:
                                                       1                              3                  1
                                1
                                         (1 2 ) 1 +2              (1 + s)(1 -  ) I   1 + 2              1 + 2
                          ¯
                        g=z    1 + 2
                                       N                        3                                               .
                                          +                               r                  -1

  14 We   thus continue without the t index in this analysis.
  15 Please  see Appendix C.3 for the formal derivation.


                                                                    19
    Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth




               Figure 5: R&D subsidies hit talented people who prefer non-research fields
                         F (z)




                                                                         Researchers




                                                                                 Preferences
                                                                                 Financial Frictions
                                                                                   z
                                                     ¯
                                                     z

   In our model, R&D subsidy has two effects, as can be seen in the above expressions. First, it has the
usual direct effect through the R&D effort in terms of final goods. When the subsidy rate goes up, the
growth rate g goes up as a function of the relative importance of lab equipment in the research production
function. In the extreme case, as 3  0, the subsidy has no direct effect on the growth rate. Second,
and more interestingly, there is a new channel in our framework where subsidies to R&D increases the
          ¯ and brings in more talented people by increasing the financial returns to being a researcher.
threshold z
This can be seen in Equation (26).


3.2.2      Subsidy to Cost of Education

The government can introduce a subsidy s to the cost of education such that students pay (1 - sk )
to enroll in a PhD program. This policy has a direct impact on the fraction of people who can afford
education. This means that the probability that an individual can afford education is:

                                                                                  ~
                                                                       ~-1
                                                                       
                                                                                  
                                        ~  = µ + (1 - µ )
                                        µ                                             .
                                                                    ~ (1 - s )
                                                                    

   This subsidy allows some talented individuals who are financially constrained to pay for education
and enter the research sector, thus increasing the average quality of researchers. This is illustrated by the
now unconstrained individuals in the shaded green area in Figure 6.
   As a result, the schools' cutoff increases as follows:


                                                                1+                                                           1 + 2
                            (1+  )                       1-                       1  - 2                               2 (  + 1 ) - 1 (  -  )
  µ~            (1 -  ) I   1 + 2
                                     1 -                  
                                                                                  1 + 2            3 ( 1 +  )
                                                                                                                 
¯=
z                                                                                          ( 3 )   1 + 2
                                                                                                                2 1                             .
   NE                r                          1-                     -1

                                          1- 
We again note that  I = [(1 - ) /]              (1 - N ). The increase in the average quality of researchers has




                                                               20
       Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth




           Figure 6: Educational; subsidies hit talented people who are financially constrained
                          F (z)




                                                                        Researchers




                                                                             Preferences
                                                                             Financial Frictions
                                                                               z
                                                       ¯
                                                       z

                                   ¯:
   affects the growth rate through z

                                                  1                           3               1
                                1
                                         (1 2 ) 1 +2            (1 -  )  I   1 + 2           1 + 2
                           ¯
                         g=z   1 + 2
                                       N                      3                                      .
                                          +                         r                   -1

       We note that with educational subsidies there is no direct effect of the subsidy on the growth rate. The
   entire effect of the subsidy comes through µ~  , which relaxes the financial constraint as it increases z
                                                                                                           ¯. The
   increase in the quality of researchers impacts the growth rate through z   ¯. Further, there is also the effect
   of the increased tax rate on final goods producers that lowers the returns to innovation. The analysis of
   the two subsidies held the number of researchers fixed; we now turn to an expansion in the supply of
   researchers.


   3.2.3   Increasing the number of PhD slots

   Another policy tool discussed in the Ministry of Education (2016) report is the expansion of university
   slots. When the university increases the share of educational slots per cohort from N to Ns , more people
   flow into research, but the quality of the marginal researcher declines. We return to the expression for the
   university's cutoff with the new number of slots Ns :


                                                                                                                                           1 + 2
                                   1- 
                                                  (1+  )                         1- 
                                                                                     1+                  1  - 2
                                                                                                                                      1 ( -)+2 ( +1)
                                                      1 + 2                                                       3 ( 1 +  )
   µ~  (1 -  )  [(1 - ) /]               (1 - Ns )            1 -                                        1 + 2
                                                                                                                  1 + 2            
¯=
z  Ns E
                                                                                                                  3             
                                                                                                                               2 1                     .
                      r                                                 1-                    -1


   Increasing the number of slots will tend to induce individuals with less talent to enter into research
   through two direct effects which are amplified through general equilibrium price mechanisms. First, as
   there are more available slots, the school admits less talented individuals to fill them as captured by the Ns
   in the denominator. Second, there is a market size effect from the production side as illustrated through
   the price of an idea in Equation (21). More researchers mean fewer production workers and thus a smaller
   market size for innovation as seen in the numerator (1 - Ns ). These effects and the tax  for funding the


                                                               21
      Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


slots expansion also operate through the equilibrium prices that amplify the decline in marginal talent.
This is filtered through the shape of the innovation production function and the talent distribution through
                        + 2
the power term  ( -1   )+ ( +1)
                                . This decline in average inventors' quality is illustrated in Figure 7.
                      1          2



           Figure 7: Increasing educational slots gets more researchers but lower quality
                        F (z)




                                                               Researchers




                                                                          Preferences
                                                                          Financial Frictions
                                                                            z
                                              ¯
                                              z

      This leaves the following equation for the growth rate of the economy.

                                      1
                                                                    1- 
                                                                                         3
                                                                                                      1
                                                                                        1 + 2
                             (1 2 ) 1 +2   3  (1 -  )  [(1 - ) /]          (1 - Ns ) 
                      1                                                                              1 + 2
                 ¯
          g = Ns z   1 + 2
                                                                                                             .
                                 +                            r                                 -1

    When the number of slots increases, the growth rate is affected through four channels: First, growth
is affected by the increase in the number of people producing ideas, Ns ; second, by a reduction in their
average quality, z¯; third, there is a reduction in lab equipment investment due to the reduced market
                             3
size effect, (1 - Ns ) 1 +2 ; finally, growth responds to the tax  to finance the increased slots. All these
interesting channels will have implications for policy design which we will study quantitatively in Section
5. We first turn to the description of the data and estimation.


4      Data and Calibration
This section describes the data, the empirical facts we use to calibrate the model, and the calibration. We
find a close match of model to data and then further illustrate the ability of the calibrated model to hit
non-targeted moments in the data. These non-targeted moments leverage policy experiments in Denmark
that motivate our own model policy counterfactuals. We will use our calibrated model parameters to
study policy counterfactuals in Section 5.


4.1     Data
The empirical and quantitative analysis in this project is built on detailed micro-level data from the Den-
mark Statistical Office (DST). For data on individuals, we rely on the Integrated Database for Labor Market



                                                        22
      Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


Research (IDA). Each individual in Denmark is assigned a unique identifier. We observe individuals on
an annual basis in the IDA. From different subsets of this dataset, we can leverage information on individ-
uals' highest completed education, background family characteristics (e.g. parental income), employment
status, occupation, and income. In addition, the firm-linked (FIDA) dataset connects individuals to their
place of employment (a unique employer identifier) each year. This comes with firm-level data such as
sales, profits, and employees.
     In addition to the individual level data in IDA, we make use of additional internal data on an indi-
vidual's academic pursuits. The PHD dataset contains detailed information on individuals who enrolled
in a PhD program. PHD contains information on most students' subject of PhD, date of enrollment, and
date of graduation. Further, this data describes the funding source of their education and can be linked to
individuals' socioeconomic background.
     We combine these datasets with IQ data provided from the Danish military test, Borge Prien's Prove,
which is required for conscripts at age 18.16 This test data goes back to 1995. With tests mostly taken at
age 18, this provides data on most males entering the workforce or college after 1995. This data informs
our measure of talent. In total, we have approximately 500,000 males with IQ data.
     Lastly, we turn our focus to innovation ­ making use of both policy and outcomes of innovative output.
DST provides details on project funding related to R&D as the Danish government expanded their support
for R&D starting in 2002. We observe both funding through the broad "Innovation Danmark" program
and specific R&D subsidies. The innovation program also has information on funding to education, which
will be a key component of our policy discussion.
     We combine DST data with innovation data made available through patents at the European Trademark
Office (EPO). We use a disambiguation algorithm provided by the DST and we are able to match about
75% of inventors on patents from Denmark to the individual information in the IDA dataset. We use these
patents as our primary measure of innovation.
     The extensive data enables a bridge between model ingredients and data-specific counterparts: the
role of IQ in the education, the innovative rate and occupation of PhDs, the team structure of innovation,
and potential policies. Detailed parental data enables a study of the determinants of who becomes a PhD
based on their background. Further, due to a host of policy tools the Danish government utilized over the
main sample period, we have variation related to policy instruments that can provide quantitative tests
for the model. This provides a basis for the out of sample moments from the introduction of policies.
     The intersection of the datasets cover 2001-2013, but all background data is available from 1980-2013
(i.e., age, education, sex, country of origin). We will focus primarily on the 2001-2013 period. This leaves
us with approximately 32 million individual matched employer-employee observations, 10,000 inventors,
and 37,000 unique PhDs.


4.2    Stylized Facts
The novel element of our framework is putting individuals and their career choice as central to a model of
innovation-led growth. One of the main advantages of our micro-data from Denmark is that we are able
to observe the backgrounds of individuals, their career choice, innovations, and a key proxy for ability, IQ.
In order to discipline our model, we need to document the relationship between these forces, primarily

   16 Studies have indicated this data is a reliable measure of cognitive ability in similar sense to IQ, e.g. Hartmann and Teasdale

(2005). Teasdale (2009) reviews the literature.


                                                                23
    Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


informed by ten empirical facts discussed in this section.
    In the model, what leads a newborn person to contribute to aggregate innovation is the following
steps. First, an individual is born with ability that will influence their educational choice. Second, since
education is costly, parental socioeconomic background will influence the ability to afford education.
Third, parental income has an impact on their child's ability through intergenerational talent transmission.
Fourth, high ability kids born to rich parents might end up not doing a PhD due to preferences. Fifth,
when an individual undertakes a PhD they become a researcher, and join a team to innovate. Sixth, ability
influences the innovative capacity of researchers. Seventh, individuals work in teams with heterogeneous
scales. Eighth, young researchers learn how to become a team leader over time. Ninth, when the number
of educational slots increases, the number of researchers increases but the average quality of researchers
decreases. Tenth, this is due to the fact that even though the country is a small open economy, its skill
pool is locally determined. Given this unique structure of our model, we are going to discipline each of
these mechanisms by looking at the relevant correlations in Danish micro-data in order. We use these facts
to provide target moments for the estimation of the model parameters.

   Fact 1: Individuals with higher IQ are more likely to obtain a PhD.

   Figure 8 looks at the relationship between ability, proxied by IQ, and the likelihood of doing a PhD.


                Figure 8: Probability of Obtaining a PhD and IQ Percentile (Fact 1)
                                     .06
                            Probability PhD
                                    .04
                                     .02
                                     0




                                              0   20      40             60       80          100
                                                            IQ Percentile


                         Source: DST, Note: Fraction of individuals with a PhD by IQ percentile bin.


    In this figure, we take an individual's percentile IQ within their same age group on the x-axis and
plot the probability an individual enrolls in a PhD program at any time in their life on the y-axis. The
relationship between IQ and the probability of becoming a PhD is convex; for each increase in an IQ
percentile an individual is increasingly more likely to become a PhD. While the lowest IQ percentile has
essentially zero probability of enrolling in a PhD, the median percentile has about 0.5%, and the top
percentile about 6-7% probability. Hence, we conclude that more talented people are more likely to enroll
in a PhD.

   Fact 2: Individuals with higher parental income are more likely to obtain a PhD.

   Our model predicted talented individuals born in poor families might be unable to afford higher


                                                              24
    Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


education. To discipline this prediction in the data, we relate the socioeconomic background of parents to
the child's likelihood of obtaining a PhD. Here, we focus on father's income percentile in order to avoid
time trends in female labor force participation in Denmark. We provide a robustness check in Section 6
that takes the income of both parents. In Figure 9, we take the father's age-adjusted income percentile in
the year 2000 for potential PhD enrollees from 1995-2012. We plot the income percentile on the x-axis and
the probability of becoming a PhD on the y-axis.


        Figure 9: Probability Child Obtains a PhD and Father's income percentile (Fact 2)
                                           .025  .02
                              Probability Child PhD
                                   .015    .01
                                           .005




                                                       0   20            40              60             80   100
                                                           Father income percentile, by age group, in 2000


                          Source: DST, Note: Income percentile is age-adjusted percentile in year 2000.


    Figure 9 shows that children of higher income fathers are more likely to obtain a PhD. Through the
lens of our model, this interesting fact could be driven by two forces. First, this could be due to financial
frictions faced by individuals born to poorer fathers. Second, talent transmission across generations could
also be responsible for this relationship. In order to tease out these two margins, the next fact focuses on
the link between parental income and child's IQ.

   Fact 3: Individuals' IQ is correlated with parental income, but not perfectly.

   How is talent related to parental income? To answer this question, Figure 10 plots a child's IQ on
parental income. We find a positive relationship between child IQ and parental income as can be seen in
the blue triangles in this figure. However, the correlation between parental income and IQ is 0.18, which
indicates imperfect sorting of talented children to high income parents. The red 45-degree line would
indicate perfect sorting in this manner. This suggests that some talented individuals may face financial
barriers to higher education enrollment if they are matched to poorer parents.

   Fact 4: Only a fraction of people with high IQ and high parental income obtain a PhD.

    Another important margin in our model for the determination of PhDs was the preference for research.
Some talented individuals who are not financially constrained may choose not to become a researcher.
Empirically, this would imply that some fraction of unconstrained people will not enter a PhD program.
When we consider children of the richest 5% of fathers and the most talented percentile, we still observe
that about 90% do not enroll in a PhD program. Through the lens of the model, this suggests some distaste
for research that drives individuals who could obtain a PhD into the production sector.


                                                                             25
    Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth




        Figure 10: Average individual IQ percentile by father's income percentile (Fact 3)




                                          100
                                          80
                                Child IQ Percentile
                                    40    20
                                          0 60




                                                      0          20            40              60             80         100
                                                                 Father income percentile, by age group, in 2000

                                                                       Child IQ Percentile        45-Deg Line


              Source: DST, Note: Child IQ × Father's income percentile within age group in 2000 (and 45 degree line).

   Fact 5: PhDs are 20-times more likely to become inventors compared to the average person in society.

    How is education related to innovation? Figure 11 plots the likelihood of becoming an inventor by the
six education categories in Denmark. In this figure, we take an individual's highest level of educational


              Figure 11: Probability of Being an Inventor by Education Level (Fact 5)
                               0.1


                              0.09


                              0.08


                              0.07


                              0.06


                              0.05


                              0.04


                              0.03


                              0.02


                              0.01


                                     0
                                                      Primary      Low        Upper             Post     College   PhD
                                                                secondary   secondary        secondary


                     Source: DST, Note: Fraction of individuals who file at least one patent by education level.


attainment (x-axis) and plot the probability of being an inventor (having at least one patent, y-axis) for
the member of each cohort. Note that the probability a PhD has a patent is 9.8% while the probability
a college graduate has a patent is 0.7%. When we compare PhDs to the population with no higher
education, we find an even larger difference in the probability of being an inventor, approximately 30
times the general population. We observe that the link between education and becoming an inventor is
monotonically increasing. Most interestingly, individuals with PhDs are disproportionately more likely
to become inventors. College graduates are also more likely to be inventors than those without a college
degree. This fact illustrates the tight link between higher education and innovation, motivating the focus
on PhDs in our analysis.


                                                                                   26
     Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


    Fact 6: Conditional on education, higher IQ people are also more likely to innovate.

    Does talent matter for innovation separately from its impact on acquiring education? To explore this
interaction, we take the components of innovation and IQ that are uncorrelated with education. We run a
regression of IQ on education level and take the residual IQ from this regression, and do the same with the
probability of becoming an inventor. Figure 12 plots the residualized inventor probability on residualized
inventor IQ. It shows that people with higher IQs are more likely to become inventors even when we
condition on education. Figure 12 illustrates that talent has a direct effect on innovation in addition to its
indirect effect through education.


     Figure 12: Probability of Becoming an Inventor Conditional on Education, by IQ (Fact 6)
                                                  .006 .005
                                      Probability Inventor
                                          .004    .003
                                                  .002




                                                              0   20   40             60        80          100
                                                                                 IQ


  Source: DST, Note: This figure takes on the y-axis the output from the residual of a regression of the probability of being an inventor on the
education level of the individual. On the x-axis, we plot the residuals of a regression of individual IQ on their highest educational level to get the
                                         residualized response of probability of being an inventor to IQ.



    Fact 7: Inventors work in teams and the team size is heterogeneous.

   We define team size as the number of inventors listed on a patent file. In our data, the average team
has size 2.5 with variance 3.6. Our modeling choice has team size and team leader talent as an important
component of idea production. We do not observe team leaders directly by patent, but we identify team
leaders as the oldest PhD inventor on a patent. 17

    Fact 8: The probability of innovating as a team leader over an inventor's life-cycle follows an inverted-U shape.

     How important is the time-to-build element of human capital? In Figure 13, we plot the share of PhDs
who apply for a patent as a team leader (as defined in Fact 7) by year after PhD enrollment. Figure 13
shows that the probability of team-leading innovation follows an inverted-U process: the probability of
filing a patent over the cohort life-cycle is increasing until its peak at around 16 years and then declines.
This observation is important because it highlights how policy interventions aimed at increasing the talent
pool of the economy may not immediately take effect, as it takes time for researchers to gain experience
and reach their peak productivity.
   17 As a robustness check, we replicate the empirical facts with an alternative definition of team leader as the PhD with the largest

experience in each patent, where we measure experience as the stock of patents, and we obtain similar findings.


                                                                            27
    Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth




    Figure 13: Fraction of PhDs applying with  1 patent, year post PhD enrollment (Fact 8)




                                  .01
                          Pr Invention (PhD)
                              .0050




                                                0     2    4   6   8      10 12 14 16 18 20          22   24   26    28       30
                                                                          Year Post PhD Enrollment

                Source: DST, Note: Probability of obtainingProbability
                                                            a patent year post PhD enrollment
                                                                                 95%  CI      (by 2-year intervals).

   Fact 9: An increase in the number of PhD slots is associated with a decline in the average IQ of PhDs.

    Starting in 2002, the Danish Government required the universities to increase the number of PhD slots,
as part of a larger initiative to support education and innovation in Denmark (see Section 2 for further
institutional details). Figure 14 shows that as the number of slots for PhDs increases, the average IQ of
the enrolling students falls. This indicates that there is heterogeneous quality of enrollees and expanding
slots may draw in a marginal researcher less talented than the average researcher from the existing pool.
Thus, even though policy can increase the supply of researchers, there is a trade-off between expanding
the pool of PhDs and the average talent of PhDs in the economy.


                 Figure 14: PhD Enrollment and Average PhD Enrollee IQ (Fact 9)
                                                                                                                       85
                                    2500




                                                      Slope=0.32 (0.49)
                                                                                                                       83
                                   2000




                                                                                                                       IQ percentile
                                                                                                                                81
                           Enrollees




                                                                                                                        79




                                                                                                Slope=-0.59 (0.13)
                                    1500




                                                                                                                       77
                                    1000




                                                                                                                       75




                                               1995            2000             2005             2010           2015
                                                                       Year of PhD Enrollment

                                                           Enrollment (LHS)                  Avg IQ pctile (RHS)
                                                           Line fit MA 1996-2003             Line fit MA 2001-2012


                                   Source: DST, Note: This figure plots the enrollment (RHS y-axis) and IQ of
                                   enrollees with a three-year moving average (LHS y-axis) from 1995-2015.



   Fact 10: The economy is open in the goods market but closed in the skills market: import and export accounted


                                                                                   28
      Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


for 44% and 51% of GDP in 2010, but foreign migrants make up only 10% of inventors.

   Fact 10 motivates our treatment of Denmark as a small open economy. In Denmark, exports and
imports accounted for about 51% and 44% of GDP, respectively, in 2010 (OECD, 2010), while foreign
inventors account for only about 10% of total inventors in our data. This is in contrast with economies
that are relatively more closed to trade in the goods market but more open to trade in the skills market,
such as the United States, where imports and exports were about 12% and 16% of GDP in 2010 (OECD,
2010), but foreign inventors accounted for 22% of total inventors in the period 2001-2010 (Miguelez, 2016).


4.3       Calibration Technique
The ten facts illustrate the links between human capital, innovation, and forces in the market for ideas
that impact who becomes an inventor. In order to quantify the importance of these forces and perform
policy counterfactuals, we calibrate our model to the ten facts. We perform a simulated method of mo-
ments (SMM) matching exercise to back out the parameters. We provide a description of the quantitative
moments we target in the data and the calibrated parameters in Tables 1 and 2, respectively. We proceed
to discuss non-targeted moments that illustrate the ability of the model to perform well out of sample in
Section 4.4.
    Our model has 17 parameters: {, r, , µ, N , , , 1 , 2 , 3 ,  , ~, , , , E,  }. We assume parental income
has the same shape parameter as talent       ~ =  , and note that 3 = 1 - 1 - 2 . This leaves us with 15
parameters to be identified. We refer to the literature for three parameters {, r, } and directly match
one with the data ( N ). For the 11 remaining parameters, we select 11 informative moments from our
facts in Section 4.2, M E . We then utilize simulated method of moments (SMM) to jointly calibrate the 11
parameters.
    We minimize the distance between model-simulated moments, M(), and their empirical counterparts,
   E
M , by searching over the parameter space , using a simulated annealing algorithm, as follows:

                                                         11
                                                   min  ( MiE - Mi ())2 .
                                                      i =1


4.3.1     External Calibration

The production side of our model is very similar to the existing literature. The key departure in our
framework is how an individual's life-cycle and career choice relates to aggregate innovation, as illustrated
in the ten steps above. Therefore, on the production side we follow the literature closely and set  = 0.106
(Akcigit and Kerr, 2018), set r = , and set the discount factor to 97% ( = 0.03).


4.3.2     Internal Calibration

We match the number of enrollees ( N ) to its empirical counterpart (M1), which we take as our first
moment. For the remaining 11 parameters {, , 1 , 3 ,  , , , , E, µ,  }, we target 11 moments (M2-M12)
jointly. Even though the parameters are identified together, below we provide a heuristic discussion of the
parameters that each moment informs.18


  18 In   Appendix C.5, we discuss derivations of the equations underlying these moments.


                                                                29
   Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


M1 PhD Enrollees per Year: The number of enrollees per year at universities will inform us on the amount
   of slots available for universities to let into research positions, N . In our data, PhDs account for 1%
   of the adult working population before the major policy interventions.

M2 Mean Percentile IQ of PhDs: In the model, individuals may not obtain a PhD either because they are
   constrained (governed by µ) or they have a distaste for research (governed by dispersion parameter
   E). This moment informs us on E. In the data, it is measured as the mean IQ percentile of PhD
   enrollees prior to policy interventions in 2002, and we obtain a value of 0.83.

M3 Assortative Matching between IQ and Parental Income: In the model, talented individuals may not be
   born to high-income parents. This correlation is governed by µ. In the data, we take the correlation
   between IQ and father's income to inform this parameter.

M4 Dispersion of Parental Income Distribution: Theoretically, there is a group of individuals who can-
   not afford education. A key parameter that determines this fraction is  , which relates assortative
   matching to income inequality. In the data, we take the ratio of the mean to standard deviation of
   the distribution of paternal income and find a value of 1.18.

M5 Mean Team Size: In our model, the mean team size is determined by the death rate  and team-leader
   arrival rate  as follows:


                                                    
                                                     + 1.
                                                    

    Hence, we target the mean team size to further inform us on these two parameters. In the DST data,
    we find the mean number of people on a patent to be 2.25.

M6 Variance of Team Size: In our model, the variance of team size is determined as follows:

                                                   2- 
                                                     ¯ .
                                                     z
                                                  -2

    In the data, we obtain a team size variance of 3.13. This target primarily informs us on the shape
    parameter  .

M7 Peak Year of Innovation for a Team Leader post-PhD Enrollment: Our model will generate an inverted-U
   relationship between the probability of team-leading innovation and the experience of a researcher.
   Targeting the time t of the peak in Figure 13 will help pin down the value for the arrival rate to
   becoming a team leader, , and the death rate, . We target the number of years after PhD enrollment
   at which individuals reach the peak probability of innovation.

M8 Probability of Innovation at Peak: We return to the inverted-U relationship between the probability
   of team-leading innovation and researcher experience. By targeting the height of the peak value in
   Figure 13, we pin down the value for the innovative rate of team-leading researchers, . This is taken
   as the probability a team leader innovates in the peak year post-PhD.




                                                   30
    Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


 M9 Post-PhD/PhD Income: In the model, team leaders and team members receive different returns from
    research production. The average ratio of their two incomes is given by:

                                                     1 
                                                        .
                                                     2 

     This moment informs us mainly about the share of team leaders 1 and team members 2 in idea
     production. In the data, we measure it as the ratio of average income for PhD graduates to average
     income of individuals without a PhD in the same age group.

M10 Skill Premium of PhDs: We define skill premium as the ratio of the team member income to outside
    workers income. In the data, it is measured as the ratio of average income of PhD students to average
    income of individuals without a PhD in the same age and talent group. This informs us on the cost
    of raising capital in the intermediate goods sector  which influences the unskilled wage.

M11 Profits to Wages: We define the profits to wage as the ratio of the total of intermediate goods profits
    to the wages paid out to production workers. M10 and M11 deliver the cost of raising capital and
    effective labor units in the final goods market,  and . In the data, it is measured as the ratio of
    profits of operating firms (with at least one employee) to total wages.

M12 Growth Rate of the Economy: The aggregate growth rate of the economy is determined by the frequency
    of innovations and the composition of inventor teams. Along with the income ratio of team leaders
    to members, this informs us mainly on the shares in the idea production function, 1 and 2 . We
    target a growth rate of 1.5%.

   Table 1 summarizes the values of these moments in the data and the corresponding model generated
values. As can be seen, our model is generating a close match to the data. Even though we only targeted
two specific data-points for the life-cycle and the team size distribution each, Figure 15 shows that the
model provides a good fit for the overall patterns.


                                           Table 1: Moments
                 Moment                                               Data        Model
                 PhD Share of the Labor Force ( N )                    0.01         0.01
                 Mean Percentile IQ of PhDs (Fact 1+4)                 0.83         0.83
                 Corr(Parent Income, Child IQ) (µ, Facts 2+3)          0.18         0.18
                 Mean/SD of Parent Income (Facts 2+3)                  1.18         1.22
                 Mean Team Size (Fact 7)                               2.25         2.23
                 Variance of Team Size (Fact 7)                        3.13         3.19
                 Peak Year Innovation Post PhD (Fact 8)                 16           16
                 Pr Innovation at Peak (Fact 8)                        0.01         0.01
                 PhD Graduate/Student Income                           1.66         1.66
                 Skill Premium of PhDs                                 0.74         0.74
                 Profits to Wages                                     0.073        0.022
                 Growth rate                                          0.015        0.015




                                                    31
    Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth




                                                 Figure 15: Specific Moments, Red Solid: Data ; Blue Dotted: Model
                                                                                                                            0.9
                                 0.012
                                                                                                                                                                        Model
                                                                                          Model                             0.8                                         Data
                                                                                          Data
                                  0.01
     Probability of Innovation



                                                                                                                            0.7

                                                                                                                            0.6
                                 0.008




                                                                                                                 Fraction
                                                                                                                            0.5

                                 0.006
                                                                                                                            0.4

                                                                                                                            0.3
                                 0.004

                                                                                                                            0.2
                                 0.002
                                                                                                                            0.1


                                    0                                                                                        0
                                         0   5      10       15         20     25    30           35                              0     2     4       6       8    10           12

                                                                  Age                                                                             Team Size



                                     (a) Innovation over the Life-Cycle                                                               (b) Team Size Distribution




                                                                                    Table 2: Parameter Values
                                                 Parameter                                             Description                                  Value
                                                                             -- Panel A. External Calibration --
                                                                                              Discount rate                                         0.030
                                                         r                                     Interest rate                                        0.030
                                                                                            Labor share output                                      0.106
                                                                             -- Panel B. Internal Calibration --
                                                         N                    PhD share of the labor force                                          0.010
                                                                    Rate at which researcher becomes a team leader                                  0.036
                                                                                       Death rate                                                   0.044
                                                         1                Skilled labor share idea production                                       0.511
                                                         2                   Worker share idea production                                           0.379
                                                         3               Lab equipment share idea production                                        0.110
                                                                                      Pareto shape                                                  2.633
                                                                                     Innovation rate                                                0.046
                                                                                 Cost of raising capital                                            0.011
                                                                             Labor efficiency in production                                         0.024
                                                         E                    Preference shock parameter                                            3.299
                                                         µ          Fraction assortative match IQ - parental income                                 0.116
                                                                      Income/IQ ratio for assortatively matched                                     7.534
                                                                      Notes: All parameters are estimated jointly.

    The resulting parameter values are reported in Table 2. Here, we discuss parameters of interest. The
input shares 1 , 2 , 3 indicate that the human capital component of research, which consists of team leader
ability and number of researchers, is significantly more important (around 46% and 41% respectively)
than the physical capital component (3 = 11%). Three other interesting parameters worth discussing are


                                                                                                           32
      Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


µ,  , and  . These parameters jointly imply that around 1/3rd of the potential PhD population (µ      ~ ) are
unconstrained in the sense that they can afford the time spent in a PhD. We would like to reemphasize
that the cost of schooling is more broad than tuition cost, in that it includes living expenses and the cost
of foregone income that might be required by individuals to support their families.


                          Figure 16: T
                               Figure  he
                                      1:  allocation
                                         The             of
                                             allocation of   talent
                                                           talent     ineconomy
                                                                  in the the economy
         F (z )




                                       11%
                                                           Unconstrained, but Dislike Research
                                       19%                 Financially Constrained and Dislike Research
                                       2%                  Taste for Research, but Financially Constrained
                                     PhD: 1%
                                 z
                                 ¯                            z



   As illustrated in Figure 16, these parameters predict that the fraction of people who are talented and
                                Figure 2: The allocation of talent in the economy
unconstrained   but dislike research are 11% of the population. More interestingly, the pool of people who
             F (z )
are talented and willing to do research but are not able to afford education is twice as large as the current
pool of researchers (2% versus 1%). This group is misallocated in society. We revisit this in the policy
counterfactuals in Section 5. Before turning to policy counterfactuals, we observe how the model hits
non-targeted moments in the data.


4.4    Non-Targeted Moments                          Unconstrained, but dislike Research

                                                        model, we
In order to assess the out-of-sample validity of theFinancially       explore the
                                                                   constrained     implications
                                                                               and dislike        of our results
                                                                                           Research
for non-targeted moments in the data. We 11%perform two main out-of-sample matching exercises. First, we
consider the relationship between parental
                                         20%
                                            income and IQ for individuals who obtain a PhD. For matching
the model, we only relied on the pairwise2%correspondence between parental income, PhD, and IQ, but not
the interaction of these three components.
                                       PhD: 1%Second, we use our z    model to simulate the observed policy
interventions in 2002 and compare the¯ implied results for the talent of PhD enrollees to what we observe
                                     z
                                 Taste for Research, but Financially Constrained
in the data.


Relationship between Paternal Income and IQ for PhDs

While we know that those who enroll in a PhD tend to have higher parental income and higher IQ,
we have not discussed the relationship between IQ and parental income among PhD enrollees. In this
exercise, we use our simulated model to trace out the different IQs of the relatively wealthier and poorer
individuals that enter a PhD program. The model implies that PhD enrollees with wealthier parents have


                                                      33
    Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


higher talent. The result in the model comes from the fact that, on average, individuals with higher IQs
have a higher preference shock which proxies for greater opportunities outside the research sector. We
find empirical support for this particular implication as shown in Figure 17.


                     Figure 17: IQ by Income Group, Data and Model Predicted
                                         90
                                               Data
                                         88    Model

                                         86

                            Average IQ   84

                                         82

                                         80

                                         78

                                         76

                                         74

                                         72

                                         70
                                              Income Below Mean        Income Above Mean
                                                 Income group, conditional on PhD


    This figure illustrates model-simulated data alongside the IQ from two income groups of PhDs. We
calculate the mean of parental resources for PhD enrollees, and we plot average IQ for PhD students with
parental resources below the mean and above the mean. Both in the model and in the data, average IQ
increases in parental income conditional on being a PhD enrollee. We now turn to our second out-of-
sample exercise.


Government Policy Intervention

Here we explore the responsiveness of PhD enrollee quality to a host of policy interventions. We did not
directly use any Danish government policy interventions to calibrate the model, yet the major break in
our sample provides us an opportunity to test the power of our calibrated framework. Thus, we use the
outcome of the policy interventions introduced in 2002 as an out-of-sample test of our model.
    The Danish government introduced a number of education and innovation policies starting in 2002
with the goal of fostering innovation and technological progress. The "Innovation Danmark" database
contains information on education and innovation programs, including the amount of funding and grants.
We group the interventions in the three types of policies discussed in our model: R&D subsidies, subsidies
to the cost of education, and increases in PhD slots. We estimate the expenditure for each type of policy
from the data. Then, we feed the estimated policy rates into our model and we compare the predicted
outcome for average IQ of PhD enrollees predicted by our model to the empirically observed outcome.
The procedure to estimate policy rates from the data is outlined in Appendix E.1.
    Figure 18 displays the increase in PhD enrollees and the corresponding change in IQ after the policy
intervention in both the data and model. Because we calibrate our model to the average IQ of PhDs
before the policy intervention, both the data and the model predict the average IQ of enrollees at the 83rd
percentile of the IQ distribution in 2002, prior to the introduction of these subsidies and slot expansion.



                                                                  34
    Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth




             Figure 18: Policy Intervention and IQ of PhD enrollees: data vs. model.
                                                        0.84
                                                                                            Inventor Avg IQ Perc data    0.020
                                                                                            Inventor Avg IQ Perc model




                          Inventor Avg. IQ Percentile
                                                        0.82                                PhD Slots Model (RHS axis)



                                                        0.80




                                                                                                                                 PhD Slots
                                                        0.78                                                             0.015



                                                        0.76



                                                        0.74

                                                                                                                         0.010

                                                        0.72
                                                               1998   2000   2002    2004   2006      2008       2010
                                                                                    Years

The introduction of the policies and the expansion of slots push in opposite directions on mean IQ:
subsidies to R&D and the cost of education lead to an increase in average IQ, while the expansion of PhD
slots leads to a decline in average IQ. Our model overall matches the declining pattern in average IQ of
PhD enrollees observed in the data. The quantitative fit is very close between 2002-2008, while it departs
slightly from the data counterpart in the last years of the sample.
    The two out-of-sample tests show that our model not only does well with the targeted moments but
also is able to reproduce both specific facts in the data and the policy intervention which was implemented
in 2002. We are now ready to study both the positive and normative quantitative implications of our
model.


5    Policy Experiments
Our calibration enables us to study the impact of policies in the short and long-run and speak to optimal
policy combinations. In this section, we use our model to perform a number of counterfactual policy
exercises to quantify the strength of different policies in shifting the growth rate. We explore the quantita-
tive impact of each policy individually and then introduce them simultaneously in order to evaluate their
interaction and the optimal policy mix. We then discuss how the effectiveness of each policy depends on
underlying parameters in the economy.
    This paper directs attention to the consequences of making a realistic description of human capital
central to an innovation-led growth model and what this suggests for longstanding debates in the literature
on R&D policies. Section 5.1 looks at the comparison of steady states under different subsidies and puts
our new mechanisms into perspective by comparing our findings to the literature. Section 5.2 illustrates
the complementarity of education and innovation policies ­ directing particular focus to the growth-
maximizing policy mix for different budgets. Section 5.3 focuses on how the optimal policy depends on
the inequality of parental income in the economy. Section 5.4 discusses the transitional dynamics with the
introduction of each policy to illustrate the intertemporal tradeoffs and understand what a policymaker
should expect on the horizon of the impact.



                                                                                      35
      Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


5.1    Steady State Impact of Policies and Comparison to Existing Literature
We begin by describing the impact of our policies individually in steady state. In particular, we want to
focus on revenue equivalent policies and their effects on the quality of PhDs, total number of PhDs, and
the overall growth rate. There are three main policies of interest: R&D subsidies, educational subsidies,
and expansion of educational slots. Each policy on its own increases innovation but through different
channels. One important point to note is that an expansion in the number of PhD slots will increase the
number of researchers, but induce a decline in their average talent, while R&D and educational subsidies,
without expansion of the pool of researchers, increase the talent of the average researcher through different
margins. These different margins were illustrated in Figures 5, 6, and 7 in Section 3.2. Table 3 compares
these three policies by showing the overall growth rate effect of a 10% R&D subsidy equivalence spent on
R&D, education subsidies, and slot expansion, respectively.19


               Table 3: Alternative Policy Interventions (10% R&D Subsidy Equivalence)
                                            %Innovation Avg. PhD IQ percentile
                       Baseline                  0%                83
                       R&D subsidy               5%                87
                       Educational subsidy      20%                93
                       University slots          2%                78

    A number of important observations are in order. First, a 10% subsidy rate to R&D and this pol-
icy increases the baseline endogenous innovation by 5%. Note that unlike the standard growth models
(Romer, 1990; Aghion and Howitt, 1992), this intervention keeps the number of researchers fixed (e.g. no
scale effect), and the effect comes mostly through the quality composition of the inventor pool. The rest
of the effect comes from the additional use of physical capital for researchers with a given subsidy. The
change in inventor talent happens due to an increase in the compensation of researchers as a result of the
subsidized R&D. The returns to being a researcher increases, which pulls in individuals who can afford a
career in research, but on the margin prefer working in production.
    Second, when we use the same amount of resources to subsidize education, the impact on endogenous
innovation is much larger (20% versus 5%) than the R&D subsidy. This is due to the fact that educational
subsidies alleviate financial frictions by bringing in high ability but constrained individuals into research.
There is evidence in the literature that there are many constrained individuals who have the ability for
a research career (Aghion et al., 2017; Akcigit et al., 2017; Bell et al., 2018), and frictions that prevent
individuals from entering the sector could have large effects on innovation (Celik, 2015).
    Third, when we use the same amount of resources to expand the PhD slots, we observe only a 2% in-
crease in endogenous innovation. Given this subsidy level, an expansion in slots is about half as effective
as an R&D subsidy. Note that unlike standard models that often assume homogeneous skills of inventors,
this framework with talent heterogeneity will have different implications for increasing the supply of re-
searchers. When researcher supply is increased, schools lower the cutoff and thus the marginal researcher
will not have the talent to contribute to the same degree as the upper tail to aggregate innovation. This
would create a non-linear relationship between policy and aggregate response (Jaimovich and Rebelo,
2017). This finding also squares facts related to an increasing pool of researchers not creating a significant

   19 Thisequals approximately 0.5% GDP in our framework. We use this as our baseline expenditure, but we present our results for
a wider range of budgets in Appendix E.2 and we explore how changing the budget changes the optimal allocation in Section 5.2.
This share is approximately the amount spent on R&D subsidies and education subsidies in Denmark from 2000-2014.


                                                               36
      Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


impact on aggregate innovation (Jones, 1995; Bloom et al., 2017).
   Lastly, we want to relate the growth implications of these policies in our framework. To put our
numbers into perspective, it would be fruitful to start with a discussion of standard endogenous growth
models. By assuming a homogeneous population that can do both production and R&D, standard frame-
works assume a very elastic margin of effective researchers. These models have been criticized for giving
very high responses of growth to policy which are not observed empirically (e.g., Goolsbee, 1998; Romer,
2000; Wilson, 2009, among others). Guided by the Danish micro-data, we have shown that becoming
an inventor requires talent, a preference for research, training, and financial resources. We now want to
highlight the role of these new ingredients in comparison to the benchmark model.
   Recall that the policy impact on growth of the standard model is approximated by the following
equation:
                                      g  g × R&D subsidy rate .
                                    0.0015   0.015           0.1

   This expression implies that a 10% R&D subsidy (or approximately 0.5% GDP equivalence) should
increase the benchmark economy that grows at 1.5% by 0.15 p.p., as reported in the second row of Panel
A in Table 4. This amounts to a 10% (= 1.65/1.5 - 1) increase in the growth rate. Our model, on the other
hand, generates about one half of this impact and increases growth to 1.58%.


                      Table 4: Comparison of New Features to Standard Model
                                               Growth rate p.p % Change in Growth
               Benchmark Model w/o subsidy                1.50
               Standard models                            1.65                  10%
               Current model in steady state              1.58                  5.4%


    In our model there are two reasons why talented individuals may not enter a PhD: financial frictions
and preferences. Each channel dampens the response of the growth rate to R&D subsidies compared to
standard models. For instance, if all high-talent individuals are constrained, R&D subsidies have minimal
effects because these individuals do not have the ability to respond to the increased wage in the research
sector.


5.2    Policy Complementarities and Growth-Maximizing Policy Mix
Motivated by the different margins that each policy hits, we now investigate how these policies interact.
First, we consider the growth-maximizing mix of R&D and education subsidies for the existing level of
slots, N = 0.01. More specifically, the solid blue line in Figure 19 plots the optimal share of education
subsidy (with the remaining share going to R&D policy) for any given budget. In the same graph, the
dotted black line plots the resulting growth rate.
    The results show a pecking order of the two policies. The policymaker prioritizes education subsidies
by allocating 100% of the policy budget to education when the budget is low ( 0.5% of GDP). This is
due to the fact that the policymaker first finds it most effective to reduce financial frictions to strengthen
the talent pool. When the level of budget is larger than 0.5% of GDP, the policymaker relies on a mix be-
tween education and R&D policies. For instance, when the government allocates 1% of GDP to maximize
innovation, it is optimal to split it evenly between R&D and education subsidies. For larger budgets, the


                                                     37
     Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth




                     Figure 19: Growth Maximizing Policy Mix at baseline slots level
                                                                           1                                                                               2.00

                                                                                                                                                           1.95
                                                                       0.9




                                             Edu Policy Budget Share
                                                                                                                                                           1.90

                                                                                                                                                           1.85
                                                                       0.8




                                                                                                                                                                  Growth Rate
                                                                                                                                                           1.80

                                                                       0.7                                                                                 1.75

                                                                                                                                                           1.70
                                                                       0.6
                                                                                                                                                           1.65

                                                                                                                                                           1.60
                                                                       0.5
                                                                                                                         Educ Policy Budget Share
                                                                                                                                                           1.55
                                                                                                                         Growth Rate
                                                                       0.4                                                                                 1.50
                                                                               0     0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6      0.7      0.8    0.9        1
                                                                                                 Budget as p.p. of GDP

share of R&D subsidy increases monotonically.
    We now investigate what the growth-maximizing policy mix would be if the government could also
expand the number of slots available in universities. Figure 20 shows the maximum growth rate attainable
at different levels of slots for a budget of 2.5% of GDP. 20 . The x-axis shows the number of slots available,
N . The vertical bars display the share of budget spending going to each policy for each level of slots. In
particular, the bars represent (i) R&D subsidy (dark blue bars) (ii) subsidizing the cost of education (light
blue bars), and (iii) slot creation (grey bars). The grey bars compute the share of the budget going to slots
creation corresponding to the level of slots given on the x-axis. The other bars show the optimal allocation
of the remaining budget between R&D subsidies and education subsidies at the given slots level. The
solid red curve displays the growth rate at each level of slots for the aforementioned policy mix.


                      Figure 20: Growth-maximizing policy mix at budget=2.5 pp GDP
                                                                       1                                                                                     2.02
                                                                                                                                  Budget Share Slots
                                                       0.9                                                                        Budget Share Edu           2.00
                                                                                                                                  Budget Share R&D
                                                       0.8                                                                        Growth Rate                1.98
                               Fraction of Budget




                                                       0.7                                                                                                   1.96
                                                                                                                                                                          Growth Rate




                                                       0.6                                                                                                   1.94

                                                       0.5                                                                                                   1.92

                                                       0.4                                                                                                   1.90

                                                       0.3                                                                                                   1.88

                                                       0.2                                                                                                   1.86

                                                       0.1                                                                                                   1.84

                                                                       0                                                                    1.82
                                                                       0.01        0.0105 0.011 0.0115 0.012 0.0125 0.013 0.0135 0.014 0.0145
                                                                                                   Number of slots


    Figure 20 indicates that the growth-maximizing mix given 2.5% of GDP corresponds to roughly spend-
   20 For small budgets, the growth-maximizing policy mix is such that none of the budget should be allocated to expanding slots

(see Appendix E.3).


                                                                                                             38
      Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


ing 59% on subsidizing R&D, 26% of the budget on subsidizing the cost of education, and 15% of the
budget on the creation of new slots. We revisit the role of the dynamics of policy complementarities in
Section 5.4.


5.3    Inequality and Education Policy
In this section, we use our quantitative model to explore the link between the distribution of parental
income and the impact of education policy. In our model, all potential students can afford education if
parental resources are evenly distributed. Yet, the extent of inequality reduces the fraction of people who
can afford education, generating a potential source of misallocation. The measure linking inequality to
the access to education is given by µ~ as defined Equation (2). As µ ~ tends to 1, the fraction of financially
constrained individuals tends to 0.

      Figure 21: Effectiveness of Education Policy at Different Levels of Financial Frictions
                                                0.40

                                                0.35

                                                0.30
                            Growth Rate, p.p.




                                                0.25

                                                0.20

                                                0.15

                                                0.10

                                                0.05

                                                0.00
                                                   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5        0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9   1




    Figure 21 analyzes the effectiveness of education policy depending on the level of financial frictions
in the economy. The x-axis represents the fraction of financially unconstrained individuals, µ ~ . We then
compute the growth rate in response to a 0.5 p.p. GDP subsidy to the cost of education. On the y-axis, we
plot the difference between the growth rate with the subsidy and the baseline growth rate of the economy
without subsidy. The figure shows that as the fraction of financially unconstrained individuals increases,
the effectiveness of subsidizing the cost of education declines. This is because the subsidy to the cost of
education targets talented individuals who would like to obtain higher education, but cannot afford it.
    The overall takeaway from this result is that as the society becomes more unequal and more families
are financially constrained, government intervention to subsidize education becomes more desirable to
preserve the innovative capacity of the economy.


5.4    Transitional Dynamics
We next turn to the dynamic evolution of the economy in response to each policy. A key component
of the dynamics is that human capital takes significantly longer to build than physical capital and will
thus induce longer delays in the transmission of policies to aggregate innovation. Starting from the initial


                                                                           39
     Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


steady state, the introduction of policies affects the occupational choice decisions of new generations.
However, it takes time for the new generations of researchers to acquire human capital to become team
leaders and to replace researchers from old generations.


                  Figure 22: Transitional dynamics response to 0.5% of GDP expenditure
                                                1.62
                                                         R&D subsidy
                                                         Education subsidy
                                                1.60
                                                         University slots


                                  Growth Rate   1.58


                                                1.56


                                                1.54


                                                1.52


                                                1.50


                                                1.48
                                                    -5        0              5           10   15   20
                                                                                 Years


    Figure 22 illustrates the evolution of the economy in response to policies.21 At time 0, we introduce
three distinct budget equivalent policies using 0.5% of GDP into the economy that will remain in place
permanently. Recall that this budget corresponds to a 10% subsidy rate, which approximately the rate of
R&D support in Denmark. We compare these policies over the following 20-year period to observe the
corresponding evolution of the growth rate. The solid dark blue line corresponds to an R&D subsidy, the
dotted light blue line corresponds to an educational subsidy, and the dashed grey line corresponds to an
expansion in PhD slots.
    A couple of remarks are in order. First, it takes time for each policy to show its full impact. All of these
policies take more than ten years to get halfway to the new steady state from Table 3. Second, the policies
that look more effective in the short-run are different from the policies that look effective in the medium
to long-run. For instance, R&D subsidies generate immediate growth effects through increased use of
lab equipment, while educational slots expansion takes some time and surpasses R&D after six years.
Educational subsidies, on the other hand, take the longest to transmit to the growth rate, but gradually
become the most effective policy tool in the long-run (see Table 3) through increasing the quality of
researchers. The talented new enrollees eventually become team leaders and then transmit their skill to
aggregate innovation. The talent increase has general equilibrium effects as the skilled wage increases
over time, making research more attractive and bringing in talented individuals who on the margin prefer
production.
    An important takeaway from these transitional dynamics is that it takes time to build a high quality
talent pool. Thus, the impact of policies targeting innovation and productivity through human capital has
long time lags. For instance, it takes educational subsidies 30 years to reach the halfway point to the new
steady state. Hence, empirical innovation policy evaluations based on data with short time-spans could
   21 We                                                                            ¯ (t)}t along the transition and verifying whether
         solve the transition dynamics numerically by guessing a vector of cutoffs {z
the implied wages and profits are consistent with individuals' decisions. The algorithm we use to numerically solve for the equilib-
rium of the economy along the transition is discussed in Appendix D.


                                                                                 40
      Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


potentially lead to wrong conclusions about their effectiveness if the lagged nature of these policies are
not taken into account.


6     Discussion and Robustness
In this section, we revisit our main findings and discuss their robustness. We focus on five variations on
the main framework and reference the results in Table 5. Our finding that R&D policy is less effective
than in standard models is confirmed in all variations in Panel A of this table which one can compare
to benchmark models. Benchmark models imply a steady state increase of growth to the corresponding
subsidy by 15%, whereas in our robustness checks it is never larger than 7%. Panel A also indicates how
R&D policy is more effective in the short-run, while education tends to be more effective in the long-
run. The fact that policymakers should mix policy to make R&D more effective can be seen in Panel B,
where usually policymakers should use exclusively education subsidies (for small budgets) or mix policies
(for larger budgets). Our other results (the interaction with parental income inequality and the different
margins each policy hits), are robust as these are theoretical and hence do not depend on the calibration
of the model.
    For each robustness check, we report the impact of each of the three policies in both the short- and
long-run. In particular, we report the responsiveness of the growth rate to budget equivalent policies of
0.5% of GDP at both one year, ten years, and in steady state. This can be found in Panel A of Table 5. In
addition, we report the role of policy complementarities at a budget of both 0.5% of GDP and 2.5% of GDP
in Panel B of Table 5. For reference, we repeat the benchmark results in Panel A(i ) and B(i ).22 Overall,
we find that our main results related to the magnitude of policies compared to benchmark models and at
different time horizons are quite robust to the different alternatives that we consider.


6.1    Alternative Estimates of Parental Income: Including Maternal Income
In our benchmark specification, we focus on paternal income as a measure of parental resources in order
to avoid time trends in female labor force participation. Here, we measure parental income as the sum
of father's and mother's income. This delivers an estimate of the correlation between parental resources
and IQ of 0.212, instead of 0.175 in our benchmark calibration. We recalibrate the model accordingly as
described in Appendix E.4. Recall that this target moment informs the parameter µ, which captures finan-
cial frictions. A higher value of µ implies that fewer individuals are financially constrained. Panel A(ii)
denotes the steady state response in the percentage change of the growth rate with this new calibration.
Education subsidies are still significantly more effective (17.86% in growth rate) than R&D subsidies
(5.54% in growth rate), yet the effectiveness of education policy declines due to better assortative match-
ing. This general pattern of education subsidy effectiveness is illustrated in Figure 21. The time-to-build
components still confirm R&D policy is more effective after one year (0.58) than educational subsidies
(0.01) and slot expansion (0.23). Lastly, Panel B(i) illustrates that for a small budget of 0.5% of GDP, the
government should allocate all of it to education. For a large budget of 2.5% of GDP, the optimal policy
mix of 58%, 26%, and 16% for R&D subsidies, education subsidies, and slots increases respectively, looks
similar to the benchmark.

   22 Additionally, for the cases that require a re-calibration of the model, we report in Appendix E.4 the implied parameter estimates

and match between model and data moments.


                                                                  41
Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth




                 Table 5: Robustness: Policy Response and Optimal Mix
               Panel A: % Increase in Growth Rate ( g/ g) from 0.5% GDP Policy
                               R&D Subsidy Education Subsidy Increase in Slots
                                    (i) Benchmark Calibration
            After 1 Year              0.60                0.01                     0.23
            After 10 Years            1.19                2.38                     1.62
            Steady State              5.44                20.12                    1.91
                     (ii) Parental Income as Sum of Father's and Mother's Income
            After 1 Year              0.58                0.01                     0.23
            After 10 Years            1.17                2.16                     1.64
            Steady State              5.54                17.86                    1.74
                      (iii) Cost of Education Includes Room and Board Expenses
            After 1 Year              0.59                 0.01                    0.23
            After 10 Years            1.19                 0.63                    1.62
            Steady State              5.44                 3.64                    1.91
                                  (iv) Alternative Cost of PhD Slots
            After 1 Year              0.59                0.01                     0.47
            After 10 Years            1.19                2.38                     4.31
            Steady State              5.44                20.12                    9.72
                             (v) Addition of Exogenous Growth Component
            After 1 Year              0.29                 0.01                    0.06
            After 10 Years            0.54                 0.55                    0.44
            Steady State              2.67                 5.33                    1.33
                        (vi) Exogenous Growth Component Responds to Policy
            After 1 Year              0.29                 0.01                    0.06
            After 10 Years            0.51                 0.49                    0.43
            Steady State              2.67                 4.67                    1.33
                     Panel B: Respective Share of Policy under Optimal Mix
                                 R&D Subsidy Education Subsidy            Increase in Slots
                                    (i) Benchmark Calibration
            0.5% GDP Budget           0                 100                         0
            2.5% GDP Budget          59                  26                         15
                      (ii) Parental Income as Sum of Father's and Mother's Income
            0.5% GDP Budget             0                  100                      0
            2.5% GDP Budget            58                   26                      16
                       (iii) Cost of Education Includes Room and Board Expenses
            0.5% GDP Budget           100                   0                       0
            2.5% GDP Budget            51                   49                      0
                                  (iv) Alternative Cost of PhD Slots
            0.5% GDP Budget            0                   100                      0
            2.5% GDP Budget            43                   22                      35
                                       (v) Non-PhD Innovation
            0.5% GDP Budget             0               100                         0
            2.5% GDP Budget            45                39                         16
                             (vi) Non-PhD Innovation Responds to Policy
            0.5% GDP Budget             0                  100                      0
            2.5% GDP Budget            48                   12                      40




                                                  42
      Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


6.2    Alternative Estimates of the Cost of Education
Our benchmark measure for the cost of education is given by the estimated foregone income during three
years of a PhD, which we estimate to be about 0.3 million DKK, or 2.4% of a PhD's lifetime discounted
income. Here, we are going to take a more aggressive approach and also include the cost of undergraduate
studies as part of the bundle of education costs. The incorporation of broader costs by including the college
expenses takes an extreme on the cost of a PhD, which enables us to illustrate the mechanics of the model
when education policy is very costly.
    In particular, the alternative estimate includes expenditures that parents have to bear to enable their
kids to prepare for a PhD, such as the cost of room and board during their years in college and masters
(tuition for college is free for domestic students). Based on information provided by international study
associations23 , we assess the cost of room and board for college students to be approximately 0.32M DKK
over five years. Including this cost alongside the 0.3M DKK cost for a PhD, we obtain our alternative
estimate of cost of education to be about 5% of a PhD's lifetime income, roughly two times as large as our
initial estimate.
    The effect of higher cost of education policy is described in Panel A(iii). After one year , education
policy shows similar effectiveness to the benchmark as in Panel A(i). However, after 10 years and in
steady state, we can observe that as education becomes very costly, education policy for the same budget
has a smaller overall effect. In Panel B(iii), we see that optimal policy with 2.5% GDP mixes again with
significant reliance (49%) on educational subsidies.


6.3    Alternative Estimates of the Cost of PhD Slots
Our benchmark measure for the cost to the government of creating a PhD slot is given by cost of training
a PhD reported by the Danish Ministry of Education (2016), which we estimate to be about 6% of a PhD's
lifetime discounted income. Here, we consider an alternative estimate based on information on the tuition
fees charged to PhD students. Although domestic students do not pay tuition fees in Denmark, some
foreign students have to pay tuition. International study associations24 report tuition fees for foreign
students to be between 0.2-0.5M DKK. According to our calculations, this amounts to about 3% of a PhD's
lifetime income. Panel A(iv) of Table 5 shows that the effectiveness of increasing PhD slots increases
when the cost of PhD slots is estimated to be lower. In fact, the increase in growth rate after 1 year from
the expansion of PhD slots increases from 0.23% in the benchmark calibration to 0.47%, after ten years
it increases from 1.62% in the benchmark to 4.31%, and in steady state it increases from 1.91% to 9.72%.
Panel B(iv) shows that the optimal policy mix still includes R&D policy, but more educational budget is
allocated to slots and education subsidies.


6.4    Non-PhD Innovation
In our baseline model, we assume that all innovation is coming by PhDs. However, in our data, PhDs
account for about a fourth of patents, while remaining patents come from non-PhDs. One concern is that
we might overestimate the effect of policies in our benchmark, because in reality they only affect a fraction
   23 https://www.studyportals.com/ is a spin-off from two large international study associations, with the goal of helping students

make an informed choice about study programs. It provides a host of information about University programs in many countries,
including cost of tuition, cost of living, scholarship and grants, visa requirements.
   24 Ibidem.




                                                                43
      Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


of the inventors in the economy. In order to capture innovations created by individuals without higher
education, in this section we extend our model to incorporate an exogenous arrival of ideas proportional
to the economy-wide talent pool at rate  . The total amount of exogenous innovation is thus equal to
                      
  q(z) f (z)dz =   -    1 . The resulting growth rate expression is:
                                           +
                                                     
                       µ  ^s
                       ~  w                        ^                                       
                   g=                                           q(z) f (z)dz +                           ,
                      +E  ^u
                          w                       ^u
                                                  w      ¯
                                                         z                                 -1
                                                                                   exogenous component
                                    endogenous component


where the additional last term reflects the exogenous growth component. We then re-calibrate the model,
as described in Appendix E.4, so that endogenous innovation due to PhD accounts for 23% of total inno-
vation, as we observe in patent data. In this setting, only the endogenous component of the growth rate is
sensitive to policy. Panel A(v) of Table 5 shows that policy effectiveness is lower when we limit the share
of susceptible population. Nonetheless, our key results hold in these settings. R&D policy is less effective
than in standard models: an R&D subsidy of magnitude corresponding to a 10% R&D subsidy leads to an
increase in the growth rate by 0.29% on impact and about 2.67% in steady state, compared to about 15% in
standard models. R&D policy is the most effective in the short run, but education policy is more effective
in the long run. Finally, Panel B(v) of Table 5 shows that also the pecking order of policies discussed in
our benchmark model still holds in this setting.


6.5    Non-PhD Innovation Responds to Policy
Our baseline model, we assume that all growth comes from PhDs. In the previous exercise in Section 6.4,
we discuss an exogenous idea arrival to account for the fact that individuals without PhDs create ideas as
well. One concern is that innovation and education policy might change the production of ideas outside
the research sector, as a result of driving more numerous and more talented individuals into research. To
address this concern, in this section we restrict the arrival rate of exogenous ideas to be proportional to
the talent pool outside the research sector. In other words, we assume that PhDs get ideas only through
research, and that the exogenous idea arrival is proportional to talent of the production workers. There-
fore, as talented individuals are driven into research, the quantity of ideas which exogenously arrive to
individuals in the production sector will decline. Formally, this growth rate takes the form:
                                +
                                       
               ~  w
               µ  ^s                 ^                                      ¯
                                                                            z                            
          g =                                     q(z) f (z)dz +                               ~ )
                                                                                zdF (z) + (1 - µ             zdF (z)
              +E  ^u
                  w                 ^u
                                    w      ¯
                                           z                            1                            ¯
                                                                                                     z


    We recalibrate the model according to this new structure, as described in Appendix E.4. In Section
6.4, the part of economic growth due to exogenous ideas arrival does not respond to policy and accounts
for 77% (1.157 p.p./ 1.5 p.p.) of the baseline growth. With the current re-calibration, in steady state, the
introduction of a 10% R&D subsidy leads to a decline to the exogenous growth component of 0.3% (to
1.153 p.p. GDP); a subsidy of equivalent expenditure to cost of education reduces the exogenous growth
component by 0.7% (to 1.149 p.p. GDP), and a subsidy of equivalent expenditure aimed at increasing PhD
slots reduces the exogenous growth component by 0.1% (to 1.156 p.p. GDP). An inspection of the overall
growth effect in Panel A(vi) of Table 5 shows that the decline in exogenous growth is reflected in overall


                                                        44
    Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


growth, particularly in the case of steady state response to an education subsidy, where the increase in
growth declines from 5.33% to 4.67% from Panel A(v) to Panel A(vi). Thus, if the growth component
due to innovation in the production sector is allowed to respond to policy, the effect of innovation and
education policy on the growth rate is mitigated. However, inspection of Panel A(vi) indicates that the
policy rankings are similar and the overall effect of policy on innovation is only slightly muted. Further,
the optimal mix of policies is similar to the benchmark model, as seen in Panel B(vi).


7    Conclusion
This paper puts the development of scarce talent and career choice at the center of an endogenous growth
framework and uses this framework to understand the effects of education policies, innovation policies,
and their interaction. Individuals decide their career path as a function of their talent, preferences, fi-
nancial constraints, and the time it takes to build human capital. These choices eventually transmit to
aggregate innovation as talent builds into human capital and contributes to idea production. We discipline
these micro-level decisions and outcomes with rich micro-level datasets from Denmark. Our estimated
model not only matches a host of facts in the data, but replicates the response of the talent pool to pol-
icy interventions in the 2000s. We then use this framework to study policy counterfactuals of education
and innovation policies and square longstanding puzzles in the literature on R&D policy. The framework
delivers a number of important messages for understanding and designing optimal policies.
    Our analysis delivers four main findings. First, we find that the introduction of a subsidy to innovation
is less effective than in standard models due to a host of forces, such as time-to-build human capital and
financial frictions, which squares the empirical evidence with these models. However, the impact of
R&D subsidies can be strengthened when combined with higher education policy that sorts talented but
credit-constrained individuals into research. Second, education and innovation policies are tapping into a
different part of the talent distribution depending on the types of frictions individuals face. Third, R&D
and education policies impact innovation at different horizons, which makes the optimal policy design a
function of the time horizon of the policymaker. Finally, the optimal policy will depend on the amount
of parental income inequality in the society. In highly unequal societies, education policy is likely to be
significantly more effective than R&D policy because education policy hits credit constrained individuals
with talent. In completely equal societies, R&D subsidies are more likely to be effective because financial
frictions in obtaining education will be limited, but R&D subsidies can increase the available capital for
researchers and induce those who would have otherwise not worked in research to enter the research
sector.
    We discuss here two exciting extensions for the individual-based endogenous growth agenda in this
paper. First, in light of the increasing inequality observed around the world, it would be interesting to
apply the current framework to societies where income inequality shows much more extreme dynamics
relative to Denmark. Second, our results highlight that domestic talent is scarce and induce a country
to run into diminishing returns when the country only relies on a domestic talent pool. One way to
ameliorate this problem could be to tap into international talent, drawing implications for immigration
policy. These are very fruitful extensions that await further research.




                                                     45
    Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


References
Aghion, P., U. Akcigit, A. Hyytinen, and O. Toivanen: 2017, `The Social Origins of Inventors'. National
 Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper # 24110.

Aghion, P., U. Akcigit, A. Hyytinen, and O. Toivanen: 2018, `On the Returns to Invention within Firms:
 Evidence from Finland'. AEA Papers and Proceedings 108, 208­12.

Aghion, P., U. Akcigit, A. Hyytinen, and O. Toivanen: 2020, `A year older, a year wiser ( and farther from
 frontier): invention spillovers and human capital depreciation.'. University of Chicago Working Paper.

Aghion, P., L. P. Boustan, C. M. Hoxby, and J. Vandenbussche: 2009, `The Causal Impact of Education on
 Economic Growth: Evidence from U.S.'.

Aghion, P. and P. Howitt: 1992, `A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction'. Econometrica 60(2),
 323­351.

Ahmadpoor, M. and B. Jones: 2017, `The Dual Frontier: Patentable Inventions and Prior Scientific Ad-
 vance'. Science 357(6351), 583--587.

Akcigit, U., S. Caicedo, E. Miguelez, S. Stantcheva, and V. Sterzi: 2018, `Dancing with the Stars: Innovation
 through Interactions'. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper # 24466.

Akcigit, U., J. Grigsby, and T. Nicholas: 2017, `The Rise of American Ingenuity: Innovation and Inventors
 of the Golden Age'. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper # 23047.

Akcigit, U. and W. R. Kerr: 2018, `Growth through Heterogeneous Innovations'. Journal of Political Economy
 126(4), 1374­1443.

Arrow, K. J.: 1962, `The Economic Implications of Learning by Doing'. The Review of Economic Studies 29(3),
  155­173.

Arts, S. and R. Veugelers: 2020, `Taste for Science, Academic Boundary Spanning, and Inventive Perfor-
  mance of Scientists and Engineers in Industry'. Industrial and Corporate Change 29(4), 917­933.

Azoulay, P., J. S. Graff Zivin, D. Li, and B. N. Sampat: 2018, `Public R&D Investments and Private-sector
 Patenting: Evidence from NIH Funding Rules'. Review of Economic Studies 86(1), 117­152.

Barro, R. J.: 2001, `Human Capital and Growth'. American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 91(2),
  12­17.

Bell, A., R. Chetty, X. Jaravel, N. Petkova, and J. Van Reenen: 2018, `Who Becomes an Inventor in America?
  The Importance of Exposure to Innovation*'. Quarterly Journal of Economics 134(2), 647­713.

Benhabib, J., J. Perla, and C. Tonetti: 2014, `Catch-up and Fall-back through Innovation and Imitation'.
  Journal of Economic Growth 19(1), 1­35.

Bloom, N., R. Griffith, and J. Van Reenen: 2002, `Do R&D tax credits work? Evidence from a panel of
  countries 1979-1997'. Journal of Public Economics 85(1), 1­31.




                                                     46
    Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


Bloom, N., C. I. Jones, J. Van Reenen, and M. Webb: 2017, `Are Ideas Getting Harder to Find?'. Working
  Paper 23782, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bloom, N., J. Van Reenen, and H. Williams: 2019, `A Toolkit of Policies to Promote Innovation'. Journal of
  Economic Perspectives 33(3), 163­84.

Celik, M.: 2015, `Does the Cream Always Rise to the Top? The Misallocation of Talent and Innovation'.
  University of Pennsylvania Working Paper.

Dimos, C. and G. Pugh: 2016, `The effectiveness of R&D subsidies: A meta-regression analysis of the
  evaluation literature'. Research Policy 45(4), 797­815.

Goolsbee, A.: 1998, `Does Government R&D Policy Mainly Benefit Scientists and Engineers?'. American
 Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 88(2), 298­302.

Greenwood, J., A. Seshadri, and M. Yorukoglu: 2005, `Engines of Liberation'. The Review of Economic
  Studies 72(1), 109­133.

Grossman, G. M. and E. Helpman: 1991, Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy. (with Gene M.
  Grossman) Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

Grossman, G. M., E. Helpman, E. Oberfield, and T. Sampson: 2017, `Balanced Growth Despite Uzawa'.
  American Economic Review 107(4), 1293­1312.

Hall, B. and J. Van Reenen: 2000, `How effective are fiscal incentives for R&D? A review of the evidence'.
 Research Policy 29(4-5), 449­469.

Hartmann, P. and T. W. Teasdale: 2005, `Spearman's Law of Diminishing Returns, and the role of test
 reliability investigated in a large sample of Danish military draftees'. Personality and Individual Differences
 39(7), 1193 ­ 1203.

Hsieh, C.-T., E. Hurst, C. I. Jones, and P. J. Klenow: 2019, `The Allocation of Talent and U.S. Economic
 Growth'. Econometrica 87(5), 1439­1474.

Jaimovich, N. and S. Rebelo: 2017, `Nonlinear Effects of Taxation on Growth'. Journal of Political Economy
   125(1), 265­291.

Jensen, M. B., U. Laursen, and K. Albris: 2012, `Globaliseringspuljen'. Technical report, DEA.

Jones, B. F.: 2009, `The Burden of Knowledge and the "Death of the Renaissance Man": Is Innovation
  Getting Harder?'. The Review of Economic Studies 76(1), 283­317.

Jones, B. F.: 2010, `Age and Great Invention'. The Review of Economics and Statistics 92(1), 1­14.

Jones, B. F. and B. A. Weinberg: 2011, `Age dynamics in scientific creativity'. Proceedings of the National
  Academy of Sciences 108(47), 18910­18914.

Jones, C. I.: 1995, `R & D-Based Models of Economic Growth'. Journal of Political Economy 103(4), 759­784.

Jovanovic, B.: 2014, `Misallocation and Growth'. American Economic Review 104(4), 1149­71.



                                                      47
    Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


Klette, T. and S. Kortum: 2004, `Innovating Firms and Aggregate Innovation'. Journal of Political Economy
  112(5), 986­1018.

Konig, M., J. Lorenz, and F. Zilibotti: 2016, `Catch-up and Fall-back through Innovation and Imitation'.
  Theoretical Economics 11(3), 1053­1102.

Kortum, S. S.: 1997, `Research, Patenting, and Technological Change'. Econometrica 65(6), 1389­1419.

Lucas, R.: 1978, `On the Size Distribution of Business Firms'. Bell Journal of Economics 9(2), 508­523.

Lucas, R. E. and B. Moll: 2014, `Knowledge Growth and the Allocation of Time'. Journal of Political Economy
  122(1), 1­51.

Miguelez, E.: 2016, `Inventor Diasporas and the Internationalization of Technology'. World Bank Policy
 Research Working Paper No. 7619.

Mincer, J.: 1984, `Human capital and economic growth'. Economics of Education Review 3(3), 195 ­ 205.

Ministry of Education, D.: 2016, `PhD programmes, quality and relevance'. Technical report, Ministry for
 Education and Research of Denmark.

Moretti, E. and D. Wilson: 2014, `State incentives for innovation, star scientists and jobs: Evidence from
 biotech'. Journal of Urban Economics 79(C), 20­38.

Murphy, K. M., A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny: 1991, `The Allocation of Talent: Implications for Growth'.
 Quarterly Journal of Economics 106(2), 503­530.

Nelson, R. R.: 1959, `The Simple Economics of Basic Scientific Research'. Journal of Political Economy 67(3),
 297­306.

OECD: 2010, `OECD National Accounts Statistics: National Accounts at a Glance'. Oecd report, Directorate
 for Science, Technology, and Innovation.

Pearce, J.: 2020, `Idea Production and Team Structure'. University of Chicago Working Paper.

Perla, J. and C. Tonetti: 2014, `Equilibrium Imitation and Growth'. Journal of Political Economy 122(1),
  52--76.

Perla, J., C. Tonetti, and M. Waugh: 2015, `Equilibrium Technology Diffusion, Trade, and Growth'. NBER
  Working Papers 20881, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Romer, P. M.: 1990, `Endogenous Technological Change'. Journal of Political Economy 98(5), S71­S102.

Romer, P. M.: 2000, `Should the Government Subsidize Supply or Demand in the Market for Scientists and
  Engineers?'. Innovation Policy and the Economy 1, 221­252.

Rosen, S.: 1981, `The Economics of Superstars'. American Economic Review 71(5), 845­858.

Stephan, P. E.: 1996, `The Economics of Science'. Journal of Economic Literature 34(3), 1199­1235.

Stokey, N. L.: 1988, `Learning by Doing and the Introduction of New Goods'. Journal of Political Economy
  96(4), 701­717.


                                                     48
    Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


Teasdale, T. W.: 2009, `The Danish Draft Board's intelligence test, Borge Priens Prove: Psychometric prop-
  erties and research applications through 50 years'. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology 50(6), 633­638.

Toivanen, O. and L. Vaananen: 2016, `Education and Invention'. The Review of Economics and Statistics 98(2),
  382­396.

Topel, R. H. and M. P. Ward: 1992, `Job Mobility and the Careers of Young Men'. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 107(2), 439­479.

Waldinger, F.: 2016, `Bombs, Brains, and Science: The Role of Human and Physical Capital for the Creation
 of Scientific Knowledge'. Review of Economics and Statistics 98(5), 811­831.

Willis, R. J. and S. Rosen: 1979, `Education and Self-Selection'. Journal of Political Economy 87(5, Part 2),
 S7­S36.

Wilson, D.: 2009, `Beggar Thy Neighbor? The In-State, Out-of-State, and Aggregate Effects of R&D Tax
 Credits'. Review of Economics and Statistics 91(2), 431­436.

Wuchty, S., B. F. Jones, and B. Uzzi: 2007, `The Increasing Dominance of Teams in Production of Knowl-
 edge'. Science 316(5827), 1036­1039.




                                                     49
    Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth



    Appendix
A    Denmark Innovation and Education Programs
In this section, we provide a brief description of the various research and education programs included in
the "Innovation Danmark" database referenced in Figure 2.


                     Table A1: Grants and Subsidies from Innovation Programs
                                           Research Subsidies
        P1    FP6 /                 VI & VII European Community Framework Program for
        P7    FP7                   Research, Technological Development and Demonstration.
        P3    Innovation Consortia Joint project between firms and knowledge institutions to
                                    develop and mature research-based knowledge.
        P4    Innovation Pilot /    Promote cooperation between SME's and institutions to
        P8    Innovation Coupon     increase SME's innovation capacity.
        P5    Innovation Agents     Innovation Agents offer knowledge and guidance to SMEs
                                    for technological innovation and business development.
        P6    Open Funds            Public-Private cooperation for other projects.
        P9    SPIR                  Strategic Platform for Innovation and Research
        P10   Horizon 2020          Part of EU Framework Program for Research & Innovation.
        P11   High Tech Fund        Supports strategic R&D initiatives in high-tech.
        P12   InnoBooster           Knowledge-based innovation projects for SMEs, start-ups
                                    and companies established by researchers.
        P13   Int'l Cooperation     Projects in cooperation with international partners.
        P14   Community P'ship      Innovation-oriented problem-solving for manufacturing.
        P16   Grand Solutions       High risk projects with high value creation.

                                           Education Subsidies
       P0     Universities Funding   Educational and Research grants for Universities.
       P2     Business PhD /         Business-oriented research project conducted in collaboration
       P15    Business Postdoc       between a private company and a university.



B    Measuring the Cost of Education
It is necessary for the budget equivalence of our policies to compute the cost of education in Denmark. In
the literature, it is common to assess the cost of higher education as the sum of tuition fees and foregone
income. However, in Denmark, tuition is free for domestic students, so we focus on assessing foregone
income for PhD students. We compare the income of PhD students in our data to the income of comparable
individuals of the same age working in the private or public sector. We assess the cost of foregone income
during the years of PhD education to be approximately 100K DKK per year. The typical duration of a PhD
program in Denmark is three years. Thus, we obtain that foregone income is approximately 300K DKK.
This is consistent with the findings of a report from the Ministry of Education and Research (Ministry of
Education (2016)), which finds that in the first years during and after completion of the PhD program,
income of PhD graduates is lower than comparable MSc graduates in both the public and the private
sector, but that the trend inverts over time. Given the average discounted income of PhD graduates in our



                                                    50
        Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


data, we obtain that the cost of education is roughly 2.4% of a PhD's lifetime income. In Section 6, we
check the robustness of our main results to different assumptions on the cost of education.
    Additionally, we need to assess the cost to the government in creating a PhD slot. A report from
the Danish Ministry of Education and Research (Ministry of Education, 2016) estimates the cost of PhD
training, including administrative costs, teaching material, etc., to be approximately between 0.7-1.1M
DKK. Given the average discounted income of PhD graduates in our data, we then assess the cost of
creating a PhD slot to be approximately 6% of a PhD's lifetime income. In Section 6, we check the
robustness of our main results to different assumptions on the cost of a PhD slot.


C         Theoretical Derivations
This section discusses primarily model derivations from the text. In particular, we focus on the main
theoretical model derivations from Appendix C.1-C.6, and details on the derivation for Equation (1) in
Appendix C.7.


C.1                                       ¯ in partial equilibrium
           Derivation of talent threshold z
Recall that individuals choose between becoming a researcher or a production worker:

                                       V (z, , b) = max{V phd (z, b), V worker (b) + ln( )}

where V phd (z) is the value of becoming a researcher for an individual with talent z and V worker is the value
of becoming a production worker. We can rewrite this maximization problem as:

                                                                                                     
max                e-(+)(t-b) e-(t-b) ln(ws (t)) + (1 - e-(t-b) ) ln( H (z, t)) dt,                     e-(+)(t-b) [(ln wu (t))] dt + ln( ) .
            b                                                                                    b

        An individual will be indifferent between becoming a researcher or a production worker if:

                                                V phd (z, b) = V worker (b) + ln( ).

We can write the value of being a PhD or being an unskilled worker as:

                                                                                           
        e-(+)(t-b)       e-(t-b) ln(w
                                    ^ s ) + (1 - e-(t-b) ) ln(^ z) + g(t - b) dt =            e-(+)(t-b) [ln w
                                                                                                             ^ u + g(t - b)] dt + ln( ).
 b                                                                                     b

Notice that the growth rate cancels out on both sides of the expression. Solving this equation yields:

                                           ^ s ) - ln(
                                        ln(w          ^ z) ln(^ z)      ^ u)
                                                                     ln(w
                                                          +        =         + ln( )
                                           ++               +         +

Notice that the resulting expression is time-invariant. Rearranging this expression, we obtain:

                                 ++           +                    ( + )( +  + )
                       ln(z) =         ^ u) -
                                    ln(w           ^ s ) - ln(
                                                ln(w          ^) +               ln( )
                                                                         




                                                                51
      Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


Finally, exponentiating both sides of this equation we obtain:

                                                                        +
                                                             ^u
                                                             w              ^u
                                                                            w     
                                                      z=                             ,
                                                             ^s
                                                             w               ^

            (+)(++)
where               .     We assume             U (0, Ez). It follows that  is also time-invariant and independent
of z:

                                             Pr V phd > V worker + ln( )
                                                              +
                                                                       
                                                       w^ u     w ^ u
                                            = Pr z                     
                                                       w^s         ^
                                                                  +
                                                                         
                                                                - 
                                                            ^u
                                                            w          ^ 
                                            = Pr    z
                                                            ^s
                                                            w         ^u
                                                                      w
                                                                    +
                                               z           ^s
                                                           w              ^
                                             =                              .
                                               Ez          ^u
                                                           w             ^u
                                                                         w

C.2     Proof of Proposition 2.
Proof.
                                                                                   ¯ (t+t)- A  ¯ (t)
                                                   ¯ in small time interval, t, as A
   We can write the change in average productivity A                                    ¯ (t)t       and obtain
                                                                                       A
the growth rate of productivity on the balanced growth path by letting t go to zero, i.e.:

                                     ¯ (t + t) - A
                                     A            ¯ (t)
                        g = lim            ¯ (t)t
                               t 0         A
                                       1                 ~                           ¯ (t) dj - A
                                                                                                ¯ (t)
                                      0     Aj +        + µ ¯
                                                            z             q(z)dF (z) A
                          = lim                                          ¯ (t)t
                               t 0                                       A
                                                   
                          =     ~
                                µ                     q(z)dF (z)
                              +                ¯
                                               z

Plugging in µ~ from Equation (2),  from Equation (9), q(z) from Equation (7) and our functional form for
F we obtain:
                                                                1                 3            1
                                  1
                                             (1 2 ) 1 +2                                      1 + 2
                                                                         3 I
                                                                                 1 + 2
                            ¯
                          g=z    1 + 2
                                           N                                                          ,
                                              +                            r             -1

delivering the formula in Equation (25).


C.3                ¯ Derivation with Taxes and Subsidies
        Details on z
                                                    ¯:
Recall the partial equilibrium value for the cutoff z

                                                                            +
                                                                                    1
                                                                                     
                                                      µ~            ^s
                                                                    w             ^ 
                                                   ¯=
                                                   z
                                                      NE            ^u
                                                                    w            ^u
                                                                                 w




                                                                    52
      Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


                                                          ^ s and 
   R&D subsidies s and taxes to fund subsidies  alter the w       ^ .25


                                                                                                    +                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                                          
                                    3                   1                                    1                 3                    2                               1
    +                              1 + 2               1 + 2          (1+s)(1- ) I         1 + 2              1 + 2         -1     1 + 2           (1+s)(1- ) I   1 + 2
         -         µ   2 3                                                                                3           1                                                   
  1-  1 2          ~                             -1                         r                      
                                                                                                                                                         r                
¯  ( 1 + 2 )
z                =                                                                                                                                                        
                   NE                                           1- 
                                                                        1- 
                                                                                                                                       1- 
                                                                                                                                                   1- 
                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                     1-                                                                       1-        


Simplfying both sides leads to Equation (26).


C.4     Details on Steady State Subsidy Equivalence Across Policies
In order to compare different policies, it is crucial to understand how to compare the equivalent revenue
cost of each policy. In this section, we provide more details on government policies described in Section
3.2. The government can introduce three types of interventions: R&D subsidies, educational financing
subsidies, and expanding university slots. The government finances these policies with a proportional
tax  on intermediate firms profits. We assume that the government balances the budget in every period.
Then the problem of the intermediate good producer becomes:

                                                                               1- 
                                                j = max ( L  A j k j                 - k j )(1 -  ) .
                                                           kj

Hence the flow profits for the intermediate good producers in the presence of a tax become

                                                                  j = (1 -  )  I A j ,

                                   1- 
where  I   [(1 - ) /]  L.
  Thus the total tax revenue to the government is:

                                                                               ¯.
                                                                        T =  I A

We will now derive the tax rates that balance the government budget in every period for each policy
instrument.

    R&D Subsidy. The government introduces a subsidy to the price of ideas purchased by firms from
research teams. Thus the price received by research teams under the subsidy, pR&D , is :

                                                                                                          I ¯
                                         pR&D = (1 + s)(1 -  ) p = (1 + s)(1 -  )                           A.
                                                                                                          r

Note that this formula also displays the pass-through of the tax  imposed on monopolists to the research
teams. The solution of the model follows the same steps described in the main text, with the only dif-
ference that the unit price of ideas now reflects the subsidy and the tax. This procedure leads to the
expression for the threshold z¯ and growth rate g described in Section 3.2.1. The total cost of an R&D
subsidy to the government is given by the unit price of ideas multiplied by the amount of ideas produced:

                         3              1                                            1-             3                  2
                                                        1                                                                             1
  25 Recall,             + 2    ¯ 
                                z      1 + 2                                   1-                   + 2         -1    1 + 2
                                                                                                                              
                                                                                      
               ^ s = 2 3 1
               w                  -1            r
                                                 I    1 + 2
                                                                 ^u =
                                                                ;w      1-                 ;^ = 3 1       1   ¯ 
                                                                                                              z               r
                                                                                                                               I    1 + 2
                                                                                                                                            .


                                                                              53
    Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth




                                                                             
                                       SR&D =s(1 -  ) p        ~
                                                               µ                q(z)dF (z)
                                                             +           ¯
                                                                         z




For a given value of the subsidy s, the value of  that balances the budget solves the equation SR&D = T ,
which is equivalent to:

                                                     1                      1                           1
                                3
                                        (1 -  )    1 + 2     (  1   2 ) 1 + 2            3
                                                                                                       1 + 2
                = s (1 + s )   1 + 2
                                                           N                  (  3  I ) 1 + 2      ¯
                                                                                                   z
                                           r                     +                              -1

     Subsidy to Cost of Education. Recall that we defined  to be the cost of education and here we assume
that the government pays a fraction s of each PhD's education cost. For ease of comparison of the cost
parameters to the data counterpart int the calibration section, we express this cost as a fraction of expected
lifetime income for a PhD student, I PhD × A ¯ . Thus, we let the cost of education be  =  e × I PhD × A     ¯.
Thus the total cost of the subsidy is:

                                                                    ¯
                                                  Sedu = s  e I PhD AN

and the  that balances the budget is:

                                                           s  e I PhD N
                                                   =                    .
                                                                I

    Increasing the Number of PhD slots. In order to solve for the balanced budget equation of the
government, we need to make assumptions on the cost to the government of increasing the slots. Again,
for ease of exposition, we translate this cost in terms of fraction of expected lifetime income for a PhD
                 ¯ (t), and let the cost of a PhD slot be  s × I PhD × A
student, I PhD × A                                                     ¯ (t). Thus, the total cost of the subsidy
is:

                                                             ¯ ( N s - N ).
                                             Sslots =  I PhD A

For a given value of the subsidy s, the value of  that balances the budget solves the equation Sslots = T ,
which is equivalent to:

                                                       s I PhD ( N s - N )
                                                  =                        .
                                                               I

    In order to carry out meaningful comparisons on the impact of these subsidies on economic growth, our
quantitative exercise solves for the subsidy rates equivalent to the same expenditure for the government.
We then report the magnitude of the government intervention in terms of total government expenditure
as a percentage of GDP for each policy. The concept of GDP in our model is given by final good output, as
expressed in Equation (19). Thus we solve for subsidy and tax rates that result in equivalent government




                                                              54
      Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


expenditures as percentage of GDP as follows:

                                             SR&D  S     S
                                                  = edu = slots .
                                              Y      Y     Y

C.5     Derivation of Equations Used for Calibration
In Section 4.3 we presented a number of expressions that represent the model counterpart of data mo-
ments that we target for calibration. In this section, we present the derivations of those expressions.

   The mean of team size in our model can be derived as follows:
                                             
                                            ¯
                                            z    n(z) f (z)dz    z¯ 1-    
                                E(n) =                        =          = .
                                                        ¯)
                                                 1 - F (z       ¯×z
                                                                z    ¯ -  
We then add one to the mean of team size to also capture the team leader as part of the team.
Similarly, we can derive the variance of team size:
                                                                2
                                          ¯ ( n ( z ) - E ( n )) f ( z ) dz
                                          z                                        2- 
                            Var (n) =                                         =      ¯ .
                                                                                     z
                                                              ¯)
                                                       1 - F (z                   -2

We can additionally derive the ratio of Post-PhD income to PhD income as the ratio of average profits of
team leaders to skilled wage of team members. First we obtain the ratio of team leader profit to skilled
wage for an individual with talent z:

                                           H ( z, t )    z-1
                                                      = 1    .
                                          ws ( t )        ¯ 
                                                       2  z
Then we compute the average profits of team leaders to skilled wage of team members for researchers in
the economy:

                                  H ( z,t )
                               ¯
                               z ws ( t )
                                            dz    1            1 -1               
                                                 =                                   z f (z)dz
                                       ¯)
                                1 - F (z          2         ¯ 1-  
                                                            z                 ¯
                                                                              z
                                                           
                                                 = 1
                                                  2        

   Finally, we can obtain the PhD skill-premium as the ratio of skilled wage to unskilled wage:

                                                     1-                1
                                                 -                                    3                   1
                  ws ( t )   1-     1-                                1 + 2
                                                                                      +  +2         I   1 + 2
                           =                                ¯
                                                            z                 2 3 1                             .
                  wu ( t )                                  -1                                      r

C.6     Model Derivations for the Case where Some Individuals with Assortative Match
        of Parental Resources and IQ Cannot Afford Education
In the main text, we derive equilibrium equations under the assumption that  is large enough so that all
individuals with an assortative match between parental resources and IQ can afford education. Here we
study the more general case where some assortatively matched individuals cannot afford education. In
particular, suppose that parental resources for the group of assortatively matched follow the same Pareto
CDF as for the individuals with random match of parental resources and IQ. We will also assume that


                                                            55
    Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


~ =  . Then, individuals whose parental resources are assortatively matched to IQ can afford education

only if they are in the top of the IQ distribution. More precisely, recall that the probability that parents
                                     
                                -1
can afford education is                 . Thus, individuals whose parental resources are assortatively matched to
                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                               -1
IQ can afford education if their IQ is larger than a threshold z such that Pr (z  z) =                                                  . This implies
            
that z =    -1 .   Thus, the fraction of individuals who can afford education in the economy is:

                                                                                                           
                                                     -1                                       -1
                                     (1 - µ )                      +µ            dF (z) =
                                                                          z                   

Following the same steps outlined in the main text, we obtain that the partial equilibrium expression for
¯ is:
z
                               
                               µ    ¯ -
                                   ~z                                    ¯z
                                                                      if z
                          N=                       
                                                1
                                 (1 - µ )  -        z¯ - + µ z-          ¯<z
                                                                      if z


where:
                                                                                 +
                                                          1          w^s              ^
                                                        =                                .
                                                          E          w^u             w^u

   The labor market clearing equations for team members becomes:

                                                                                         
                                            -1                                                                             N
                             (1 - µ )                          n(z) f (z)dz + µ                      n(z) f (z)dz      =
                   +                                    ¯
                                                        z                                     ¯}
                                                                                        max{z,z                            +

      ¯  z we default to the case we already solved in the main text. Thus, we focus on the case z
   If z                                                                                          ¯ < z.
The resulting relationship between wages and prices is:

                                                                                                1
                                                                ¯ )1-  + µ                     + 1     2
                        ws                           (1 - µ ) ( z                     -1                          p
                                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                                      1 + 2
                           = 2                                                                                 3  ¯
                        p         -1                                 ¯ - + µ
                                                            (1 - µ ) z                                           A

while the expression for profits of the team leader is:

                                                                          1- 
                                                                                                  -+
                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                     
                                                           ¯)
                                                (1 - µ ) ( z     +µ                      
                                                                                         -1
                                                                                                      1    2
                                                                                                                   p
                                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                                        1 + 2
                      H ( z ) = z  p 1                                                                          3  ¯            .
                                             -1               ¯  +µ
                                                     (1 - µ ) z -                                                 A

   Substituting these expressions into the formula for  we obtain :


                                                                                                                                       ~ - 2
                                                                                                           1- 
                                                                                                                                     1 +
                   1                    3
                                             ~ +1
                                                        1-         ~ +1                  ¯)
                                                                              (1 - µ ) ( z     +µ                                       1   2

           =
                       ~
                        3 I
                                             1 + 2
                                                                                                                        -1
                                                                                                                                    
                   E 1 2  r                              r                 -1               ¯  +µ
                                                                                   (1 - µ ) z -



              +                                      
      ~                                        -1                ¯- + µ . Plugging in  into this expression we obtain:
where          .     Recall that N =                    (1 - µ ) z


                                                                      56
           Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth




                                                                                                                    1 ~ - 2
                    ~
                                     ~ +1                 ~ +1                                                                                           1 ~ - 2
       -1         1 2            3           1-                                                                     1 + 2                           1-
                         3 I                                                                        1- 
                                     1 + 2                                                                                                 -             1 + 2
N=                                                                                             ¯)
                                                                                    (1 - µ ) ( z          +µ                           ¯
                                                                                                                              (1 - µ ) z       +µ
                  E        r                  r                   -1                                           -1

                                                                       ¯ for the case z
     Solving this expression delivers the general equilibrium value of z              ¯ < z.


     C.7     Derivation of Equation (1)
     We describe a simple model of Schumpeterian endogenous growth that delivers the benchmark Equation
     (1) for the effect of R&D subsidies on the rate of economic growth in standard endogenous growth models.
         Assume that time is discrete and, in each period, there is a fixed number L of individuals that live only
     for one period. Final good Yt is produced competitively according to the production function:

                                                                
                                                          Yt = xt ( A t L t )1- 

     where At is productivity and xt is the amount of the intermediate good used in final good production.
     The price of the final good is normalized to 1. The intermediate product is produced by a monopolist
     using the final good as the only input with one-for-one technology. The monopolist maximizes expected
     profits subject to the demand:

                                                max pt xt - xt
                                                pt , xt
                                                             -1
                                                s.t. pt =  xt   ( A t L t )1- 

     We obtain that intermediate profits are:

                                                              t =  LAt

                           1+ 
     where   (1 - ) 1- . In each period a potential entrant attempts to innovate and create a more
     productive version of the intermediate product. If innovation at time t is successful, productivity of the
     intermediate good increases up to At =  At-1 , where  > 1. The probability that innovation is successful
     depends on the amount of resources spent on R&D. The cost of doing R&D and generating a successful
     innovation with probability µ is:

                                                                                1
                                                                        µ       
                                                          Rt (µ) =                  At
                                                                        

     where   (0, 1) and  > 0 is R&D productivity. The maximization problem for a potential entrant is :

                                                                            µ       1/
                                                max µ LAt -                               At
                                                  µ                         

     which delivers the innovation rate:
                                                                                      1
                                                    µ = ( L) 1-  1-




                                                                   57
     Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


The expected productivity growth rate can be expressed as:

                                                 A t - A t -1
                                       g=E                          = µ  (  - 1).
                                                     A t -1

Now suppose that the government introduces a subsidy s to R&D. Then the problem of the potential
entrant becomes

                                                                        µ   1/
                                        max µ LAt - (1 - s)                      At
                                          µ                             

and innovation rate becomes:

                                                                µ
                                                   µs =              
                                                          ( 1 - s ) 1- 

Thus we can obtain that the expected growth rate upon the introduction of the subsidy becomes

                                                                
                                                   gs =              
                                                          ( 1 - s ) 1- 
                          1
where  = ( L) 1-  1- (1 - ). Taking log on both sides we obtain

                                                                          
                              ln( gs ) = ln( ) -      ln(1 - s)  ln( ) +    s
                                                   1-                    1-

It follows that :

                                               ln( gs )   g (s)   
                                                        =       
                                                s         g(s)   1-

For the value of the parameter of R&D productivity  = 0.5, we obtain the expression from Equation (1):

                                                     g (s)
                                                            1.
                                                     g(s)


D      Details on Transitional Dynamics
In this section, we present the algorithm used to solve for transitional dynamics of the equilibrium of the
economy upon the introduction of a permanent subsidy. We solve the transition dynamics numerically
by guessing a vector of cutoffs {z  ¯ (t)}t along the transition and verifying whether the implied wages
are consistent with individuals' decisions. We then apply the following steps to numerically solve for
transitional dynamics.

                                  ¯ (t)}t along the transition
    1. Guess a vector of cutoffs {z

    2. Obtain a vector of taste-probabilities {(t)}t consistent with the guess for cutoffs, i.e. taste-probabilities
       must satisfy:



                                                         ¯ (t)) × µ
                                          N (t) = Pr (z  z        ~ (t) × (t)


                                                           58
 Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


3. Solve for labor market clearing along the transition at every point in time  given thresholds and
   probabilities:

                                                                                                                                 N
                                                                      ~ (t)(t)
                                                            H ( t,  ) µ                     n(z,  ) f (z)dzdt =
                                         +           0                              ¯(t)
                                                                                    z                                            +

  where H (t,  ) indicates the fraction of team leaders at time  from cohort t. Then solve recursively
      p( )
  for w ( ) along the transition:
           s


                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                      1 + 2
                                                                                          -1
                                        1                                                 N
                              p( )                                                                                                             
                                      =                                                                                                        
                                        2                                                                                                      
                                                                                    3
                              ws (  )                            I (1+s)(1- )       1         t
                                                          3           r                      0
                                                                                                                        ¯ ( t )1- 
                                                                                                                   ~ (t)z
                                                                                                  H ( t,  )  ( t ) µ

  from this we also obtain that profits for team leaders along the transition are given by:


                                                                                        2                                                 3
                                                         p( )                           1            (1 + s)(1 -  ) I                     1
                                         ( ) = 1 p( ) 2                                           3 
                                                         ws (  )                                             r

4. Obtain the implied taste-probabilities given the wages and profits. An individual born at time b will
   be indifferent between becoming a researcher or a production worker if:

                                                                                            V phd (z, b) = V worker (b) + ln( )(b)
                                                                                                                      
           e-(+)(t-b) e-(t-b) ln ws (t) + (1 - e-(t-b) )ln( H ,t z) dt =                                                 e-(+)(t-b) [(ln wu (t))] dt + ln( )
    b                                                                                                             b

  Normalize wages and profits by p(t) and rearrange to obtain:

                                               ws ( t )                      (t)      ln(z)                                                                             wu ( t )
           e-(+)(t-b) e-(t-b) ln                        + (1 - e-(t-b) ) ln( H ) dt +       =                                                    e-(+)t (ln                      ) dt + ln( )
    b                                          p(t)                          p(t)                                                         b                              p(t)

  We are interested in computing the probability:

                                                               Pr (ln( )  V phd (z) - V worker ) =
                                                                                 phd ( z ) -V worker
                                                            = Pr (   
                                                                         e  (V                          ))

                                                                                                      (+)(++)
  Recall the following error dist:                              U (0, Ez), where                              .                then:

                                         -(+)(t-b)                                       ,t                             -(+)(t-b)                       w u,t
                                       b e            e-(t-b) ln
                                                                     ws (t)
                                                                            +(1-e-t )ln( pH          ) dt+ ln(z)
                                                                                                                 -    b e                        (ln            ) dt
               Pr (          e                                        p(t)                (t)                                                           p(t)           )=
                                          -(+)(t-b)                     w s,t              ,t                  -(+)(t-b)                      w u,t
                                        b e               e-(t-b) ln          +(1-e-t )ln( pH        ) dt-   b e                       (ln            ) dt
               Pr (           ze                                        p(t)                (t)                                               p(t)            )=
                               -(+)(t-b)                 w s,t                  ,t                    -(+)(t-b)                w u,t
                             b e             e-t ln            +(1-e-(t-b) )ln( pH      ) dt-       b e                  (ln           ) dt
                      e                                  p(t)                    (t)                                           p(t)
               =
                                                                           E

5. Verify whether the taste-probabilities obtained in point 4 are consistent with the taste-probabilities



                                                                               59
      Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


       implied by the guess. If not, repeat point 1-4 until reaching convergence.

    6. Once step 5 converges, compute the growth rate along the transition given the obtained values of
                    ¯ (t)}t .
       the cut-off {z


E     Quantitative Appendix
In this section, we discuss the policy counterfactuals in the quantitative section of the model. We first
address the inputs for subsidies which we use in Section 4.4, then discuss in greater detail the steady state
policy comparisons.


E.1    Policy Values for Comparison Non-Targeted Moments
Starting in 2002, the Danish government introduced a number of education and innovation policies. We
use the outcome of policy interventions as an out-of-sample test of our model. We group the policies into
R&D subsidies, education subsidies, and slot expansion.
    We use the following procedure to estimate policy rates from the data. To compute the R&D subsidy
rate, we proceed in multiple steps. First, we compute the expenditures of the government for grants under
the "Innovation Danmark" programs for the period 2002-2010. For most grants, we observe the exact
amount received by firms in the program. Second, for those grants for which the expenditure is missing,
we impute the median value of grants under the same program. Third, to apportion expenditures over
each year, we use the year in which the program rolled out and, for those programs that last more than
one year, we spread the expenditures proportionally for each year of duration. Fourth, we add up the
expenditures for all grants year by year and obtain yearly government expenditures for R&D subsidies.
Fifth, to convert the expenditures into subsidy rates, we divide the total expenditure in subsidies in a given
year by the total business R&D expenditures reported by DST. We then compute the average subsidy rate
between 2002 and 2010 and obtain a value of 1.22%.
    We follow a similar procedure to compute the educational subsidy rates. We consider grants within
"Innovation Danmark" aimed at PhD students ("Business PhD" grant and "Business Postdoc" grant, see
Appendix A for further details). After repeating the first four steps outlined above, we then convert year
expenditures into subsidy rates by dividing the total expenditure in education subsidies in a given year
by the total cost of education for enrolled PhD students computed according to our measure of cost.
Although we do not need to make assumptions on the cost of education to solve the model, estimating
the costs are necessary to understand the budgetary costs of each policy. In Appendix B, we explain in
detail how educational costs are backed out. Finally, we compute the average subsidy rate between 2002
and 2010 and we obtain a value of 12.5%.
    For the increase in PhD slots, we compute the percentage increase in PhD enrollment from our data.
PhD enrollment doubled from 2002-2012; however, the increase was not sudden, but rather gradual over
the ten years. Thus, we feed a corresponding gradual increase in slots to our model, as displayed in figure
E1.
    We then feed the estimated time-series of policy rates to our model and we solve for the equilibrium
of the economy along the transitional dynamics since the introduction of the subsidy. Note that, in order
to solve for the transitional dynamics, we need to know the value of subsidy rates in every time period



                                                     60
    Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth




        Figure E1: Increase in PhD slots for Non-Target Moment Exercise from the Data
                                                    0.02                                                                                           2600
                                                                                     PhD slots Model
                                                    0.02                             PhD slots Data                                                2400
                                                    0.02
                                                                                                                                                   2200




                               PhD Slots Model
                                                    0.02




                                                                                                                                                           PhD Slots Data
                                                                                                                                                   2000
                                                    0.02

                                                    0.02                                                                                           1800

                                                    0.01
                                                                                                                                                   1600
                                                    0.01
                                                                                                                                                   1400
                                                    0.01
                                                                                                                                                   1200
                                                    0.01

                                                    0.01                                                                                           1000
                                                       2002                       2003   2004    2005   2006    2007   2008    2009      2010   2011
                                                                                                          Years

until the economy reaches the new steady state. We assume that, for the time periods after our data ends,
the government continues to operate the R&D and education subsidy at a rate equal to the average rate
that we observe between 2002-2010 and that the slots are maintained at the new level observed in 2011.
   The 2002 government policy intervention discussed in Section 4.4 used the three policies from this
paper simultaneously. Figure 18 illustrated how our model replicates fairly well the decline in average
IQ of the pool of individuals who enrolled in a PhD even though it did not directly target this decline.
Here, we use the transitional dynamics to decompose the contribution of each policy to the decline in the
IQs of enrolling PhDs. We use the same policy rates estimated from the data as for Figure 18, and we
compute the counterfactual change in average IQ of PhD students under different choices of policy mix,
as displayed in Figure E2.


        Figure E2: Policy Intervention: Decomposition of the Contribution of each policy
                                                                           0.85
                                                                                                                               Slots + R&D + Edu
                                                                                                                               Slots Only
                                             Inventor Avg. IQ Percentile




                                                                           0.80




                                                                           0.75




                                                                           0.70




                                                                           0.65




                                                                           0.60
                                                                              2002   2003       2004    2005    2006    2007      2008      2009    2010
                                                                                                               Years


    By 2007, the combination of R&D subsidies, education subsidies, and the increases in PhD slots chosen
by the government led to a decline in IQ of PhD students from the 83rd to the 78th percentile of the IQ
distribution . If the government had only increased the PhD slots, our model predicts IQ would have
declined much more strongly, all the way to the 70th percentile of the distribution. Thus, the government
intervention expanded the pool of talent in the economy while mitigating the decline in average talent by
using a mix of complementary policies that target different frictions to the allocation of talent. The fact that
there was a significant decline in average IQ, however, shows that the economy already had well-allocated


                                                                                                               61
      Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


individuals to research prior to the policy intervention.


E.2    Steady State Results in terms of p.p of GDP
In Figure E3, we display the steady state impact of the introduction of policies by expressing the magnitude
of policies in terms of p.p. of GDP. In Appendix C.4, we provide details on the computation of the revenue
equivalence across policies. We observe that, as explained in Section 5.1, for smaller budgets, a subsidy


                                                          Figure E3: Comparing subsidies at different budget levels.
                                         1                                                                                 2.20

                                       0.95                                                                                2.10
         Inventor Avg. IQ percentile




                                        0.9
                                                                                                                           2.00
                                       0.85




                                                                                                             Growth Rate
                                                                                                                           1.90
                                        0.8

                                       0.75                                                                                1.80

                                        0.7                                                                                1.70

                                       0.65
                                                                                                                           1.60
                                        0.6
                                                                                   R&D Subsidy                                                               R&D Subsidy
                                                                                   Edu Subsidy                             1.50                              Subsidy to cost of education
                                       0.55
                                                                                   Increase Slots                                                            Increase Slots

                                        0.5                                                                                1.40
                                              0   1   2       3     4     5    6         7          8                             0   1   2       3     4     5        6         7          8

                                                          Subsidy as p.p. of GDP                                                              Subsidy as p.p. of GDP



                                        (a) inventor quality and subsidy                                                              (b) growth and subsidy



to the cost of education is the most effective in stimulating growth in steady state. However, for large
enough budgets, the effectiveness of education subsidies levels off. This happens when the education
subsidy has effectively enabled all individuals to afford the cost of education: subsidizing education any
further is ineffective because there are no more financially constrained individuals. The effectiveness of
expanding slots also levels off for large enough budgets. This happens when the slot expansion is so large
that there are more open slots in the economy than individuals who are financially unconstrained and
have a taste for research and thus willing to fill them. Finally, the effectiveness of R&D does not level off,
but it is reduced when subsidies are so large to convince anyone in the economy to prefer research over
the production sector. Even at that point, R&D subsidies are still somewhat effective, because they can
stimulate the purchase of lab equipment.
    Beyond comparing the subsidies overall, here we present the effect of subsidies when computed as a
subsidy rate. Figure E4 shows the response of growth rate (primary axis) and inventor quality (secondary
axis) for different policies.
    In line with the predictions from the theoretical analysis of the policies in Section 3.2, we find that
increasing education subsidy and R&D subsidy rates and increasing the number of slots leads to an
increase in the growth rate. However, the effect of different policies on the composition of the inventor
pool varies. Both the subsidy to the cost of education and the R&D subsidy result in higher quality of
average inventors, but they operate through different channels: the former affects talented but financially
constrained individuals, while the latter affects talented individuals with a distaste for research. Increasing
the number of slots results in an expansion of the number of researchers, but at the cost of a declining
average talent of the research pool.


                                                                                                        62
                           Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth




                                                                                                                Figure E4: Steady State Policy Comparisons
                    1.95                                                                                                0.94                                                      1.90                                                                                                  0.96                                 1.54                                                                                   0.90
                                                                                                                                                                                                Growth Rate                                                                                                                              Growth Rate
                    1.90                                                                                                                                                          1.85          Inventor Avg. IQ percentile                                                                                                              Inventor Avg. IQ percentile
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1.53                                                                                   0.85




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Inventor Avg. IQ percentile
                                                                                                                                Inventor Avg. IQ percentile




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Inventor Avg. IQ percentile
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.94
                                                                                                                        0.92
                    1.85
                                                                                                                                                                                  1.80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1.53                                                                                   0.80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Growth Rate, p.p.
Growth Rate, p.p.




                                                                                                                                                              Growth Rate, p.p.
                    1.80                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.92
                                                                                                                        0.90                                                      1.75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1.52                                                                                   0.75
                    1.75
                                                                                                                                                                                  1.70                                                                                                  0.90
                    1.70                                                                                                0.88                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.52                                                                                   0.70
                                                                                                                                                                                  1.65                                                                                                  0.88
                    1.65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1.51                                                                                   0.65
                                                                                                                        0.86                                                      1.60
                    1.60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.86
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1.51                                                                                   0.60
                                                                                                                                                                                  1.55
                    1.55
                                                                                                                        0.84
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.84                                 1.50                                                                                   0.55
                                                                                      Growth Rate                                                                                 1.50
                    1.50
                                                                                      Inventor Avg. IQ percentile
                    1.45                                                                                                0.82                                                      1.45                                                                                                  0.82                                 1.50                                                                              0.50
                           0      0.1                 0.2    0.3   0.4    0.5   0.6       0.7     0.8     0.9       1                                                                    0    0.1     0.2            0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6   0.7           0.8                0.9   1                                           0.01    0.0105     0.011      0.0115       0.012   0.0125     0.013        0.0135
                                                             R&D Subsidy Rate, s




                                                      (a) R&D Subsidies                                                                                                                      (b) Educational Subsidies                                                                                                                     (c) University Slots


E.3                                Growth-maximizing policy
Section 5.2 discussed the growth-maximizing policy mix for a budget of 2.5% of GDP. Here, we discuss
the growth-maximizing policy mix for smaller budgets. Figure 19 shows that for small budgets, when
slots are fixed at the baseline level of 0.01, it is optimal to spend the entire budget on subsidies to the cost
of education. This result still holds when we allow for the number of slots to be increased as well. In
Figure E5a we show the growth-maximizing policy mix at a budget of 0.5% of GDP. Growth is maximized
when spending the entire budget on subsidies to education. For intermediate budget levels ( larger than
0.5% but smaller than approximately 2% of GDP), it is optimal to mix subsidies to the cost of education
and to R&D, but still none of the budget is allocated to expanding PhD slots. For example, Figure E5b
shows the growth-maximizing policy mix at a budget of 1% of GDP. Growth is maximized when splitting
the budget equally between subsidies to the cost of education and to R&D. Finally, for budgets larger than
2% of GDP, it is growth maximizing to use all three policies instruments (expansion of PhD slots, subsidy
to education and R&D), as exemplified in Figure 20 .


                                                                                Figure E5: Growth-Maximizing policy different budget levels
                                                     1                                                                                                                                              1.95                                                                 1                                                                                                                     2.00
                                                                                                                               Budget Share Slots                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Budget Share Slots
                                                    0.9                                                                        Budget Share Edu                                                     1.90                                                                0.9                                                                                            Budget Share Edu        1.95
                                                                                                                               Budget Share R&D                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Budget Share R&D
                                                    0.8                                                                        Growth Rate                                                                                                                              0.8                                                                                            Growth Rate             1.90
                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.85
                               Fraction of Budget




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Fraction of Budget




                                                    0.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.7                                                                                                                    1.85
                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.80
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Growth Rate




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Growth Rate



                                                    0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.6                                                                                                                    1.80
                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.75
                                                    0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.5                                                                                                                    1.75
                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.70
                                                    0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.4                                                                                                                    1.70
                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.65
                                                    0.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.3                                                                                                                    1.65
                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.60
                                                    0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.2                                                                                                                    1.60

                                                    0.1                                                                                                                                             1.55                                                                0.1                                                                                                                    1.55

                                                     0                                                                                                                              1.50                                                                                 0                                                                                                                     1.50
                                                    0.0098     0.01      0.0102 0.0104 0.0106 0.0108                       0.011                                         0.0112 0.0114                                                                                  0.0095          0.01                     0.0105                0.011      0.0115        0.012        0.0125         0.013
                                                                                  Number of slots                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Number of slots



                                                                      (a) Budget = 0.5 pp GDP                                                                                                                                                                                                      (b) Budget = 1 pp GDP




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 63
      Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth


E.4     Robustness: Calibration Parameters Estimates and Targeted Moments Fit
In this section, we present the estimated parameters and target moments for the robustness exercises
outlined in Section 6.


E.4.1   Alternative Estimates of Parental Income Including Maternal Income

Here we use the sum of paternal and maternal income as a measure of parental income. This delivers a
higher assortative matching parameter. The recalibration can be seen in Tables E2 and E3.


                                              Table E2: Moments
                    Moment                                         Data      Model
                    PhD Share of the Labor Force ( N )             0.01       0.01
                    Mean Percentile IQ of PhDs (Fact 1+4)          0.83       0.85
                    Corr(Parent Income, Child IQ) (µ, Facts 2+3)   0.21       0.22
                    Mean/SD of Parent Income (Facts 2+3)           1.20       1.22
                    Mean Team Size (Fact 7)                        2.25       2.23
                    Variance of Team Size (Fact 7)                 3.13       3.12
                    Peak Year Innovation Post PhD (Fact 8)          16        16
                    Pr Innovation at Peak (Fact 8)                 0.01       0.01
                    PhD Graduate/Student Income                    1.66       1.66
                    Skill Premium of PhDs                          0.75       0.64
                    Profits to Wages                               0.07       0.02
                    Growth rate                                    0.015     0.015




                                                         64
    Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth




                                        Table E3: Parameter Values
                    Parameter                        Description                      Value
                                        -- Panel A. External Calibration --
                                                     Discount rate                    0.030
                        r                            Interest rate                    0.030
                                                Labor share output                    0.106
                                        -- Panel B. Internal Calibration --
                        N                  PhD share of the labor force               0.010
                                  Rate at which researcher becomes a team leader      0.036
                                                      Death rate                      0.044
                        1               Skilled labor share idea production           0.511
                        2                 Worker share idea production                0.379
                        3              Lab equipment share idea production            0.110
                                                     Pareto shape                     2.633
                                                  Innovation rate                     0.046
                                               Cost of raising capital                0.011
                                          Labor efficiency in production              0.024
                        E                   Preference shock parameter                3.299
                        µ         Fraction assortative match IQ - parental income     0.15
                                    Income/IQ ratio for assortatively matched         7.534
                                    Notes: All parameters are estimated jointly.


E.4.2   Non-PhD Innovation

In this section we introduce an exogenous ideas arrival rate,  , which accounts for innovation coming from
individuals without higher education. To calibrate the additional parameter, we add one target moment,
which is the share of patents applications from PhDs, which is 23% in our data. The resulting moments
and calibrated parameters are displayed in Tables E4 and E5.


                                              Table E4: Moments
                    Moment                                                    Data      Model
                    PhD Share of the Labor Force ( N )                        0.01        0.01
                    Mean Percentile IQ of PhDs (Fact 1+4)                     0.83        0.83
                    Corr(Parent Income, Child IQ) (µ, Facts 2+3)              0.18        0.19
                    Mean/SD of Parent Income (Facts 2+3)                      1.20        1.23
                    PhD Patent Share (Fact 5)                                 0.23        0.23
                    Mean Team Size (Fact 7)                                   2.47        2.50
                    Variance of Team Size (Fact 7)                            3.62        3.60
                    Peak Year Innovation Post PhD (Fact 8)                     16            16
                    Pr Innovation at Peak (Fact 8)                            0.01        0.01
                    PhD Graduate/Student Income                               1.66        1.69
                    Skill Premium of PhDs                                     0.75        0.74
                    Profits to Wages                                          0.10        0.11
                    Growth rate                                               0.015      0.015




                                                          65
    Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth




                                      Table E5: Parameter Values
                    Parameter                     Description                     Value
                                     -- Panel A. External Calibration --
                                                 Discount rate                    0.030
                        r                         Interest rate                   0.030
                                              Labor share output                  0.106
                                      -- Panel B. Internal Calibration --
                        N                PhD share of the labor force             0.010
                                Rate at which researcher becomes a team leader    0.031
                                                   Death rate                     0.047
                        1             Skilled labor share idea production         0.459
                        2               Worker share idea production              0.409
                        3           Lab equipment share idea production           0.132
                                                 Pareto shape                     2.561
                                                Innovation rate                   0.053
                                             Cost of raising capital              0.086
                                        Labor efficiency in production            0.107
                        E                Preference shock parameter               2.863
                        µ       Fraction assortative match IQ - parental income   0.111
                                  Income/IQ ratio for assortatively matched       0.016
                                            Exogenous idea arrival                0.007
                                  Notes: All parameters are estimated jointly.


E.4.3   Non-PhD Innovation Responds to Policy

Here we recalibrate the model where the exogenous stock of ideas responds to a change in the talent pool.
The idea here is that when individuals are pulled away from non-inventing occupations, they may reduce
their "inventiveness" in those occupations. Thus, the overall targeted growth rate takes this into account
in Tables E6 and E7.




                                                       66
Tapping into Talent: Coupling Education and Innovation Policies for Economic Growth




                                       Table E6: Moments
             Moment                                                 Data        Model
             PhD Share of the Labor Force ( N )                     0.01         0.01
             Mean Percentile IQ of PhDs (Fact 1+4)                  0.83         0.83
             Corr(Parent Income, Child IQ) (µ, Facts 2+3)           0.18         0.19
             Mean/SD of Parent Income (Facts 2+3)                   1.20         1.23
             PhD Patent Share (Fact 5)                              0.23         0.23
             Mean Team Size (Fact 7)                                2.47         2.50
             Variance of Team Size (Fact 7)                         3.62         3.60
             Peak Year Innovation Post PhD (Fact 8)                    16         16
             Pr Innovation at Peak (Fact 8)                         0.01         0.01
             PhD Graduate/Student Income                            1.66         1.69
             Skill Premium of PhDs                                  0.75         0.74
             Profits to Wages                                       0.10         0.11
             Growth rate                                            0.015        0.015




                                  Table E7: Parameter Values
             Parameter                        Description                    Value
                           -- Panel A. External Calibration --
                                           Discount rate                     0.030
                 r                            Interest rate                  0.030
                                         Labor share output                  0.106
                            -- Panel B. Internal Calibration --
                 N                  PhD share of the labor force             0.010
                           Rate at which researcher becomes a team leader    0.031
                                               Death rate                    0.047
                 1               Skilled labor share idea production         0.459
                 2                 Worker share idea production              0.409
                 3              Lab equipment share idea production          0.132
                                              Pareto shape                   2.561
                                          Innovation rate                    0.053
                                       Cost of raising capital               0.086
                                   Labor efficiency in production            0.107
                 E                  Preference shock parameter               2.863
                 µ         Fraction assortative match IQ - parental income   0.111
                             Income/IQ ratio for assortatively matched       0.016
                                       Exogenous idea arrival                0.0072
                             Notes: All parameters are estimated jointly.




                                                   67
