                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      IS THE SELFISH LIFE-CYCLE MODEL MORE APPLICABLE IN JAPAN AND,
                      IF SO, WHY? A LITERATURE SURVEY

                                     Charles Yuji Horioka

                                     Working Paper 27869
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27869


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 2020




This paper is based in large part on my keynote lecture at the Annual Meeting of the Society of
Economics of the Household (SEHO), my keynote lecture at the International Conference on
Business, Economics and Finance, School of Business and Economics, Universiti Brunei
Darussalam, Brunei, my invited lecture at the Singapore Economic Review Conference (SERC),
my invited lecture at the Kyoto University Faculty of Economics 100th Anniversary International
Conference, my lecture in the "Inequality and ...? Lecture Series" at the European Investment
Bank (Luxembourg), my special lecture at the Autumn Meeting of the Japanese Economic
Association (JEA), my webinar at Xavier University Bhubaneswar (India), and Horioka (2020). I
am grateful to Yuichi Abiko, Conchita d'Ambrosio, Kazuo Ogawa, Ryosuke Okamoto, Shovan
Ray, Etsuro Shioji, Takashi Unayama, and other participants of these conferences, especially
Shoshana Grossbard, Yoko Niimi, and three anonymous referees for their valuable comments.
This work was supported by JSPS (Japan Society for the Promotion of Science) KAKENHI Grant
Numbers 18H00870 and 20H01513. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Charles Yuji Horioka. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Is the Selfish Life-Cycle Model More Applicable in Japan and, If So, Why? A Literature Survey
Charles Yuji Horioka
NBER Working Paper No. 27869
September 2020
JEL No. D11,D12,D14,D15,D64,E21,J14

                                           ABSTRACT

The selfish life-cycle model or hypothesis is, together with the dynasty or altruism model, the
most widely used theoretical model of household behavior in economics, but does this model
apply in the case of a country like Japan, which is said to have closer family ties than other
countries? In this paper, we first provide a brief exposition of the simplest version of the selfish
life-cycle model and then survey the literature on household saving and bequest behavior in Japan
in order to answer this question. The paper finds that almost all of the available evidence suggests
that the selfish life-cycle model applies to at least some extent in all countries but that there is
more consistent support for this model in Japan than in the United States and other countries. It
then explores possible explanations for why the life-cycle model is more consistently supported
in Japan than in other countries, attributing this finding to government policies, institutional
factors, economic factors, demographic factors, and cultural factors. Finally, it shows that the
findings of the paper have many important implications for economic modeling and for
government tax and expenditure policies.


Charles Yuji Horioka
Research Institute for Economics
 and Business Administration
Kobe University
2-1, Rokkodai, Nada
Kobe 657-8501
JAPAN
and NBER
horioka@rieb.kobe-u.ac.jp
1. Introduction

The selfish life-cycle model or hypothesis is, together with the dynasty or altruism model
of Barro (1974) that assumes the presence of intergenerational altruism, the most widely
used theoretical model of household behavior in economics. Many researchers have
investigated whether or not this model applies in North America, Europe, and elsewhere
(see, for example, Modigliani (1975), Deaton (1992, 2005), Browning and Lusardi
(1996), Hayashi (1997b), Attanasio (1999), Browning and Crossley (2001), Baranzini
(2005), Attanasio and Weber (2010), and Jappelli and Pistaferri (2017) for useful
surveys). However, whether or not the selfish life-cycle model applies in the case of a
country like Japan, which is said to have closer family ties than other countries is another
question.

The purpose of this paper is to provide a brief exposition of the simplest version of the
selfish life-cycle model and to then survey the literature on household saving and
bequest behavior in Japan to shed light on whether or not the selfish life-cycle model
applies in the case of Japan. There have been many comprehensive surveys of the
literature on household saving, consumption, and bequest behavior in Japan (for
example, Hayashi (1986, 1992, 1997a), Horioka (1984, 1990, 1993, 2008a), and Ogawa
and Horioka (1996)), but this paper is unique in focusing on the question of whether or
not the selfish life-cycle model applies and in surveying the literature on a wide variety
of approaches including not only studies of saving behavior (e.g., studies of the impact
of the age structure of the population on the saving rate, the saving behavior of the retired
elderly, saving motives, and the importance of borrowing (liquidity) constraints) but also
studies of bequest behavior (e.g., studies of the prevalence of bequests, bequest motives,
and tests of altruism). I emphasize my own research because, over the years, I have tried
a variety of approaches to test the validity of the selfish life-cycle model.

One view that has its adherents even today is that the laws of Western economics
(including the selfish life-cycle model) do not apply in the case of Japan, that the
Japanese are not rational utility maximizers, and that the economic behavior of the
Japanese is largely determined by the country's unique culture and social norms,
especially its Confucian heritage (see Morishima, 1982, and Katzner, 1999, 2008).1 For
example, a common view is that Japan's high household saving rate is attributable to
national character, culture, or Confucian teachings concerning frugality (see, for
example, Horioka, 1990, 2019, Garon, 1997, pp. 164-165). Thus, it is of great interest
to examine whether or not the selfish life-cycle model applies in the case of a non-
Western country such as Japan despite enormous differences in culture and social norms.

To preview the main findings of this paper, it finds that almost all of the available
evidence suggests that the selfish life-cycle model applies at least to some extent in all
countries but that there is more consistent support for this model in Japan than in the
United Sates and other countries. Thus, the answer to the question posed in the title of

1
  See Guiso, et al. (2006) for a more general discussion of how culture affects economic outcomes
by affecting people's beliefs, values, or preferences and for a brief discussion of the impact of
religiosity (an important component of culture) on attitudes toward thrift and actual saving behavior.
                                                 1
this paper is an unqualified "yes." The paper then explores possible explanations for why
the selfish life-cycle model is more consistently supported in Japan than in other
countries, attributing this finding to government policies, institutional factors, economic
factors, demographic factors, and cultural factors. Finally, it shows that the findings of
the paper have many important implications for economic modeling and for government
tax and expenditure policies.

This paper is organized as follows: we provide a brief exposition of the simplest version
of the selfish life-cycle model in section 2; we survey the literature on the impact of the
age structure of the population on the saving rate in section 3, that on the saving behavior
of the retired elderly in section 4, that on saving motives in section 5, that on the
prevalence of bequests in section 6, that on bequest motives in section 7, that on tests of
altruism in section 8, and that on the importance of borrowing constraints in section 9;
we explore possible explanations for why there is more consistent support for the selfish
life-cycle model in Japan than there is in other countries in section 10; and we summarize
our findings and discuss the implications thereof for economic modelling and for
government tax and expenditure policies in section 11.


2. The Selfish Life-Cycle Model

In this section, we provide a brief exposition of the simplest version of the selfish life-
cycle model, which is primarily attributable to Franco Modigliani and his collaborators
(for more details, see Modigliani and Brumberg (1954, 1980), Ando and Modigliani
(1963), Modigliani (1966), Modigliani (1975), Baranzini (2005), and Deaton (2005)).

In a nutshell, this model assumes that individuals are rational, forward-looking, and
selfish, that they maximize their own lifetime utility subject to a lifetime budget
constraint, and that they neither receive nor leave bequests and other intergenerational
transfers. Since most individuals retire at some point in their lives, this model requires
individuals to save part of their earnings during their working years to prepare for living
expenses during retirement and to finance their living expenses during retirement by
drawing down (decumulating) their previously accumulated assets.

In order to simplify the model as much as possible, we ignore the childhood years and
assume that individuals graduate from school and start working at age 0 and that they
work from age 0 until age R, earning Y yen each year, part of which they use to finance
their current consumption and part of which they save in preparation for their living
expenses during retirement. We further assume that individuals retire at the exogenous
retirement age R, that they finance their living expenses during retirement by drawing
down their previously accumulated assets, and that they die with certainty at age L.
Finally, we assume that individuals smooth their consumption throughout their lives,
consuming C yen per year from age 0 until age L, and that they are selfish, receiving no
bequests or inter vivos transfers from their parents and leaving no bequests or inter vivos
transfers to their children (see Figure 1).

If we assume that the interest rate is zero for the sake of simplicity, these assumptions

                                             2
imply that lifetime income will be Y*R and that lifetime consumption will be C*L. Thus,
the lifetime budget constraint can be expressed as follows:

(1)         Y*R = C*L

If equation (1) is solved for C, we can obtain the following expression for C, which
denotes the annual amount of consumption:

(2)         C = (R/L)*Y

In words, consumption will be a constant fraction of income, with that fraction being
equal to the ratio of one's working years to total lifespan.

SW, the annual saving of working individuals can be calculated by subtracting
consumption C from income Y and substituting the expression in equation (2) for C:

(3)         SW = Y ­ C = (1 ­ R/L)*Y = ((L ­ R)/L)*Y

In words, the saving of working individuals will be a constant fraction of their income,
with that fraction being equal to the ratio of their retirement span to total lifespan.

Moreover, since individuals are assumed to work for R years, CSW, the cumulative
saving of working individuals, is as follows:

(4)         CSW = R*((L ­ R)/L)*Y = (L ­ R)*(R/L)*Y

As for retired individuals, since they have no income but need to consume, their
consumption will be financed entirely by drawing down their previously accumulated
saving. Thus, SR, the annual (dis)saving of retired individuals, is as follows:

(5)         SR = ­ C = ­ (R/L)*Y

Moreover, since the retirement span of retired individuals is (L ­ R) years, CSR, the
cumulative (dis)saving of retired individuals, is as follows:

(6)         CSR = ­ (L ­ R)*(R/L)*Y

As can be seen by comparing equations (4) and (6), the cumulative saving of working
individuals and the cumulative (dis)saving of retired individuals are precisely equal to
one another in absolute value but have opposite signs. This confirms that the lifetime
budget constraint of individuals is satisfied. This is the same as saying that the area of
the rectangle showing the cumulative saving of individuals during their working years
is exactly equal to the area of the rectangle showing the cumulative (dis)saving of
individuals during their retirement years in Figure 1.

Next, we wish to derive the saving amount and saving rate of the household sector as a

                                            3
whole on the assumption that all households are identical. From equations (3) and (5),
AS, the aggregate saving of the household sector as a whole, is as follows:

(7)         AS = POP(0, R)*((L ­ R)/L)*Y ­ POP(R, L)*(R/L)*Y,

where POP(0, R) = the population aged 0 to R (the working-age population)
     POP(R, L) = the population aged R to L (the retirement-age population)

Furthermore, AY, the aggregate income of the household sector as a whole, is as follows:

(8)        AY = POP(0, R)*Y

Thus, ASY, the saving rate of the household sector as a whole, is as follows:

(9)        ASY = AS/AY = (L ­ R)/L ­ [POP(R, L)/POP(0, R)]*(R/L)

In other words, the saving rate of the household sector as a whole should be a function
of the ratio of the retirement-age population to the working-age population, and the
higher is this ratio, the lower should be the household saving rate. Moreover, the
derivative of the household saving rate with respect to this ratio should equal the
negative of the ratio of one's working years to total lifespan.

Thus, we can test whether the selfish life-cycle model applies in the real world by
examining whether or not the age structure of the population (in particular, the ratio of
the retirement-age population to the working-age population) has the expected impact
on the household saving rate.

Thus far, we have simplified our theoretical model by making the following
assumptions:

  (1)     There is no economic growth.
  (2)     There is no public old-age pension system.
  (3)     There is no lifespan uncertainty.

The age structure of the population will have an impact on the household saving rate
even if these simplifying assumptions are relaxed, but what will change is that now other
factors will also affect the household saving rate.

  (1)     If the economy is growing, cohorts born later will have higher lifetime
          incomes than cohorts born earlier, and thus the aggregate saving of cohorts
          that are working and saving will exceed the aggregate dissaving of cohorts that
          are retired and dissaving in absolute value. As a result, if the economy is
          growing, the aggregate saving of the household sector as a whole will be
          positive, and the higher is the economic growth rate, the greater will be the
          aggregate saving of the household sector as a whole.

  (2)     If a public old-age pension system is introduced, there will be less need to save

                                            4
          in preparation for living expenses during retirement, and thus one would
          expect the saving of working-age individuals and the (dis)saving of retired
          individuals to be less than in a world with no public old-age pension system
          (see, for example, Feldstein (1974)).

  (3)     If lifespan is uncertain and individuals are risk-averse, one would expect the
          saving of working-age individuals to be greater and the dissaving of
          retirement-age individuals to be less than in a world with no lifespan
          uncertainty because individuals will be afraid of running out of money before
          they die (see Davies (1981)). This will lead individuals to leave unintended or
          accidental bequests unless they are able to completely annuitize their wealth.


3. Evidence on the Impact of the Age Structure of the Population on the Saving
   Rate

As we showed in the previous section, if the selfish life-cycle model applies, the
household saving rate should be a decreasing function of the ratio of the retirement-age
population to the working-age population. Thus, we can shed light on the applicability
of the selfish life-cycle model by investigating whether or not the age structure of the
population has the expected impact on the saving rate.

The author has used various types of data to investigate the impact of the age structure
of the population on the saving rate, and in this section, we survey this body of work and
consider whether or not the findings are consistent with the selfish life-cycle model. In
subsection 3.1, we discuss papers that make use of cross-country or cross-provincial data,
while in subsection 3.2, we discuss papers that make use of time-series data for Japan.


3.1.    Evidence based on Cross-Country and Cross-Provincial Data

Horioka (1986, 1989) uses data on the member countries of the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) for the 1975-84 period from the
OECD to analyze the determinants of the private saving rate and finds that the ratio of
the retirement-age population to the working-age population has a negative and
statistically significant impact on the private saving rate.

Based on his estimation results, Horioka (1986, 1989) calculates the contribution of each
factor to the difference between Japan's private saving rate and the OECD-wide average
and to the U.S.-Japan saving rate gap (see Table 1). During the 1975-84 time period,
Japan's population was the youngest and her retirement-age population to working-age
population ratio was the lowest among all OECD member countries at the time, and as
Table 1 shows, this can explain virtually all of the difference between Japan's private
saving rate and the OECD-wide average and about half of the U.S.-Japan saving rate
gap.

Similarly, Horioka and Terada-Hagiwara (2012) use panel data on twelve Asian
                                            5
countries for the 1966-2007 period from Penn World Tables to analyze the determinants
of the domestic saving rate, and as in the case of Horioka (1986, 1989), they find that
the ratio of the retirement-age population to the working-age population has a negative
and statistically significant impact on the domestic saving rate.

Finally, Horioka and Wan (2007) use provincial panel data for the 1995-2004 period
from a household survey to analyze the determinants of the household saving rate in
China and find that the impact of the ratio of the retirement-age population to the
working-age population is negative, as expected, but often not statistically significant.

The reader is referred to Loayza, Schmid-Hebbel, and Serven (2000) for a survey of
more recent research and for a comprehensive econometric analysis. Virtually all of the
papers surveyed in this paper as well as the analysis in this paper itself find, as expected,
that the ratio of the retirement-age population to the working-age population has a
negative and statistically significant impact on the private saving rate.


3.2.   Evidence based on Time-Series Data

Horioka (1997) uses time-series data for the 1955-93 period from Japan's National
Accounts to analyze the determinants of Japan's household saving rate and finds that
there is a cointegrating relationship between the household saving rate and the ratio of
the retirement-age population to the working-age population and that this ratio has a
negative and statistically significant impact on the household saving rate (see Horioka
(1991) and Koga (2006) for similar studies for Japan and Modigliani and Cao (2004) for
a similar study for China, all of which obtain broadly consistent results).

Figure 2 shows trends over time in National Accounts data on Japan's household saving
rate for the 1955-2018 period, and as can be seen from this figure, Japan's household
saving rate showed a steady upward trend from 1955 until the mid-1970s, peaking at
23.2%, and showed a steady downward trend thereafter, sometimes even becoming
negative.

The ratio of the retirement-age population to the working-age population in Japan has
shown a steady upward trend over time so Horioka's (1997) finding that this ratio has a
negative and statistically significant impact on the household saving rate implies that the
upward trend in this ratio can explain the downward trend in Japan's household saving
rate since the mid-1970s and that further increases in this ratio will cause further declines
in Japan's household saving rate in future years (see Horioka (1989, 1992)).

As for why Japan's household saving rate showed a steady upward trend from 1955 until
the mid-1970s, Horioka (2008a) argues that it was due to the steady downward trend in
the ratio of minors (those aged 0 to 19) to the working-age population during the same
period, which in turn was due to the decline in the fertility rate. The ratio of minors to
the working-age population would be expected to have a negative impact on the
household saving rate, as in the case of the ratio of the retirement-age population to the
working-age population, because minors contribute to consumption without contributing

                                             6
to income.


3.3.   Summary

In this section, we showed that the ratio of the retirement-age population to the working-
age population has a negative and statistically significant impact on the saving rate
whether one uses cross-country data or time-series data. This not only suggests that the
selfish life-cycle model applies in the case of Japan but also that the low ratio of the
retirement-age population to the working-age population can explain why Japan's
household saving rate was so high in the past and that the sharp increase in this ratio can
explain the sharp decline in Japan's household saving rate since the mid-1970s. Thus,
the selfish life-cycle model can explain the level of, as well as trends over time in,
Japan's household saving rate. However, we should note that the selfish life-cycle model
is not the only theoretical model that predicts that the age structure of the population
will have a significant impact on the household saving rate and thus that, although we
can conclude that the evidence is consistent with the selfish life-cycle model, we cannot
assert that we have unequivocably established that the selfish life-cycle model applies
in the case of Japan.


4. Evidence on the Saving Behavior of the Retired Elderly

The selfish life-cycle model assumes that working individuals save and that retired
individuals dissave. Thus, we can shed light on the applicability of the selfish life-cycle
model by examining the saving behavior of the retired elderly (see Weil (1994) and De
Nardi, French, and Jones (2016) for excellent surveys of this literature). In this section,
we survey studies that examine the saving behavior of the retired elderly in Japan and
consider whether or not their findings are consistent with the selfish life-cycle model.

All of the papers we surveyed find that the retired elderly in Japan dissave, at least after
a certain age, which constitutes evidence in favor of the selfish life-cycle model. For
example, Hayashi, et al. (1988) carefully analyze household-level data from the
"National Survey of Family Income and Expenditure," which is conducted every five
years by the Statistics Bureau of the Japanese Ministry of Internal Affairs and
Communications and find that the elderly start dissaving after the age of 80 whether they
live in nuclear households or extended (three-generation) households. However, Hayashi,
et al. (1988) do not take account of the employment status of respondents, and if they
had confined their sample to the retired elderly, they are likely to have found that the
Japanese elderly start dissaving at an earlier age.

Horioka (2006, 2010) and Horioka and Niimi (2017) analyze tabulated data on the
retired elderly from the "Family Income and Expenditure Survey," which is conducted
by the Statistic Bureau of the Japanese Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications,
and find that the saving rate of such households has fluctuated in the -40 to -10% range
and that their decumulation rate of financial assets has fluctuated in the 1 to 3% range

                                             7
since 2000.2 These findings constitute convincing evidence that the retired elderly in
Japan are dissaving and suggest that the selfish life-cycle model applies in the case of
Japan (see also Horioka, et al. (1996), Horioka and Niimi (2017), and Niimi and Horioka
(2019)).

However, we should note that the selfish life-cycle model is not the only theoretical
model that predicts that the retired elderly should dissave and thus that, although we can
conclude that the evidence is consistent with the selfish life-cycle model, we cannot
assert that we have unequivocably established that the selfish life-cycle model applies
in the case of Japan.


5. Evidence on Saving Motives

The simplest version of the selfish life-cycle model implies that individuals should be
saving primarily for living expenses during retirement and that they should not be saving
to leave bequests to their children. Thus, we can shed light on the applicability of the
selfish life-cycle model by looking at the relative importance of saving for individual
motives. In this section, we survey studies that attempt to estimate the contribution of
saving for each motive to total household saving in Japan and other countries and
consider whether or not the findings are consistent with the selfish life-cycle model. Our
findings support the selfish life-cycle model because they show that saving for life-cycle
motives such as retirement are much more important than saving for bequests in Japan
as well as in many other countries.

Before turning to our findings, however, let us first explain the methodology we used to
calculate the amount of saving for each motive. If individuals cannot realize a given
motive with only their current income, they need to rely on saving. Moreover, at any
given time, there will be individuals who are saving in order to prepare for a given
motive as well as individuals who are dissaving to realize the same motive. For example,
at any given time, there will be pre-retirement individuals who are saving for retirement
as well as post-retirement individuals who are dissaving for retirement. Thus, the
contribution that saving for a given motive makes to aggregate household saving is net
saving for that motive, which can be calculated as gross saving for that motive minus
dissaving for that motive. Mathematically,

(10)        NS = net saving for a given motive = GS ­ DS

       where GS = gross saving for a given motive
             DS = dissaving for a given motive

Furthermore, there are two ways in which one can use saving to help realize a given

2
  Horioka and Niimi (2017) and Niimi and Horioka (2019) point out that the rate of wealth
decumulation of the retired elderly in Japan is slower than one might expect but show that this can
be explained by the presence of precautionary saving and bequest motives, especially the former.
See Ventura and Horioka (2020) for a similar analysis of the determinants of the saving behavior of
the retired elderly in Italy.
                                                  8
motive. The first way is to rely on one's own assets, and in the case of this way, one
accumulates the financial assets needed to realize the motive in question beforehand and
draws down those assets in order to realize that motive. The other way is to rely on
borrowing, and in this case, one borrows the funds needed to realize the motive in
question, uses those funds to realize that motive, and repays the loan little by little after
realizing the motive (note that loan repayments (repayment of the principal only) are a
form of saving). What should be noted is that the saving is done before the realization
of the motive when one relies on one's own wealth and that it is done after the realization
of the motive when one relies on borrowing

The gross saving and dissaving for a given motive in the case of the two financing
methods are shown in Table 2, and as can be seen from this table, the gross saving for a
given motive equals the sum of saving in the form of the accumulation of financial assets
and saving in the form of loan repayments. Similarly, dissaving for a given motive equals
dissaving in the form of the decumulation of financial assets and dissaving in the form
of new borrowings.3 Moreover, as noted earlier, net saving for a given motive equals
gross saving for that motive minus dissaving for that motive.

The former Institute of Posts and Telecommunications Policy of the former Ministry of
Posts and Telecommunications of the Japanese Government conducted a number of
surveys of household saving behavior including the "Survey of the Financial Asset
Choice of Households," which was conducted in Japan every two years, and the "U.S.-
Japan Comparison Survey of Saving," which was conducted simultaneously in the
United States and Japan in 1996. Both of these surveys are unique in asking respondents
to provide information on the amount of saving, dissaving, new borrowings, and loan
repayments for each motive. Horioka and Watanabe (1997, 1998) and Horioka, et al.
(1998, 2000) use the methodology described above in conjunction with data from the
1994 "Survey of the Financial Asset Choice of Households" and the 1996 "U.S.-Japan
Comparison Survey of Saving," respectively, to calculate the contribution of saving for
each motive to aggregate household saving (see Horioka (1985) for an analysis of saving
for one's children's educational expenses, Horioka (1987) and Grossbard (2015) for an
analysis of saving for one's children's marriage expenses, Horioka (1988) for an analysis
of saving for housing purchase, and Horioka and Okui (1999) for an analysis of saving
for retirement).4


3
  The only exception to this rule is in the case of the housing purchase. A household purchasing
housing will decumulate financial assets in order to pay for the down payment and will incur new
borrowings (a mortgage) to pay for the remainder of the cost of the house, but dissaving in these two
forms will be exactly offset by saving in the form of the accumulation of real assets (viz., housing).
Thus, no dissaving will occur at the time of housing purchase, but dissaving will occur after the
purchase of the house in the form of depreciation.

4
  It should be noted that saving for the various motives are often interrelated. For example, as noted
by Wei and Zhang (2011), Du and Wei (2013), and Horioka and Terada-Hagiwara (2017), the
marriage and housing motives are closely related in China and the Republic of Korea because it is
common practice in these countries for parents with sons to buy housing for their sons in preparation
for their marriage.
                                                  9
Table 3 shows data from Horioka and Watanabe (1997, 1998) and Horioka, et al. (1998,
2000) on the contribution of net saving for each motive to total household saving from
the two aforementioned surveys. If the selfish life-cycle model applies, individuals
should be saving primarily for the retirement motive, and as this table shows, net saving
for the retirement motive accounts for a full 62.23-62.50% and 30.84% of total
household saving in Japan and the United States, respectively, and that it is by far the
dominant component of household saving in both countries. Thus, the selfish life-cycle
model seems to apply in both countries. However, the share of retirement-related saving
in Japan is more than twice what it is in the United States, which suggests that the selfish
life-cycle model applies to a much greater extent in Japan than it does in the United
States.5

If the simplest version of the selfish life-cycle model applies, individuals should not
leave a bequest to their children and should therefore not be saving in order to leave a
bequest to them. As can be seen from Table 3, the share of net saving for the bequest
motive is 1.50-3.23% in Japan and 5.04% in the United States, and thus its share is low
in both countries but especially in Japan. Thus, our findings concerning saving for the
bequest motive also suggest that the selfish life-cycle model applies in both Japan and
the United States but that it is especially applicable in the case of Japan.6

A closely related paper is Gourinchas and Parker (2002), which analyzes how the
proportions of precautionary saving (buffer saving) and retirement saving (life-cycle
saving) evolve over the life cycle using data for the United States and finds that
precautionary saving decreases sharply with age whereas retirement saving increases
sharply with age and that precautionary saving comprises the lion's share of the target
level of liquid wealth until about the age of 40.

Another closely related paper is Schunk (2009), which uses micro data from the SAVE
data set to analyze motives for saving in Germany. Schunk (2009) finds that the most
important motive for saving in Germany is the precautionary motive, with 62% of
respondents feeling that this motive is "very important," followed by the old-age
provision motive (59%), the motive to purchase a house (36%), and the bequest motive
(20%). Horioka, et al. (1998, 2000) presents roughly comparable data on the proportion
of respondents saving for each motive, and they find that the most important motive is
the retirement motive in both the United States and Japan, with 48.6% and 45.2% of
respondents saving for this motive in the two countries, respectively, and that the bequest


5
  The second most important saving motive is the precautionary motive in both countries. Readers
may be confused about why the share of net saving for housing purchase is negative in Japan. The
reason is that dissaving for housing purchase is greater in absolute value than gross saving for
housing purchase in Japan and the reason for this, in turn, is that housing is less durable in Japan due
to differences in construction materials and thus that the depreciation of housing is greater in Japan.
6
  Note, however, that saving for one's children's education and marriage expenses also involve
intergenerational transfers and that the share of net saving for these two motives is much higher in
Japan than in the United States (16.08-16.45% vs. 2.73%). Thus, the share of net saving involving
intergenerational transfers is also much higher in Japan than in the United States (17.58-19.68% vs.
7.77%).
                                                  10
motive is far less important, with only 10.8% and 3.6% of respondents saving for this
motive in the two countries, respectively. Thus, the retirement motive is much more
important than the bequest motive in all three countries, but the ratio between the two is
lowest in Germany (59% vs. 20%), intermediate in the United States (48.6% vs. 10.8%),
and highest in Japan (45.2% vs. 3.6%).

Yet another closely related paper is Yao, et al. (2011), which compares saving motives
in China and the United States. Unfortunately, they do not consider saving for the
bequest motive, but they find that saving for the retirement motive is more important for
Chinese households than for American households in the lower income quantiles and
that saving for the education motive is more important for Chinese households than for
American households in all income quantiles. These results suggest that Chinese
households are more similar to Japanese households than to American households in
terms of the relative importance of saving for the retirement (and education) motives.

Yet another closely related paper about China is Chao, et al. (2011), which finds that the
life-cycle hypothesis can explain only 35% of the surge in Chinese household saving but
that by adding to the model the strong motivation of young adults for buying a home and
the financial support they receive from their parent for that purpose, their model can
reproduce the high and increasing level of household saving since the mid-nineties.

Finally, Birkeland (2013) analyzes the saving motives of Dutch households and finds
that saving for the precautionary motive is the most important motive for Dutch
households, that saving for the retirement motive is the second most important motive,
and that the inter vivos transfer motive and the bequest motive are less important.

To summarize, our findings concerning saving motives suggest that the selfish life-cycle
model applies in all countries but that it applies to a greater extent in Japan (and perhaps
also in China and the Netherlands) than it does in the United States and Germany.


6. Evidence on the Prevalence of Bequests

The simplest version of the selfish life-cycle model assumes that individuals do not leave
any bequests or other intergenerational transfers to their children so we can shed light
on the applicability of the selfish life-cycle model by looking at the prevalence of
bequests and other intergenerational transfers. In this section, we survey the literature
on the prevalence of bequests and other intergenerational transfers in Japan and other
countries and consider whether or not the findings are consistent with the selfish life-
cycle model.

The most commonly used measure of the importance of bequests and other
intergenerational transfers is the share of such transfers in total household wealth. This
measure was first used by Kotlikoff and Summers (1981), and they obtained the
shocking result that the share of intergenerational transfers in total household wealth
amounts to a full 46 to 81 percent. Subsequently, many researchers have calculated this
share using a variety of methodologies and data sources for a large number of countries.

                                            11
Davies and Shorrocks (2000) survey this literature and conclude that the majority of
studies find that this share is 35 to 45% in the United States, roughly comparable to the
United States in Canada, and somewhat higher in France.

Moreover, a number of researchers have tried to calculate the share of intergenerational
transfers in total household wealth for the case of Japan. For example, Hayashi (1986)
estimates this share to be at least 9%, Dekle (1989) estimates it to be 3-49%, Barthold
and Ito (1992) estimate it to be at most 25-40%, Campbell (1997) estimates it to be 23-
28%, and Horioka (2008b,c and 2009) estimates it to be 15-18%. Thus, this share
appears to be lower in Japan than it is in the United States and other countries, which
suggests that bequests and other intergenerational transfers are less important
quantitatively in Japan than they are in other countries. Thus, the findings concerning
the quantitative importance of bequests also suggest that the selfish life-cycle model
applies to a greater extent in Japan than it does in other countries.

Another approach for gauging the importance of bequests and other intergenerational
transfers is to look not at the amounts of bequests actually left behind but to ask
individuals about their bequest intentions. Osaka University has been conducting a
household survey called the "Preference Parameters Study" in four countries (China,
India, Japan, and the United States) since 2003, and fortunately, this survey contains
several questions about bequests. The bequest data from this survey are analyzed in
detail in Horioka (2014a,b), and as can be seen from these papers, the proportion of
respondents planning to leave a bequest to their children is by far the highest in India
(87.05%), also relatively high in the United States (60.77%) and China (56.35%), and
by far the lowest in Japan (31.44%). These findings reinforce our earlier conclusion that
bequests are less prevalent in Japan than in other countries and that the selfish life-cycle
model applies to a greater extent in Japan than it does in other countries. However, we
should note that there is substantial heterogeneity in all countries and that, even in Japan,
a substantial minority of households (nearly one-third) plan to leave bequests.


7. Evidence on Bequest Motives

In the previous section, we presented our findings concerning the prevalence of bequests
and other intergenerational transfers and concluded that they are less prevalent in Japan
than in other countries. However, even if the selfish life-cycle model applies, individuals
may still leave bequests and other intergenerational transfers to their children, and thus,
even if we find that individuals do leave bequests and other intergenerational transfers
to their children, we cannot make a determination about the applicability of the selfish
life-cycle model unless we know the reasons for which individuals leave bequests and
other intergenerational transfers to their children. Thus, in this section, we present
evidence on the motives for which individuals leave bequests and other intergenerational
transfers to their children in Japan and three other countries and consider whether or not
the findings are consistent with the selfish life-cycle model.

If individuals are selfish, as assumed by the life-cycle model, they should either leave
no bequests at all, leave only accidental or unintentional bequests arising from lifespan

                                             12
uncertainty, or selfish motivated bequests (see Arrondel and Masson (2006) and
Laferrère and Wolff (2006)). One example of a selfishly motivated bequest is the
strategic (or exchange) bequest motive proposed by Bernheim, Shleifer, and Summers
(1985), whereby parents leave a bequest to their children to induce them to provide care,
attention, and/or financial assistance during old age (see also Grossbard, 2014). Another
example of a selfishly motivated bequest is the implicit intra-family annuity contract
proposed by Kotlikoff and Spivak (1981) whereby parents agree to leave a bequest to
their children in return for receiving a monthly stipend from them until they die. By
contrast, altruistic parents will leave a bequest to their children unconditionally (i.e.,
whether or not their children provide anything in return). Thus, we can shed light on the
applicability of the selfish life-cycle model by looking at data on bequest motives.

The "Preference Parameters Study" of Osaka University that we referred to in the
previous section collects information on bequest motives in four countries (China, India,
Japan, and the United States). The survey asks "How do you feel about leaving an
inheritance to your children?" and respondents are asked to select one of eight options.
Two of the eight options ("I plan to leave an inheritance to my child(ren) no matter what"
and "I do not plan to leave an inheritance to my child(ren) under any circumstances
because doing so may reduce their will to work") are altruistic, while four ("I plan to
leave an inheritance to my child(ren) only if they provide care (including nursing care)
during old age," "I plan to leave an inheritance to my child(ren) only if they provide
financial assistance during old age," "I do not plan to make special efforts to leave an
inheritance to my child(ren) but will leave whatever is left over," and "I do not plan to
leave an inheritance to my child(ren) under any circumstances because I want to use my
wealth myself") are selfish.

Horioka (2014a,b) presents data on bequest motives from this survey for China, India,
Japan, and the United States, and as can be seen from these papers, the proportion of
respondents with an altruistic bequest motive is highest in India (75.80%) and also very
high in the United States (66.97%), whereas this proportion is lowest in Japan (33.98%)
and also relatively low in China (37.40%). By contrast, the proportion of respondents
with a selfish bequest motive is highest in Japan (64.96%) and also relatively high in
China (55.10%), whereas this proportion of lowest in India (21.82%) and also relatively
low in the United States (32.76%). Thus, judging from the evidence on bequest motives,
the Japanese are the most selfish among the four peoples and the Chinese are the next
most selfish, whereas Indians are the most altruistic and Americans are the next most
altruistic.

Moreover, as the data presented in Horioka (2014a) show, data on bequest division point
to the same conclusion (i.e., that the Japanese are the most selfish and the Chinese the
second most selfish). However, in the case of bequest division, Americans and Indians
change positions, with Americans being the most altruistic and Indians being the second
most altruistic.

Horioka, et al., (1998), Horioka, et al. (2000), Horioka (2002a,b), Horioka (2008b,c),
and Horioka (2009) present similar data on bequest motives and bequest division from
other surveys and obtain broadly consistent results.

                                           13
Finally, Alma'amun (2012) analyzes the bequest motives of Malaysian Muslims and
finds that the bequest motives of Malaysian Muslims are largely altruistic (where the
responses "To make them equally well off" and "To help them regardless of their
economic status" are classified as altruistic), whereas dynastic and selfish (strategic)
bequest motives are of roughly equal importance. 7

Thus, not only do the Japanese leave fewer bequests than other peoples but their bequests
are more selfishly motivated that those of other peoples. These findings suggest that the
selfish life-cycle model applies to a much greater extent in Japan than it does in other
countries.


8. Evidence from Tests of Altruism

The simplest version of the selfish life-cycle model assumes that individuals are selfish,
not altruistic, so we can shed light on the applicability of this model by conducting tests
of altruism. Thus, in this section, we survey papers that have conducted tests of altruism
for the case of Japan and consider whether or not their findings are consistent with the
selfish life-cycle model.

First, we survey the literature that examines the impact of parental bequest motives on
the caregiving behavior of children. If children are altruistic, they should provide care,
attention, and financial assistance to their parents regardless of whether or not they
expect to receive bequests from them. Conversely, if children are selfish, they should
provide care, attention, and financial assistance to their parents only if they expect to
receive bequests from them (Bernheim, Shleifer, and Summers's (1985) strategic
bequest motive).

All such studies for Japan of which I am aware are consistent with the selfish life-cycle
model rather than with the altruism model. For example,

    (1)    Ohtake and Horioka (1994) find that the housing assets of parents have a
           positive and statistically significant impact on the probability that their
           children live with them and that the financial net worth of parents has a
           positive and statistically significant impact on the amount of the financial
           assistance children provide to their parents.

    (2)    Komamura (1994) finds that the housing assets of parents have a positive and
           statistically significant impact on the probability that their children live with
           them.

    (3)    Yamada (2006) finds that whether or not children expect to inherit a house


7
  Alma'amun (2012) analyzes the motives for leaving bequests to family members who are excluded
by Faraid (Islamic law) because the distribution of bequests among legal heirs is specified in detail
in the Quran and Muslims have no discretion regarding this matter.
                                                 14
          from their parents has a positive and statistically significant impact on the
          probability that their children live with them and on the frequency with which
          their children contact them and a negative and statistically significant impact
          on the distance between their own home and their children's home.

  (4)     Wakabayashi and Horioka (2009) find that whether or not parents are
          managers or homeowners has a positive and statistically significant impact on
          the probability that their children live with them.

  (5)     Kohara and Ohtake (2011) find that the educational attainment of parents has
          a positive and statistically significant impact on the probability that their
          children take care of them during old age.

  (6)     Horioka, et al. (2018) find that whether or not children expect to receive a
          bequest from their parents has a positive and statistically significant impact on
          the probability that they live with or near their parents and on the probability
          that they help their parents with housework.

If parental assets, homeownership, occupation, and educational attainment are regarded
as proxies for expected bequests from parents, all of the aforementioned findings suggest
that the probability receiving bequests from parents and/or the expected amount of such
bequests have a positive and statistically significant impact on the probability of parents
living with, or near, their children and on the probability of receiving care, attention,
and/or financial assistance from their children. This, in turn, suggests that the Japanese
are selfish, not altruistic.

The seminal study on the impact of bequests on the amount of care and attention from
one's children is Bernheim et al. (1985), which finds, using data on American households
from the Longitudinal Retirement History Survey (LRHS), that bequeathable wealth has
a positive and significant impact on the frequency of phone calls and visits from one's
children in the case of families with two or more children, even after controlling for the
parents' age, health, and employment status, but that it has a negative and insignificant
impact on the frequency of phone calls and visits in the case of families with only one
child and that non-bequeathable wealth does not have a significant impact on the
frequency of phone calls and visits in either sample. All of these results appear to support
the selfish life-cycle model because only bequeathable wealth should influence the
behavior of children and because parents' threat of disinheritance is not credible if they
have only one child.

However, Perozek (1998) replicates Bernheim et al. (1985) test using a richer data set
[the 1987 National Survey of Families and Households (NSFH)] and finds that
bequeathable wealth no longer has a significant impact on attention from one's children
when additional child and family characteristics are taken into account and/ or a more
comprehensive measure of attention is used.


                                            15
Laferrère and Wolff (2006) survey the literature from throughout the world on the impact
of parental bequests on children's caregiving behavior. They find that such research is
the most prevalent in the United States and that two-thirds of such studies for the United
States suggest that Americans are altruistic (see also Horioka (2014a)). Thus, our
findings in this section are consistent with our earlier conclusion in section 7 that the
Japanese are more selfish than Americans.

As for studies for countries other than the United States, Laferrère and Wolff (2006) also
survey studies for France, Germany, and Italy and finds that most studies for France
reject altruism while two out of the three studies for Germany accept altruism, and the
studies for Italy are inconclusive.

Finally, there are at least three studies of bequest division behavior--one for Japan, one
for China, and one for Tanzania. Hamaaki, et al. (2019) analyze the determinants of
bequest division behavior in Japan using micro data from a unique survey and find that
parents tend to bequeath more to children who are living with the surviving parent,
which is consistent with the selfish life-cycle model, but that they do not necessarily
bequeath more to economically disadvantaged children, which is evidence against the
altruism model.

Turning to studies for other countries, Jiang, et al. (2015) analyzes the bequest division
behavior of rural households in China and find that they have mixed motives, with the
likelihood of leaving bequests and the amount of the bequest being lower for children
providing financial support but higher for children providing instrumental (in-kind)
support. The first finding is consistent with the altruism model since children who
provide financial support are presumably more affluent, but the second finding is
consistent with the selfish life-cycle model.

Similarly, Wineman and Liverpool-Tasie (2019) analyze the bequest division behavior
of rural households in Tanzania and find strong evidence in support of the selfish life-
cycle model. For example, they find that parents with greater needs leave more to female
children who reside nearby because they are more willing and able to provide attention
and care to them and that they leave more to children who remit money or in-kind gifts.
Moreover, they find little evidence in support of the altruism model: they find that
parents do not favor children who are divorced or widowed (who are presumably more
needy) and that they do not disfavor children with off-farm income.

Thus, tests of altruism that are based on examining the interrelationship between parental
bequest motives, bequest division, and the caregiving behavior of children indicate the
presence of considerable heterogeneity across countries, and France and Tanzania seem
to be two of the few countries other than Japan in which the findings are consistent with
the selfish life-cycle model.

Moreover, Hayashi (1995) conducts a completely different test of altruism using micro
data from the "National Survey of Family Income and Expenditure." If parents and
children are both altruistic, the two sides should pool their incomes when deciding how
much to consume, and thus if one controls for the combined income of parents and

                                           16
children, parental income or children's income should not have any impact on total
consumption. However, Hayashi (1995) finds, even after controlling for combined
income by introducing fixed effects, that parental income and children's income have a
statistically significant impact on total consumption. This suggests that the Japanese are
not pure altruists.

Thus, all of the tests of altruism surveyed here suggest that Japanese individuals are
selfish, not altruistic, and that the selfish life-cycle model applies in Japan to a greater
extent than it does in the United States and other countries with the possible exception
of France and Tanzania.


9. Evidence on the Importance of Borrowing (Liquidity) Constraints

In our brief exposition of the selfish life-cycle model in section 2, we assumed that
individuals smooth their consumption over their lifetimes, but this result requires that
capital markets are perfect and that borrowing (liquidity) constraints do not exist. Thus,
we can shed light on the applicability of the selfish life-cycle model by looking at how
important borrowing (liquidity) constraints are in the real world. In this section, we
survey the literature on the importance of borrowing (liquidity) constraints in the case
of Japan and consider whether or not the findings are consistent with the selfish life-
cycle model (see Hayashi, 1985b, for a more general survey of this literature).

Hayashi (1985a) and Watanabe, Watanabe, and Watanabe (2001) find that about 15%
and 25% of Japanese households face borrowing (liquidity) constraints, respectively.
Similarly, Kohara and Horioka (2006) find that 8 to 15% of young Japanese couples are
borrowing (liquidity) constrained. Moreover, Horioka (2012a, b) and Horioka and Niimi
(2020) find that the ratio of household liabilities to household disposable income in
Japan was the highest among the Group of Seven (G7) countries until at least 2005.

Thus, all of the existing evidence suggests that most Japanese households are not
borrowing (liquidity) constrained, that borrowing constraints do not constrain them from
smoothing consumption over their lifetimes, and that the selfish life-cycle model applies
in the case of Japan.8 This conclusion is surprising at first glance because it is well
known that, during the high-growth era from the mid-1950s until the early 1970s, the
Japanese government funneled capital from households to firms to enable them to
finance massive amounts of investment in plant and equipment and that consumer credit
was largely unavailable. It must be borne in mind, however, that after economic growth
slowed, loans to households for housing and automobile purchases and other purposes
expanded rapidly (see, for example, Horioka and Niimi (2020, 2021).




8 However, Ogawa (2007) finds that the proportion of households facing borrowing (liquidity)
constraints has increased sharply since the mid-1990s.
                                                 17
10. Why Is There More Consistent Support for the Selfish Life-Cycle Model in
    Japan?

The overall conclusion of this paper is that the selfish life-cycle model applies in all
countries but that it is more applicable in Japan than it is in the United States and most
other countries. This finding suggests at first glance that the Japanese are inherently
(genetically) more rational, forward-looking, and selfish than other peoples, as these are
the fundamental assumptions of the selfish life-cycle model, but this is not necessarily
the case. In this section, we explore possible explanations for why there is more
consistent support for the selfish life-cycle model in Japan than there is in most other
countries. At least eleven possible explanations come to mind, and we group them by
category into government policies, institutional factors, economic factors, demographic
factors, and cultural factors.


GOVERNMENT POLICIES

10.1. Underdeveloped Social Insurance System

Japan had an underdeveloped social insurance system for much of the postwar system,
with the public old-age pension system being expanded only in 1973 and the public long-
term care insurance system being introduced only in 2000. Moreover, the public old-age
pension system has been scaled back in recent years, with the pensionable age being
gradually increased from 60 to 65, contribution rates being gradually increased, and
benefit levels being held down. Moreover, further reductions in benefit levels are likely
as further population aging places further strains on the finances of the public old-age
pension system. This means that a larger share of living expenses during retirement
needs to be financed by one's own assets in Japan, which in turn increases the need to
save for life-cycle purposes (i.e. for living expenses during retirement). Thus, it could
be that Japan's underdeveloped social insurance system is one explanation for the greater
importance of saving for retirement in Japan.

10.2. High Inheritance Taxes

Estate, bequest, or inheritance taxes are much higher in Japan than in other countries.
For example, the maximum tax rate of the inheritance tax was already high (50%) but it
was increased further to 55% in 2015, and there is also a comparable gift tax that is
levied on inter vivos transfers. By contrast, there is no inheritance tax at all in China and
the threshold for taxable bequests is very high in the United States, as a result of which
only the very wealthy are required to pay inheritance taxes in the United States. Thus, it
could be that higher inheritance taxes are one explanation for why bequests are less
prevalent in Japan than in other countries.

10.3. Relatively Early Retirement Age

Japan has traditionally had a surprising early retirement age, although it has been
gradually extended over time. During most of the postwar period, the compulsory

                                             18
retirement age in Japan was only 55, which is much earlier than other developed
countries. In 1986, the Japanese government amended the Act on Stabilization of
Employment of Elderly Persons to provide various incentives for companies to raise
their compulsory retirement age to 60. In 1994, the Act was further amended to legally
prohibit companies from setting a compulsory retirement age below 60 beginning in
1998, and to require companies to strive to secure employment opportunities for their
employees until the age of 65 beginning in 2000. In 2004, the Act was further amended
to require companies with a compulsory retirement age of less than 65 to gradually
provide employment opportunities for all interested employees until the age of 65
beginning in 2006, and in 2012, the Act was further amended to require companies to
provide employment opportunities for all interested employees until the age of 65
beginning in 2013, either by (a) raising the compulsory retirement age, (b) introducing
a continued employment system whereby employees are re-hired on a contractual basis,
or (c) abolishing their compulsory retirement age entirely. Note, moreover, that even
though Japan's compulsory retirement age has been raised over time, a compulsory
retirement age of 65 has not yet been fully implemented, and even a compulsory
retirement age of 65 is early by international standards (for example, the United States
has completely abolished compulsory retirement for almost all occupations). A relatively
early retirement age implies a relatively long retirement span, ceteris paribus, and our
theoretical analysis in section 2 showed that a longer retirement span necessitates more
life-cycle saving (saving for retirement). Thus, it could be that the relatively early
retirement age in Japan is one explanation for the greater importance of saving for
retirement in Japan.9


INSTITUTIONAL FACTORS

10.4. The Underdeveloped Financial System

Japan has traditionally had a relatively underdeveloped financial system. For example,
in Japan, lifetime annuities, long-term care insurance, and reverse mortgages are not
provided by the private sector to the same extent as they are in other developed countries
(see Horioka and Kanda, 2010, for more details). Private annuities are widely available
but many, if not most, of them provide for benefits only up to a certain age, meaning that
they do not provide full insurance against longevity risk. This makes it necessary for
Japanese households to self-insure against medical and long-term care expenses during
retirement and against lifespan uncertainty, assuming that social insurance systems do
not fully insure Japanese households against such risks, and this could be one
explanation for the greater importance of life-cycle saving (saving for retirement) in
Japan.




9
  Note, however, that even though the compulsory retirement age in Japan is relatively early, many
Japanese workers continue working after formal retirement (usually at greatly reduced wages) and
that self-employed workers are not bound by the compulsory retirement age.
                                               19
10.5. Unavailability of Nursing Homes and Professional Care Workers

Nursing homes and professional care workers were, until recently, less available in Japan,
meaning that parents had little choice but to rely on their children for care and assistance
during old age, and this could be one explanation for why selfishly motivated strategic
bequest motives are more prevalent in Japan than elsewhere. Note, however, that this
explanation no longer applies because the supply of nursing homes and professional care
workers has increased substantially in recent years and because Japan introduced a
public long-term care insurance program in 2000.


ECONOMIC FACTORS

10.6. Rapid Economic Growth

As we discussed briefly in section 2, the selfish life-cycle model predicts that the
aggregate amount of life-cycle saving (saving for retirement) will be greater, the greater
is the extent to which the lifetime incomes of workers exceeds the lifetime incomes of
retirees because the aggregate amount of saving for retirement equals the saving for
retirement of workers (which is presumably a function of their lifetime incomes) minus
the dissaving for retirement of retirees (which is also presumably a function of their
lifetime incomes). Thus, it could be that the rapid growth of household incomes during
the high-growth era from the mid-1950s until the early 1970s is one explanation for the
greater importance of saving for retirement in Japan during this period.

Similarly, we would expect bequests to be smaller, the greater is the extent to which the
lifetime incomes of the children's generation exceeds the lifetime incomes of the parents'
generation because the faster the growth of household incomes, the less willing even
altruistic parents will be to leave bequests to their children, who are more affluent than
they are. Thus, it could be that the rapid growth of household incomes during the high-
growth era from the mid-1950s until the early 1970s is also one explanation for the lower
prevalence of bequests in Japan during this period.

However, neither of these explanations applies any longer since economic growth in
Japan has been stagnant for the past two decades or more.


DEMOGRAPHIC FACTORS

10.7. The Young Age Structure of the Population

As we showed in section 2, the selfish life-cycle model predicts that the aggregate
amount of saving for retirement will be greater, the higher is the ratio of the retirement-
age population to the working-age population because workers are saving for retirement
whereas retirees are dissaving for the same purpose. Moreover, as we pointed out in
subsection 3.1, the ratio of the retirement-age population to the working-age population
in Japan was one of the lowest among the developed countries until the mid-1980s. Thus,

                                            20
it could be that the unique age structure of Japan's population is one explanation for the
greater importance of life-cycle saving (saving for retirement), at least until the mid-
1980s. However, this explanation no longer applies since Japan is now virtually the most
aged society in the world.

10.8. Long Life Expectancy

Life expectancy at birth in Japan has in recent years been virtually the longest in the
world. For example, in 2019, it was 87.45 for females and 81.41 for males. The life
expectancy of females was second only to Hong Kong, and that of males was the third
highest in the world after Hong Kong and Switzerland ( Asahi Shimbun, July 31, 2020).
Thus, even assuming a retirement age of 65, the expected retirement span of Japanese
females is 22.45 years and that of Japanese males is 16.41 years, and moreover, we need
to bear in mind that the compulsory retirement age was only 60 until recently, meaning
that the expected retirement span was even longer until recently. Our theoretical analysis
in section 2 showed that a longer retirement span necessitates more life-cycle saving
(saving for retirement), and thus it could be that the relatively long life expectancy at
birth in Japan, which entails a longer retirement span, is one explanation for the greater
importance of saving for retirement in Japan.


CULTURAL FACTORS

10.9. Weak Religiosity

As the data presented in Horioka (2014a) show, the Japanese are much less religious
than Americans and Indians. If weaker religiosity makes people less altruistic, it may at
least partly explain the lower prevalence of altruistically motivated bequests in Japan
than in the United States and India. There is a vast literature on the impact of religiosity
and religious affiliation on people's economic attitudes and outcomes starting with Max
Weber's 1905 treatise on the Protestant ethic (Weber, 1905/2002) (see Guiso, et al.
(2003), and McCleary and Barro (2006) for comprehensive surveys of this literature).
For example, Barro and McCleary (2002) find that the extent of religious beliefs has a
positive impact on economic growth. Similarly, Guiso, et al. (2003) conduct a careful
econometric analysis of the impact of religiosity and religious affiliation on economic
attitudes using data from the World Values Survey for a large number of countries and
find that religious respondents differ significantly in their economic attitudes from non-
religious people (for example, they place greater emphasis on thrift), even after
controlling for individual country effects.

10.10. Social Norms concerning Parental Care

Perhaps reflecting Confucian teachings concerning the importance of filial piety, the
social norm in Japan has traditionally been for children (especially sons) to take care of
their elderly parents, and this could be a partial explanation for why selfishly motivated



                                            21
strategic bequest motives are more prevalent in Japan than in other countries. 10 By
contrast, in countries where this social norm is not as strong (for example, the United
States), children will be less willing to take care of their elderly parents and hence there
will be less scope for parents to induce their children to provide care by dangling a
potential bequest in front of them.11

10.11. Social Norms concerning Children's Education and Marriage Expenses

The social norm in Japan is for parents to pay the bulk of their children's education and
marriage expenses, and this could be one explanation for why Japanese parents are not
able to leave as large a bequest to their children as parents in other countries. 12


10.12. Summary

In this section, we identified a large number of not only cultural factors but also
government policies, institutional factors, economic factors, and demographic factors
that are capable of explaining why there is more consistent support for the selfish life-
cycle model in Japan than there is in other countries. Thus, the fact that there is more
consistent support for the selfish life-cycle model in Japan does not necessarily imply
that the Japanese are inherently (genetically) more rational, forward-looking, and selfish
than other peoples. Rather, it could be that there is more consistent support for the selfish
life-cycle model in Japan because of various differences in government policies,
institutional factors, economic factors, and demographic factors. Thus, it is not
necessarily surprising that the selfish life-cycle model applies with greater force in a
non-Western country like Japan with very different traditions, social norms, and culture
and closer family ties, and this finding can potentially be explained without relying on
cultural or even genetic explanations (we will say more about this in the concluding
section). However, an assessment of the relative importance of the various explanations
for why there is more consistent support for the selfish life-cycle model in Japan than
there is in most other countries remains as a topic for further research.


11. Conclusion and Policy Implications

In this paper, we first provided a brief exposition of the simplest version of the selfish
life cycle model or hypothesis, which, together with the dynasty or altruism model, is
undoubtedly the most widely used theoretical model of household behavior in

10
   Grossbard (2018) suggests that social norms regarding parental care may be influenced by the
prevalence of dowries and brideprice.
11
   See Banerjee, et al. (2014) for an interesting analysis of how the social norm of children
(especially sons) taking care of their parents has affected China's household saving rate.
12
   Note, however, that parental assistance with children's education and marriage expenses is a form
of intergenerational transfer and that, strictly speaking, it should be included in the share of bequests
broadly defined in total household wealth (see footnote 5).
                                                    22
economics. We then surveyed the literature on household saving behavior in Japan (with
emphasis on the author's own past research) to shed light on whether or not the selfish
life-cycle model applies in the case of Japan. In particular, we surveyed the literature on
a wide variety of approaches including not only studies of saving behavior (e.g., studies
of the impact of the age structure of the population on the saving rate, the saving
behavior of the retired elderly, saving motives, and the importance of borrowing
(liquidity) constraints) but also studies of bequest behavior (e.g., studies of the
prevalence of bequests, bequest motives, and tests of altruism). Almost all of the
available evidence suggested that the selfish life-cycle model applies to at least some
extent in all countries but that there is more consistent support for this model in Japan
than there is in the United States and other countries. Thus, the answer to the question
posed in the title of this paper is an unqualified "yes."

Needless to say, selfish behavior and altruistic behavior coexist in all countries, and
Japan is no exception. Fumio Hayashi, the foremost authority on Japanese saving
behavior, concludes his survey paper on this topic as follows (Hayashi (1997a), p. 322):

"We can now profitably contemplate what sort of model is best suited for explaining
these stylized facts [about Japanese household saving behavior]. It has become clear that
intergenerational linkages through the exchange of nonmarket services and through
altruism will be an essential ingredient."

Moreover, Hayashi makes the following assertion elsewhere in the same paper
(Hayashi(1997a), p. 319): "[b]oth the exchange and altruistic motives are important for
explaining [Japanese household saving behavior]."

The current author agrees completely with Hayashi but strongly feels that selfish
behavior is more prevalent in Japan than altruistic behavior and that there is more
consistent support for the selfish life-cycle model in Japan than there is in the United
States and other countries.

This paper then explored possible explanations for why there is more consistent support
for the selfish life-cycle model in Japan than there is in other countries, attributing this
finding to government policies, institutional factors, economic factors, demographic
factors, and cultural factors.

Some readers may be surprised to learn that there is more consistent support for the
selfish life-cycle model in Japan than there is in the United States and other countries
because Japan is a non-Western country with very different traditions, social norms, and
institutions and closer family ties. However, it must be borne in mind that the fact that
family ties are close does not necessarily imply that family members harbor feelings of
altruism toward one another. It could be that family ties are closer in Japan than in most
other countries but that they are motivated by strategic rather than altruistic
considerations (see Horioka (2019) for a more extensive discussion of the impact of
culture on the saving and bequest behavior of the Japanese). Moreover, there are a large
number of other differences between Japan and other countries with respect to
government policies, institutional factors, economic factors, and demographic factors

                                            23
that are capable of explaining the greater applicability of the selfish life-cycle model in
the case of Japan without having to resort to cultural or even genetic explanations.

Note, moreover, that even if social norms were a partial explanation for the greater
applicability of the selfish life-cycle model in the case of Japan, it should be noted that
social norms are not immutable and that they are shaped by the policy, institutional,
economic, and demographic environment of the country. For example, the social norm
of children taking care of their elderly parents may have arisen partly because of the
unavailability of nursing homes and professional care workers and the absence of a
public long-term care insurance program and it may now be weakening partly in
response to the increased supply of nursing homes and professional care workers and
the introduction of a public long-term care program in 2000 (see Horioka (2019) for a
more detailed discussion of this argument).

Finally, we would like to consider the implications of our finding that the selfish life-
cycle model applies in the case of Japan. This conclusion has at least five important
implications for economic modeling and for government tax and expenditure policies:

     (1)   When constructing theoretical models to describe Japanese household
           behavior, one should construct models that assume that households are selfish
           rather than altruistic or models that assume that selfish households and
           altruistic households coexist.

     (2)   As population aging progresses even further in Japan, Japan's household
           saving rate can be expected to decline ever further. This is likely to lead to
           substantial capital shortages, which in turn may necessitate fiscal
           reconstruction measures designed to reduce the large deficits (negative saving)
           of the government sector and may also lead to Japan running current account
           deficits rather than current account surpluses.

     (3)   Our finding implies that Ricardian equivalence does not apply in the case of
           Japan, meaning that the Japanese Government may be able to stimulate the
           economy by implementing tax cuts that are financed by the issuance of
           government bonds (Barro, 1974), but it is, of course, possible that such
           policies would not be effective even if Ricardian equivalence does not apply.

     (4)   Our finding that bequests are motivated primarily by strategic or exchange
           considerations in Japan implies that they are accompanied by some sort of quid
           pro quo such as care, attention, and financial assistance during old age. This,
           in turn, implies that, in Japan, bequests from parents to children will be largely
           offset by transfers in the opposite direction (from children to parents), meaning
           that net transfers from parents to children will not necessarily be large or even
           positive and that wealth disparities will not necessarily be transmitted from
           generation to generation (from parents to children).13

13 However, Niimi and Horioka (2018) find that individuals receiving bequests are more likely to
leave bequests, which suggests that there is a danger than wealth disparities will be passed on from
                                                 24
  (5)      Our finding that bequests are motivated primarily by strategic or exchange
           considerations in Japan implies that the introduction of a public long-term care
           insurance system in 2000 may have led to a reduction in the prevalence of
           bequests because parents no longer need to rely on their children for care
           during old age to the same extent as in the past.

Thus, whether or not the selfish life-cycle model applies in the case of Japan is important
not only from an intellectual perspective but also from a policy perspective, and thus
further work on this topic is of urgent need. I am therefore planning to continue my
research on this topic as I enter the retirement phase of my own life cycle.

In the case of Japan, randomized controlled trials (RCTs) have not been widely used in
studies of household consumption, saving, and bequest behavior. This is a promising
avenue for further research, but as Ravallion (2020) has pointed out, this methodology
is not necessarily the best methodology in all cases, and it should be used only if it is the
best methodology for the question at hand. As Ravallion writes, "The gold standard is
the best method for the question at hand."

Given that the Covid-19 pandemic is the most pressing issue currently facing the world
economy, I would like to close this article by speculating about how the pandemic will
alter the extent to which the selfish life-cycle model applies in the case of Japan and
other countries. First, the pandemic and the policies implemented to counteract the
pandemic have caused many people to be laid off, to lose their jobs entirely, and/or to
suffer sharp drops in their income. This has forced many of them to finance their living
expenses by drawing down their previously accumulated wealth and will reduce the
amount of wealth that they can accumulate for their retirement years, but it will also
reduce the amount of wealth they can leave to their children in the form of inter vivos
transfers and bequests.

Second, until the pandemic subsides, children will presumably become less likely to live
with, and/or to provide care to, their parents in order to avoid infecting them with the
virus, and this may cause the selfish strategic bequest motive and thence the selfish life-
cycle model to become less applicable.

Thus, it is clear that the pandemic will have a pervasive impact on people's economic
behavior, but it is not clear whether it will cause the selfish life-cycle model to become
more or less applicable, on balance.


                                   Acknowledgements

This paper is based in large part on my keynote lecture at the Annual Meeting of the
Society of Economics of the Household (SEHO), my keynote lecture at the International


parents to children.
                                             25
Conference on Business, Economics and Finance, School of Business and Economics,
Universiti Brunei Darussalam, Brunei, my invited lecture at the Singapore Economic
Review Conference (SERC), my invited lecture at the Kyoto University Faculty of
Economics 100th Anniversary International Conference, my lecture in the "Inequality
and ...? Lecture Series" at the European Investment Bank (Luxembourg), my special
lecture at the Autumn Meeting of the Japanese Economic Association (JEA), my webinar
at Xavier University Bhubaneswar (India), and Horioka (2020). I am grateful to Yuichi
Abiko, Conchita d'Ambrosio, Kazuo Ogawa, Ryosuke Okamoto, Shovan Ray, Etsuro
Shioji, Takashi Unayama, and other participants of these conferences, especially
Shoshana Grossbard, Yoko Niimi, and three anonymous referees for their valuable
comments. This work was supported by JSPS (Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science) KAKENHI Grant Numbers 18H00870 and 20H01513.




                                         26
                                    References

Alma'amun, Suhaili (2012). Searching for Bequest Motives and Attitudes to Leaving a
   Bequest among Malaysian Muslims. Jurnal Ekonomi Malaysia, 46(1), 73-84.
Ando, Albert, and Modigliani, Franco (1963). The Life-Cycle Hypothesis of Saving:
   Aggregate Implications and Tests. American Economic Review, 53(1), 47-73.
Arrondel, Luc, and Masson, Andre (2006). Altruism, Exchange or Indirect Reciprocity:
   What Do the Data on Family Transfers Show? In Serge-Christophe Kolm and Jean
   Mercier Ythier (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Giving, Altruism and
   Reciprocity (vol. 2, pp. 741-812). Amsterdam, Netherlands: Elsevier Science B.V.,
   971-1053.
Attanasio, Orazio P. (1999). Consumption. In John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford
   (Eds.), Handbook of Macroeconomics (vol. 1, part B, pp. 741-812). New York, NY:
   Elsevier.
Attanasio, Orazio P., and Weber, Guglielmo (2010). Consumption and Saving: Models
   of Intertemporal Allocation and Their Implications for Public Policy. Journal of
   Economic Literature, 48(3), 693-751.
Banerjee, Abhijit; Meng, Xin; Porzio, Tommaso; and Qian, Nancy (2014). Aggregate
   Fertility and Household Savings: A General Equilibrium Analysis using Micro Data.
   NBER Working Paper 20050. Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of
   Economic Research.
Baranzini, Mauro (2005). Modigliani's Life-Cycle Theory of Savings Fifty Years Later.
   Banca Nazionale del Lavoro (BNL) Quarterly Review, 58(233-234), 109-172.
Barro, Robert J. (1974). Are Government Bonds Net Wealth? Journal of Political
   Economy, 82(6), 1095-1117.
Barro, Robert J., and McCleary, Rachel M. (2002). Religion and Political Economy in
   an International Panel. NBER Working Paper 8931. Cambridge, Massachusetts:
   National Bureau of Economic Research.
Barthold, Thomas A., and Ito, Takatoshi (1992). Bequest Taxes and Accumulation of
   Household Wealth: U.S.-Japan Comparison. In Takatoshi Ito and Anne Krueger
   (Eds.), The Political Economy of Tax Reform (pp. 235-290). Chicago, Illinois:
   University of Chicago Press.
Bernheim, B. Douglas; Shleifer, Andrei; and Summers, Lawrence H. (1985). The
   Strategic Bequest Motive. Journal of Political Economy, 93(6), 1045-1076.
Birkeland, Fredrik Berggren (2013). The Saving Motives of Dutch Households: And the
   Effect of Individual Characteristics on the Importance of Saving Motives. Master's
   Thesis. Kristiansand and Grimstad, Norway: Department of Economics, Faculty of
   Economics and Social Sciences, University of Agder.
Browning, Martin, and Crossley, Thomas. F. (2001). The Life-Cycle Model of
   Consumption and Saving. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 15(3), 3-22.
Browning, Martin, and Lusardi, Annamaria (1996). Household Saving: Micro Theories
   and Micro Facts. Journal of Economic Literature, 34(4), 1797-1855.
Campbell, David (1997). Transfer and Life-cycle Wealth in Japan, 1974-1984. Japanese
   Economic Review, 48(4), 410-423.
Chao, Chi-Chur; Laffargue, Jean-Pierre; and Yu, Eden (2011). The Chinese Saving
   Puzzle and the Life-Cycle Hypothesis: A Revaluation. China Economic Review, 22(1),
   108-120.

                                         27
Davies, James B. (1981). Uncertain Lifetime, Consumption, and Dissaving in
   Retirement. Journal of Political Economy, 89(3), 561-577.
Davies, James B., and Shorrocks, Anthony F. (2000). The Distribution of Wealth. In
   Anthony B. Atkinson and Francois Bourguignon (Eds.), Handbook of Income
   Distribution (vol. 1, pp. 605-675). Amsterdam, Netherlands: Elsevier Science B. V.
Deaton, Angus (1992). Understanding Consumption. Oxford, England: Clarendon Press.
Deaton, Angus (2005). Franco Modigliani and the Life Cycle Theory of Consumption.
   Banca Nazionale del Lavoro (BNL) Quarterly Review, 58(233­234), 91­107.
Dekle, Robert (1989). The Unimportance of Intergenerational Transfers in Japan. Japan
   and the World Economy, 1(4), 403-413.
De Nardi, Mariacristina; French, Eric; and Jones, John Bailey (2016). Savings after
   Retirement: A Survey. Annual Review of Economics, 8, 177-204.
Du, Qingyuan, and Wei, Shang-Jin (2013). A Theory of the Competitive Saving Motive.
   Journal of International Economics, 91(2), 275-289.
Feldstein, Martin (1974). Social Security, Induced Retirement, and Aggregate Capital
   Accumulation. Journal of Political Economy, 82(5), 905-926.
Garon, Sheldon (1997). Modeling Japanese Minds: The State in Everyday Life.
   Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Parker, Jonathan A. (2002), "Consumption over the Life
   Cycle," Econometrica, 70(1), 47-89.
Grossbard, Shoshana (2014). A Note on Altruism and Caregiving in the Family: Do
   Prices Matter? Review of Economics of the Household , 12(3), 487-491.
Grossbard, Shoshana (2015). The Marriage Motive: A Price Theory of Marriage: How
   Marriage Markets Affect Employment, Consumption, and Savings. New York, New
   York: Springer Publishing Co.
Grossbard, Shoshana (2018). An Extended Household Model of Eldercare by Children
   and Children-in-Law based on Far-Eastern Traditions. Review of Development
   Economics, 22(3), 1022-1038.
Guiso, Luigi; Sapienza, Paola; and Zingales, Luigi (2003). People's Opium: Religion
   and Economic Attitudes. Journal of Monetary Economics, 50(1), 225-282.
Guiso, Luigi; Sapienza, Paola; and Zingales, Luigi (2006). Does Culture Affect
   Economic Outcomes? Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20(2), 23-48.
Hamaaki, Junya; Hori, Masahiro; and Murata, Keiko (2019). The Intra-Family Division
   of Bequests and Bequest Motives: Empirical Evidence from a Survey of Japanese
   Households. Journal of Population Economics , 32, 309-346.
Hayashi, Fumio (1985a). The Permanent Income Hypothesis and Consumption
   Durability: Analysis based on Japanese Panel Data. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
   100(4), 1083-1113.
Hayashi, Fumio (1985b). Tests for Liquidity Constraints: A Critical Survey. NBER
   Working Paper 1720. Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic
   Research.
Hayashi, Fumio (1986). Why Is Japan's Saving Rate So Apparently High? In Stanley
   Fischer (Ed.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1986 (vol. 1, pp. 147-210). Cambridge,
   Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Hayashi, Fumio (1992). Explaining Japan's Saving: A Review of Recent Literature.
   Monetary and Economic Studies, 10(2), 63-78.
Hayashi, Fumio (1995). Is the Japanese Extended Family Altruistically Linked? A Test

                                         28
  Based on Engel Curves. Journal of Political Economy, 103(3), 661-674.
Hayashi, Fumio (1997a). Introduction to Part III: A Review of Recent Literature on
  Japanese Saving. In Fumio Hayashi, Understanding Saving: Evidence from the
  United States and Japan (pp. 289-329). Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Hayashi, Fumio (1997b). Understanding Saving. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Hayashi, Fumio; Ando, Albert; and Ferris, Richard (1988). Life Cycle and Bequest
  Savings: A Study of Japanese and U.S. Households based on Data from the 1984
  NSFIE and the 1983 Survey of Consumer Finances. Journal of Japanese and
  International Economies, 2(4), 450-491.
Horioka, Charles Yuji (1984). The Applicability of the Life-Cycle Hypothesis of Saving
  to Japan. Kyoto University Economic Review, 54(2), 31-56.
Horioka, Charles Yuji (1985). The Importance of Saving for Education in Japan. Kyoto
  University Economic Review , 55(1), 41-78.
Horioka, Charles Yuji (1986). Why Is Japan's Private Savings Rate So High? Finance
  and Development, 23(4), 22-25.
Horioka, Charles Yuji (1987). The Cost of Marriages and Marriage-related Saving in
  Japan. Kyoto University Economic Review, 57(1), 47-58.
Horioka, Charles Yuji (1988). Saving for Housing Purchase in Japan. Journal of the
  Japanese and International Economies, 2(3), 351-384.
Horioka, Charles Yuji (1989). Why Is Japan's Private Saving Rate So High? In Ryuzo
  Sato and Takashi Negishi (Eds.), Developments in Japanese Economics (pp. 145-178).
  Tokyo, Japan: Academic Press/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Horioka, Charles Yuji (1990). Why Is Japan's Household Saving Rate So High? A
  Literature Survey. Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 4(1), 49-92.
Horioka, Charles Yuji (1991). The Determinants of Japan's Saving Rate: The Impact of
  the Age Structure of the Population and Other Factors. Economic Studies Quarterly
  (now called Japanese Economic Review), 42(3), 237-253.
Horioka, Charles Yuji (1992). Future Trends in Japan's Saving Rate and the Implications
  Thereof for Japan's External Imbalance. Japan and the World Economy, 3(4), 307-
  330.
Horioka, Charles Yuji (1993). Saving in Japan. In Arnold Heertje (Ed.), World Savings:
  An International Survey (pp. 238-278). Oxford, England: Blackwell Publishers.
Horioka, Charles Yuji (1997). A Cointegration Analysis of the Impact of the Age
  Structure of the Population on the Household Saving Rate in Japan. Review of
  Economics and Statistics, 79(3), 511-516.
Horioka, Charles Yuji (2002a). Are the Japanese Selfish, Altruistic, or Dynastic?
  Japanese Economic Review, 53(1), 26-54.
Horioka, Charles Yuji (2002b). Nihonjin ha Rikotekika, Ritatekika, Ouchoutekika (Are
  the Japanese Selfish, Altruistic, or Dynastic?). In Keijiro Otsuka, Miko Nakayama,
  Shin-ichi Fukuda, and Yuzo Honda (Eds.), Gendai Keizaigaku no Chouryuu (Trends
  in Contemporary Economics) (pp. 23-45). Tokyo, Japan: Toyo Keizai Shinposha (in
  Japanese).
Horioka, Charles Yuji (2006). Do the Elderly Dissave in Japan? In Lawrence R. Klein
  (Ed.), Long-Run Growth and Short-Run Stabilization: Essays in Memory of Albert
  Ando (pp. 129-136). Cheltenham, England: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Horioka, Charles Yuji (2008a). A Survey of Household Saving Behaviour. In Florian
  Coulmas, Harald Conrad, Annette Schad-Seifert, and Gabriele Vogt (Eds.), The

                                          29
  Demographic Challenge--A Handbook about Japan (pp. 879-897). Leiden,
  Netherlands: Brill Academic Publishers.
Horioka, Charles Yuji (2008b). Isan to Kakusa (Bequests and Inequality). Kikan Shakai
  Hoshou Kenkyuu, 44(3), 307-315 (in Japanese).
Horioka, Charles Yuji (2008c). Nihon ni okeru Isan Douki to Oyako Kankei: Nihonjin
  ha Rikotekika, Ritatekika, Ouchoutekika (Bequest Motives and Parent-Child
  Relations in Japan: Are the Japanese Selfish, Altruistic, or Dynastic?). In Charles Yuji
  Horioka and Institute for Research on Household Economics (Eds.), Setainai Bunpai/
  Sedaikan Iten no Keizai Bunseki (Economic Analysis of Intra-household Distribution
  and Intergenerational Transfers ) (pp. 118-135). Kyoto, Japan: Minerva Shobo (in
  Japanese).
Horioka, Charles Yuji (2009). Do Bequests Increase or Decrease Wealth Inequalities?
  Economics Letters, 103(1), 23-25.
Horioka, Charles Yuji (2010). The (Dis)saving Behavior of the Aged in Japan. Japan
  and the World Economy, 22(3), 151-158.
Horioka, Charles Yuji (2012a). Are Japanese Households Financially Healthy, If So,
  Why? Japanese Economy, 39(4), 109-124.
Horioka, Charles Yuji (2012b). Japan and the Western Model: An Economist's View of
  Cultures of Household Finance. In Jan Logemann (Ed.), The Development of
  Consumer Credit in Global Perspective: Business, Regulation, and Culture (pp. 243-
  256). London, England: Palgrave Macmillan.
Horioka, Charles Yuji (2014a). Are Americans and Indians More Altruistic than the
  Japanese and Chinese? Evidence from a New International Survey of Bequest Plans.
  Review of Economics of the Household, 12(3), 411-437.
Horioka, Charles Yuji (2014b). Naze Hitobito ha Isan wo Nokosunoka? Aijou kara
  nanoka, Rikoshin kara nanoka? Isan Douki no Kokusai Hikaku (Who Do People
  Leave Bequests? Is It Out of Love or Selfishness? An International Comparison of
  Bequest Motives). Higashi Ajia no Shiten, 25(4), 51-62 (in Japanese).
Horioka, Charles Yuji (2019). Are the Japanese Unique? Evidence from Household
  Saving and Bequest Behavior. Singapore Economic Review, 64(1), 5-22.
Horioka, Charles Yuji (2020). Nihon de Raifu Saikuru Kasetsu ha Naritatteiruka? (Is the
  Life Cycle Hypothesis Applicable in Japan?). In Takashi Ui, Takashi Kano, Junko
  Doi, and Toshiaki Watanabe (Eds.), Gendai Keizaigaku no Choryuu (Trends in
  Contemporary Economics). Tokyo, Japan: Toyo Keizai Shinposha (in Japanese).
Horioka, Charles Yuji; Fujisaki, Hideki; Watanabe, Wako; and Ishibashi, Shohei (1998).
  Chochiku Douki / Isan Douki no Nichibei Hikaku (A U.S.-Japan Comparison of
  Saving Motives and Bequest Motives). In Charles Yuji Horioka and Koji Hamada
  (Eds.), Nichibei Kakei no Chochiku Koudou (A U.S.-Japan Comparison of Saving
  Behavior) (pp. 71-111). Tokyo, Japan: Nihon Hyoronsha (in Japanese).
Horioka, Charles Yuji, Fujisaki, Hideki; Watanabe, Wako; and Kouno, Takatsugu (2000).
  Are Americans More Altruistic than the Japanese? A U.S.-Japan Comparison of
  Saving and Bequest Motives. International Economic Journal, 14(1), 1-31.
Horioka, Charles Yuji; Gahramanov, Emin; Hayat, Aziz; and Tang, Xueli (2018). Why
  Do Children Take Care of Their Elderly Parents? Are the Japanese Any Different?
  International Economic Review , 59(1), 113-136.
Horioka, Charles Yuji, and Kanda, Reiko (2010). Revitalizing the Japanese Economy by
  Socializing Risk. The Japanese Economy, 37(3), 3-36.

                                           30
Horioka, Charles Yuji; Kasuga, Norihiro; Yamazaki, Katsuyo; and Watanabe, Wako
   (1996). Do the Aged Dissave in Japan? Evidence from Micro Data. Journal of the
   Japanese and International Economies, 10(3), 295-311.
Horioka, Charles Yuji, and Niimi, Yoko (2017). Nihon no Koureisha Setai no Chochiku
   Koudou ni kansuru Jisshou Bunseki (An Empirical Analysis of the Saving Behavior
   of Elderly Households in Japan). Keizai Bunseki, 196, 29-47 (in Japanese).
Horioka, Charles Yuji, and Niimi, Yoko (2020). Was the Expansion of Housing Credit
   in Japan Good or Bad? Japan and the World Economy, 53.
Horioka, Charles Yuji, and Niimi, Yoko (2021). Household Debt and Aging in Japan. In
   Olivia S. Mitchell and Annamaria L. Lusardi (Eds.), Remaking Retirement: Debt in
   an Aging Economy. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Horioka, Charles Yuji, and Okui, Megumi (1999). A U.S.-Japan Comparison of the
   Importance and Determinants of Retirement Saving. Economics Letters, 65(3),
   365-371.
Horioka, Charles Yuji, and Terada-Hagiwara, Akiko (2012). The Determinants and
   Long-term Projections of Saving Rates in Developing Asia. Japan and the World
   Economy, 24(2), 128-137.
Horioka, Charles Yuji, and Terada-Hagiwara, Akiko (2017). The Impact of Sex Ratios
   before Marriage on Household Saving in Two Asian Countries: The Competitive
   Saving Motive Revisited. Review of Economics of the Household , 15(3), 739-757.
Horioka, Charles Yuji, and Wan, Junmin (2007). The Determinants of Household Saving
   in China: A Dynamic Panel Analysis of Provincial Data. Journal of Money, Credit
   and Banking, 39(8), 2077-2096.
Horioka, Charles Yuji, and Watanabe, Wako (1997). Why Do People Save? A Micro-
   Analysis of Motives for Household Saving in Japan. Economic Journal, 107(442),
   537-552.
Horioka, Charles Yuji, and Watanabe, Wako (1998). Nihonjin no Mokuteki-betsu
   Chochiku-gaku: 1994-nen no `Kakei ni okeru Kin'yuu Shisan Sentaku ni kansuru
   Chousa' kara no Maikuro Deta wo Mochiita Suikei (Saving Amounts by Motive of
   the Japanese: Estimates based on Micro Data from the 1994 `Survey of Financial
   Asset Choice of Households'). In Charles Yuji Horioka and Koji Hamada (Eds.),
   Nichibei Kakei no Chochiku Koudou (A U.S.-Japan Comparison of Saving Behavior)
   (pp. 29-69). Tokyo, Japan: Nihon Hyoronsha (in Japanese).
Jappelli, Tullio, and Pistaferri, Luigi (2017). The Economics of Consumption: Theory
   and Evidence. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Jiang, Quanbao; Li, Xiaomin; and Feldman, Marcus W. (2015). Bequest Motives of
   Older People in Rural China: From the Perspective of Intergenerational Support.
   European Journal of Aging, 12, 141-151.
Katzner, Donald W. (1999). Western Economics and the Economy of Japan. Journal of
   Post-Keynesian Economics, 21(3), 503-521.
Katzner, Donald W. (2008). Culture and Economic Explanation: Economics in the US
   and Japan. New York, New York: Routledge.
Koga, Maiko (2006). The Decline of Japan's Saving Rate and Demographic Effects.
   Japanese Economic Review , 57(2), 312-321.
Kohara, Miki, and Horioka, Charles Yuji (2006). Do Borrowing Constraints Matter? An
   Analysis of Why the Permanent Income Hypothesis Does Not Apply in Japan. Japan
   and the World Economy, 18(4), 358-377.

                                        31
Kohara, Miki, and Ohtake, Fumio (2011). Altruism and the Care of Elderly Parents.
   The Japanese Economy, 38(2), 3-18.
Komamura, Kouhei (1994). Koreisha Kakei ni okeru Isan Koudou no Keizai Bunseki (An
    Economic Analysis of Bequest Behavior in Elderly Households). Kikan Shakai Hoshou
    Kenkyuu, 30(1), 62-74 (in Japanese).
Kotlikoff, Laurence J., and Spivak, Avia (1981). The Family as an Incomplete Annuities
    Market. Journal of Political Economy, 89(2), 372-391.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J., and Summers, Lawrence H. (1981). The Role of
   Intergenerational Transfers in Aggregate Capital Accumulation. Journal of Political
   Economy, 89(4), 706­732.
Laferrère, Anne, and Wolff, Francois-Charles (2006). Microeconomic Models of Family
   Transfers. In Serge-Christophe Kolm and Jean Mercier Ythier (Eds.), Handbook of
   the Economics of Giving, Altruism and Reciprocity (vol. 2, pp. 889-969). Amsterdam,
   Netherlands: Elsevier Science B.V.
Loayza, Norman; Schmidt-Hebbel, Klaus; and Serven, Luis (2000). What Drives Private
   Saving Across the World. Review of Economics and Statistics , 82(2), 165-181.
McCleary, Rachel M., and Barro, Robert J. (2006). Religion and Economy. Journal of
   Economic Perspectives, 20(2), 49-72.
Modigliani, Franco (1966). The Life Cycle Hypothesis of Saving, the Demand for
   Wealth and the Supply of Capital. Social Research, 33(2), 160-217.
Modigliani, Franco (1975). The Life-cycle Hypothesis of Saving Twenty Years Later. In
   Michael Parkin (Ed.), Contemporary Issues in Economics (pp. 2-35). Manchester,
   England: Manchester University Press.
Modigliani, Franco, and Brumberg, Richard H. (1954). Utility Analysis and the
   Consumption Function: An Interpretation of Cross-Section Data. In Kenneth K.
   Kurihara (Ed.), Post-Keynesian Economics (pp. 388-436). New Brunswick, New
   Jersey: Rutgers University Press.
Modigliani, Franco, and Brumberg, Richard H. (1980). Utility Analysis and Aggregate
   Consumption Functions: An Attempt at Integration. In Andrew Abel (Ed.), The
   Collected Papers of Franco Modigliani, vol. 2: The Life Cycle Hypothesis of Saving
   (pp. 128-197). Cambridge Massachusetts: The MIT Press.
Modigliani, Franco, and Cao, Shi Larry (2004). The Chinese Saving Puzzle and the Life-
   Cycle Hypothesis. Journal of Economic Literature, 42(1), 145-170.
Morishima, Michio (1982). Why Has Japan Succeeded? Western Technology and the
   Japanese Ethos. New York, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Niimi, Yoko, and Horioka, Charles Yuji (2018). The Impact of Intergenerational
   Transfers on Wealth Inequality in Japan and the United States. World Economy, 41(8),
   2042-2066.
Niimi, Yoko, and Horioka, Charles Yuji (2019). The Wealth Decumulation Behavior of
   the Retired Elderly in Japan: The Relative Importance of Precautionary Saving and
   Bequest Motives. Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 51, 52-63.
Ogawa, Kazuo (2007). Why Did Japan's Household Savings Rate Fall in the 1990s.
   Applied Economics, 39(18), 2341-2353.
Ogawa, Kazuo, and Horioka, Charles Yuji (1996). Shouhi / Chochiku (Consumption and
   Saving). In Keimei Kaizuka, Yutaka Kosai, and Yujiro Nonaka (Eds.), Nihon Keizai
   Jiten (Japanese Economic Encyclopedia) (pp. 965-980). Tokyo, Japan: Nihon Keizai
   Shinbunsha (in Japanese).

                                          32
Ohtake, Fumio, and Horioka, Charles Yuji (1994). Chochiku Douki (Saving Motives).
   In Tsuneo Ishikawa (Ed.), Nihon no Shotoku to Tomi no Bunpai (The Distribution of
   Income and Wealth in Japan) (pp. 211-244). Tokyo, Japan: Tokyo Daigaku
   Shuppankai (in Japanese).
Perozek, Maria G. (1998). A Rexamination of the Strategic Bequest Motive. Journal of
   Political Economy, 106(2), 423-445.
Ravallion, Martin (2020). Should the Randomistas (Continue to) Rule? NBER Working
   Paper 27554. Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Schunk, Daniel (2009). What Determines the Saving Behavior of German Households:
   An Examination of Saving Motives and Saving Decisions. Journal of Economics and
   Statistics (Jahrbuecher fuer Nationaloekonomie und Statistik) , 229(4), 467-491.
Ventura, Luigi, and Horioka, Charles Yuji (2020). The Wealth Decumulation Behavior
   of the Retired Elderly in Italy: The Importance of Bequest Motives and Precautionary
   Saving. Review of Economics of the Household , 18(3), 575-597.
Wakabayashi, Midori, and Horioka, Charles Yuji (2009). Is the Eldest Son Different?
   The Residential Choice of Siblings in Japan. Japan and the World Economy, 21(4),
   337-348.
Watanabe, Katsunori; Watanabe, Takayuki; and Watanabe, Tsutomu (2001). Tax Policy
   and Consumer Spending: Evidence from Japanese Fiscal Experiments. Journal of
   International Economics, 53(2), 261-281.
Weber, Max (1905/2002). The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism (translated
   by Peter Baehr and Gordon C. Wells). New York, New York: Penguin Classics.
Wei, Shang-Jin, and Zhang, Xiaobo (2011). The Competitive Saving Motive: Evidence
   from Rising Sex Ratios and Savings Rates in China. Journal of Political Economy,
   119(3), 511-564.
Weil, David N. (1994). The Saving of the Elderly in Micro and Macro Data. Quarterly
   Journal of Economics, 109(1), 55-81.
Wineman, Ayala, and Liverpool-Tasie, Lenis Saweda (2019). All in the Family: Bequest
   Motives in Rural Tanzania. Economic Development and Cultural Change, 67(4), 799-
   831.
Yamada, Ken (2006). Intra-family Transfers in Japan: Intergenerational Co-residence,
   Distance, and Contact. Applied Economics, 38(16), 1839-1861.
Yao, Rui; Wang, Feifei; Weagley, Robert O.; and Liao, Li (2011). Household Saving
   Motives: Comparing American and Chinese Consumers. Family and Consumer
   Sciences Research Journal, 40(1), 28-44.




                                          33
                             Figure 1: The Selfish Life-Cycle Model


Consumption,
Income

               Y
                    Cumulative saving during working years
            C
                                                                           Cumulating
                                                                       (dis)saving during
                                                                        retirement years

                0                                                  R                        L
                                                       Age


 Table 1: A Decomposition of the Private Saving Rate Gap between Japan and Other
                                        Countries
                                                                     Gap between
                                                          U.S.-Japan  Japan and
                            Factor
                                                             gap     OECD-wide
                                                                       average
The contribution of a high income growth rate               +0.45       +0.47
The contribution of a low retirement-age population ratio   +5.45       +6.90
The contribution of a low dependent-age population ratio           +1.64           +1.07
The contribution of a high labor force participation rate of the
                                                                       -3.94        -3.89
elderly
The contribution of a low per capita income level                  +4.36           +1.29
Subtotal                                                           +7.96           +5.85
Unexplained residual                                               +2.90           +0.95
Total private saving rate gap                                      +10.86          +6.80
Note: The figures denote the contribution of each factor to the private saving rate gap (in
percentage points).
Source: Horioka (1986, 1989)




                                              34
  Figure 2: Trends over Time in Japan's Household Saving Rate, 1955-2018

 25.0


 20.0


 15.0


 10.0


  5.0


  0.0
        1955
               1958
                      1961
                             1964
                                    1967
                                           1970
                                                  1973
                                                          1976
                                                                 1979
                                                                        1982
                                                                               1985
                                                                                      1988
                                                                                             1991
                                                                                                    1994
                                                                                                           1997
                                                                                                                  2000
                                                                                                                         2003
                                                                                                                                2006
                                                                                                                                       2009
                                                                                                                                              2012
                                                                                                                                                     2015
                                                                                                                                                            2018
 -5.0

                         68SNA(1990)                                      93SNA(2000)                                    08SNA(2011)


Note: This figure shows trends over time in the household saving rate, which is
      defined as household saving as a share of household disposable income (in
      percent).
Source: Economic and Social Research Institute, Cabinet Office, Government of
        Japan, "Annual Report on National Accounts," various issues.



                                                  Table 2: Saving for Specific Motives
Financing method                                              Gross saving                                                            Dissaving
                                                         Accumulation of financial                                              Decumulation of financial
Own wealth
                                                                 assets                                                                 assets
Borrowing                                                   Loan repayments                                                         New borrowing




                                                                                             35
   Table 3: A U.S.-Japan Comparison of the Share of Net Saving for Each Motive
         Saving Motive                 Japan (1994)        Japan (1996)       U.S. (1996)
Retirement                                       62.50              62.23             30.84
Precautionary                                    55.99              41.18             27.93
Children's education                              8.93               8.77             -0.14
Children's marriage                               7.52               7.31              2.87
Housing purchase                                -20.21             -15.57             14.60
Consumer durable purchases                       -3.75               1.54              4.20
Leisure                                          -0.44               2.44               6.35
Payment of taxes                                 -1.54               0.25               6.40
Independent business                              0.10              -0.37               2.59
Bequests                                          3.23                1.50               5.04
Other                                          -12.33                -9.29              -0.66
Total                                          100.00             100.00              100.00
Note: The figures denote the share of net saving for each motive in total household saving
(in percent). The figure for "Precautionary" denotes the sum of the figures for "Illness" and
"Peace of mind."
Sources: Horioka (1998, 1999) and Horioka, et al. (1998, 2000).




                                           36
