                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     IMPEDIMENTS TO THE SCHUMPETERIAN PROCESS IN THE REPLACEMENT
                            OF LARGE FIRMS

                                          Mara Faccio
                                       John J. McConnell

                                      Working Paper 27871
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27871


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2020




We thank David Denis, William Free, E. Han Kim, Baixiao Liu, Maria-Teresa Marchica, Randall
Morck, Roberto Mura, Henri Servaes, René Stulz, Deniz Yavuz, Qian Wang and participants at
the Entrepreneurial Finance Workshop series in Chicago for their suggestions and Shrijata
Chattopadhyay, Nobuhiko Kobayashi, and Deliya Kuleshov for assistance in data collection. We
are also grateful to Leslie Hannah for generously sharing his painfully gathered list of business
directories for circa 1910. The authors acknowledge financial support from the "Blake Family
Fund for Ethics, Governance and Leadership." The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Mara Faccio and John J. McConnell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Impediments to the Schumpeterian Process in the Replacement of Large Firms
Mara Faccio and John J. McConnell
NBER Working Paper No. 27871
September 2020
JEL No. G3,G38,O16,P16

                                           ABSTRACT

Using newly-assembled data encompassing up to 75 countries and starting circa 1910, we find
that the Schumpeterian process of creative destruction aptly describes the replacement of large
firms by other firms, but exceptions to the norm of replacement are not rare and replacement is
often not by new firms. Initial firm size and political connections represent the main obstacles to
the Schumpeterian process while board interlocks and a corporate culture of innovation play
modest roles. Consistent with a theory of political capture, when accompanied by regulations that
restrict entry, political connections play a formidable role in abetting large firms remaining large.


Mara Faccio
Krannert School of Management
Purdue University
403 W. State Street
West Lafayette, IN 47907
and NBER
mfaccio@purdue.edu

John J. McConnell
Krannert School of Management
Purdue University
403 West State Street
West Lafayette, IN 47907
mcconnj@purdue.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27871
 


In the Schumpeterian process of "creative destruction," the market power of dominant firms is

inexorably eroded over time as innovations are launched by new entrants (Schumpeter (1911,

1934, 1942)). Some economists contend that this process plays a major role in economic growth

(Grossman and Helpman (1991), Aghion and Howitt (1992), King and Levine (2003), Fogel,

Morck, and Young (2008), Kogan, Papanikolaou, Seru, and Stoffman (2017)). In this process, as

the norm, firms, including large firms, do not remain the same for long, as they are continuously

replaced by new entrants. Yet, contrary to this intuitive prediction, there are at least a few well-

known cases of dominant firms that have remained powerful since (at least) the early 1900s.

Examples include AT&T (U.S.), the National Bank of Egypt (Egypt), Nestlé (Switzerland),

Paribas (France), Siemens (Germany), and Tata Iron and Steel (India). How pervasive are such

cases? And, what enables big businesses to maintain their economic power, as in the cases above,

for up to a century or more and, thereby, defy the process of creative destruction?

         Two of Schumpeter's contemporaries, Steffens (1906) and Brandeis (1914, 1934), both of

whom perceive big business as an evil to be combatted, provide possible answers. The theme of

these authors is that the biggest firms are able to entrench their positions by stifling entry, a view

that has reemerged in the more recent scholarly literature (e.g., Crouzet and Eberly (2018),

Philippon (2019), De Loecker, Eeckhout, and Unger (2020)) and in the popular press (Ramaswamy

(2020), The Economist (2020)).1

         Steffens (1906) observes that large firms maintain their positions of dominance by

exercising power over the political process. That perspective was anticipated in the famous cartoon

published in Puck on January 23, 1889, and republished in many economics textbooks, showing



1
  A related literature investigates the role of mergers and acquisitions (M&As) in enabling firms to acquire rivals to
impede or acquire their innovations (Kamepalli, Rajan, and Zingales (2019), and Cunningham, Ederer, and Ma
(2020)). Tests presented in Section VII.C show that our conclusions are robust to accounting for M&A activity.


                                                          1
 


tiny legislators overseen by bloated business bosses.2 Such observations presaged the later

development of the capture theory of regulation in Stigler (1971) and extended by Peltzman (1976)

in which large business enterprises exploit the regulatory process to their advantage by, among

other ways, erecting regulatory barriers to entry.

         In a slightly different spirit, Brandeis (1914, 1934) views economic activity as being

dominated by "money trusts" that are connected by interlocking boards of directors, particularly

those involving banks, that allow big business interests to suppress rival entrants and, thereby,

remain big. To exemplify this narrative, Brandeis points to J.P. Morgan & Co. and its associates

as holding "such financial power in at least thirty-two transportation systems, public utility

corporations and industrial companies."3

         Although Schumpeter proposes that, in the normal course of economic events, the founding

entrepreneurs of large enterprises may reap rents for up to a few decades, he also theorizes that,

although rare, some firms may remain large for extended periods by establishing cultures of

creativity that support innovation. Tata Sons Private Limited is often portrayed as such a case.4

The company, established in 1868 by Jamsetji Tata as an opium and tea trading company,

subsequently ventured into iron and steel, chemicals, motor vehicles, energy production, and

telecommunications and, in 2018, was the largest firm in India.

         With that as background, in this study, we investigate two questions. First, worldwide, how

pervasive are exceptions to the Schumpeterian process of replacement among large firms? Second,

to the extent that exceptions to the process are not rare, what factors impede the Schumpeterian


2
  Steffens' writings and writings by other political economists are often credited with passage of the Sherman Antitrust
Act (1890) and the Clayton Act (1914) that outlawed monopolies and other anticompetitive business practices.
3
  Brandeis (1914), p. 12.
4
  According to Graham (2010), "J.R.D. Tata, who was chairman [of Tata Sons] from 1938 to 1991...nurtured its
reputation for integrity and innovation" and Masani (2015) states "[R. Gopalakrishnan] chaired Tata Group Innovation
Forum (TGIF), a Tata Sons Ltd offspring mandated to positively influence the culture of innovation in all Tata
companies."


                                                           2
 


process of new large firms replacing the old?

         In addressing these questions, we start with a manually assembled sample of the 20 largest

firms in each of 60 countries and colonies (that later became countries) circa 1910. We focus on

the largest firms in each country because those firms disproportionately contribute to their

country's economic output. We continue our analysis with two more recent time intervals, one

starting with 1980 and the other with 2000, both of which end with 2018. For these more recent

time periods, we use a variety of data sources, including manually collected data on boards of

directors and political connections, and financial data from commercial databases. The virtue of

data from circa 1910 is that this ten-decade-long interval gives the Schumpeterian process an

abundance of time to create and destroy. The second and third time intervals, though shorter than

a century, still allow the Schumpeterian process decades to prevail.

         Consistent with Schumpeter's proposition, worldwide, the replacement of old large firms

with the other large firms is the norm in each of the time periods considered. However, contrary

to Schumpeter's proposition, exceptions are not rare.5 Exceptions represent 13.6% of the 20 largest

firms in each country over the century-long time period, increasing to 25.0% of the largest firms

over the four-decade period of 1980-2018, and increasing further to 43.8% of the largest 20 firms

over the nearly two-decade interval of 2000-2018.

         Why are exceptions so pervasive? We first consider the proposition set forth by Steffens

and Brandeis that the biggest businesses are able to entrench their positions and, thereby, remain

dominant over long time periods. Consistent with this proposition, we find that the largest of the




5
 We recognize, of course, that what constitutes a "rare" event lies in the eyes of the beholder. The U.S. Rare Diseases
Act of 2002 (https://www.congress.gov/bill/107th-congress/house-bill/4013) defines as a "rare disease" any disease
affecting fewer than 200,000 persons in the U.S., i.e., fewer than 1/1,500. The European Commission on Public Health
uses a threshold of 1 in 2,000 persons to define the concept of "rare diseases" (see, e.g., Baldovino, Moliner, Taruscio,
Daina, Roccatello (2016)).


                                                           3
 


large firms are disproportionately more likely to remain dominant. For example, in our base case

regression, a one standard deviation increase in the book equity of one of the largest 20 firms in

1910 increases the likelihood of that firm remaining among the 20 largest firms in its country over

100 years later by 6.9 percentage points, from 13.6% to 20.5%. Firm size continues to be highly

statistically and economically significant in explaining whether a large firm remains among the

largest 20 in its country over the other two time intervals.

         How do the biggest firms remain big over extended periods of time? Is it because the

biggest firms better foster a culture of innovation, as proposed by Schumpeter, is it because they

capture the political process, as proposed by Steffens, Stigler, and others, or is it because of

interlocking boards of directors, as proposed by Brandeis? The results show a statistically and

economically large impact of political connections, but only limited roles for innovation and board

interlocks.

         More specifically, consistent with the political capture proposition, being politically

connected circa 1910 increases the likelihood of a large firm continuing to be one of the 20 largest

firms in its country over 100 years later by 11.5 percentage points, a result that is both

economically and statistically significant. The relation between political connections and a large

firm becoming or remaining among the largest 20 over the interval of 2000-2018, the other interval

for which we have data on political connections, is also statistically significant and economically

large.

         To investigate the extent to which firms remain among the 20 largest by establishing a

culture of creativity that supports innovation, for the circa 1910 sample, we use a new tech

indicator, based on prior work by Braggion and Moore (2012), as a proxy for innovation. For the

1980 and 2000 samples, we use research and development (R&D) expenditures, which first




                                                  4
 


became available in a commercial database in 1980, as a proxy for innovation. For the circa 1910

sample, the variable is statistically significant only in one regression and the sign of the coefficient

is sometimes negative. Thus, the results provide little support for the proposition that a culture of

innovation allows big firms to remain big for a century. For the 1980 and 2000 samples, the sign

of the coefficient is positive in every regression and the coefficient is statistically significant in 14

of the 18 models. Thus, over the shorter time intervals, the results do lend some support to that

proposition; however, in comparison with size and political connections, the economic impact of

innovation is modest.

        As regards board interlocks, for the 1910 sample, for each firm, we count the number of

other large firms with which the firm shares officers or directors. If a firm's nexus of interlocks

includes a bank, this count is also the firm's number of bank-board interlocks. Neither the number

of board interlocks nor the number of bank-board interlocks circa 1910 are significantly related to

the probability of a large firm being among the 20 largest in its country 100 years later.

        Similarly, we find no significant link between the number of interlocks nor the number of

bank-board interlocks and the propensity of a large firm to remain large over the nearly four-

decade interval of 1980-2018. In contrast, a higher number of interlocks, including bank-board

interlocks, in 2000 results in a significantly higher probability of a firm being among the 20 largest

in its country 18 years later providing some, albeit limited, support for Brandeis's proposition.

        The positive correlation between political connections and subsequent firm size could be

the result of politically connected firms being the best firms and remaining large because they are

the best, rather than because of their political connections. To tackle this concern, we augment our

specifications with firm profitability, measured as return on equity (ROE), and firm growth

opportunities, measured as the ratio of the market value of equity to book value of equity (M/B),




                                                   5
 


as two measures of firm quality. We further augment the regressions with other control variables,

as well as a variety of fixed effects to reduce alternative sources of confounding variation. The

fixed effects include country and industry fixed effects, and, in some of the specifications, country

x industry fixed effects. The positive relation between the propensity of a firm to remain among

the largest in its country and political connections continues to be positive and statistically

significant in a well-identified setting that includes all of these controls and fixed effects.

        Could it be that we are still capturing a spurious correlation where the politically connected

companies are the best and, therefore, the biggest, but ROE and market-to-book fail to properly

control for firm quality?6 To address that possibility, we conduct an indirect test. To do so, we

recognize that weak firms, rather than the best firms, cannot remain large when the destructive

forces of competition are at work. However, barriers to competitive entry may enable weak firms

to remain large. In the absence of restrictions to cross-border competition, barriers to domestic

entry are insufficient. A necessary condition for weak firms to remain large is that cross-border

entry be limited. À la Rajan and Zingales (2003), we propose that cross-border competition

requires open borders to trade and access to capital. We investigate whether politically connected

firms are disproportionately more likely to remain large when regulatory barriers to cross-border

entry and to cross-border capital flows are in place.

        We find that they are. Specifically, our tests show that openness to cross-border capital

flows and openness to cross-border trade reduce the ability of politically connected incumbents to

remain dominant over extended periods of time. These results are consistent with regulatory

barriers to entry and barriers to cross-border capital flows being mechanisms that allow politically

connected firms to impede the Schumpeterian process.


6
 The evidence in Fogel et al. (2008), who document that lack of replacement among large firms is detrimental to
economic growth, rejects this contention.


                                                      6
 


        The Schumpeterian process of creative destruction is often associated with evolutionary

economic development and growth. One manifestation of that process, and the one that we study

here, is that, within countries, large incumbent firms are replaced by new large firms. Despite the

salutary benefits of the process, we find evidence of factors that systematically impede it from

occurring. In particular, when the demand for regulatory protection is met by the supply of

regulations that protect incumbents from entry, large incumbent firms connected to politicians tend

to remain dominant for decades if not centuries.

        Our study connects to prior research on the effect of barriers to entry on the start up of new

businesses (Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2002), Klapper, Laeven, and Rajan

(2006)), the role of political connections in shaping regulatory decisions affecting business firms

(Kroszner and Stratmann (1998), Faccio and Zingales (2019), Akcigit, Baslandze, and Lotti

(2020)), and the role of political connections and bank-board interlocks in affecting preferential

access to capital (La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Guillermo Zamarripa (2003),

Sapienza (2004), Faccio, Masulis, and McConnell (2005), Khwaja and Mian (2005), Morck,

Yavuz, and Yeung (2011), Houston, Jiang, Lin, and Ma (2014)).

        Each of these studies either examines firm-level data for a limited number of years or

examines a longer time series of data using country-level data. Such analyses are important and

shed light on key questions. However, Schumpeter allows for successful entrepreneurs to earn

rents and remain large for limited periods of time. Testing whether impediments restrict the

evolutionary Schumpeterian process of replacement at the firm level requires tracking the fate of

individual firms over an extended period of time. That is our objective. To accomplish that

objective, we construct a novel set of firm-level data spanning more than 100 years. We turn to

that topic next.




                                                   7
 


I.      Data

I.A     Circa 1910

        We label our data as commencing circa 1910 rather than commencing in 1910 because

certain of the data sources are not available in that year. We use the data source that is available

and that is closest in time to 1910. The years range from 1900 to 1925.

        Company size is a critical variable in our analyses. We measure size as the book value of

equity. We do so because, for 1910, that variable is far more frequently reported than are other

potential measures of relative business size. Further, for the years 1980 and 2000, book value of

equity correlates well with net income, operating income, book value of assets, revenues, and

number of employees.7 Thus, given our objective of measuring firms by relative size within a

country, book value of equity works well. For each country, we gather data on the 20 largest

companies, requiring a minimum of book equity data to be available for 10 companies for the

country to be included in our 1910 sample.8 This results in a sample of 1,115 firms from 60

countries for which book equity data are available. Appendix A lists the countries.

        We use the term country to indicate a "modern-day country" that exists in 2018. Some of

these countries were colonies circa 1910 and a few were part of a larger country at that time. For

example, Azerbaijan was part of the Russian Empire. The data sources employed often provide

the address, or, at a minimum, the main area of operations, of each firm. We use Google searches

to determine the modern-day country to which each firm's address corresponds.

        Online Appendix A lists the 56 sources that we employ to collect data on the book value

of equity and business addresses circa 1910. The bulk of these sources are country-specific


7
 The correlations between book equity and these other measures of size range between 0.48 and 0.99.
8
 The sample includes 10 firms in Bolivia, 19 in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 12 in Ecuador, 10 in the
French Guiana, 10 in Guinea, 14 in Kenya, 11 in Luxembourg, 11 in Peru, 18 in Senegal, 10 in Uzbekistan, and 10 in
Venezuela.


                                                        8
 


business directories. A starting point for identifying these directories is Hannah (2015). We

supplement his initial list through library and internet searches. The vast majority of these sources

are scanned paper directories and in a number of instances the directories cover both publicly-

traded and privately-held businesses. When covered in the directories, we include both types of

firms in our 1910 sample.

       These directories report the names of top officers and directors for all but a few of the

largest firms in 44 countries. We use this information to identify each instance in which an officer

or director of a large firm is an officer or director of another large firm in the same country. We

then count the number of other large firms with which the firm has a common officer or director.

If the firm's nexus of interlocks includes a bank, this count is also the firm's number of bank-board

interlocks. While our classification captures interlocks with banks that are among the top 20 firms

in each country, it misses interlocks with smaller, but still large banks. For example, Brandeis

(1914) characterizes J.P. Morgan & Co. as being the hub of a nexus of connected firms. Because

J.P. Morgan is not among the largest 20 U.S. firms in 1910, that set of bank-board interlocks is not

captured by our variable.

       For 17 of the countries, the directory also identifies at least one instance in which a board

member holds or held a political office at some point in time. If so, we assume that the directory

gives that information for all firms for which officers and board members are provided. For the

US and Canada, the board directories provide no information on board members' political

experience. For these two countries, however, we do have directories of US congressmen and

Canadian parliamentarians. We match these with lists of board members to identify potential

political connections. We, then, conduct a Google search to ensure that the board member and the

parliamentarian are the same person circa 1910. We define a political connection as any instance




                                                 9
 


in which a director or officer of a large firm is a member of the central government or a member

of the parliament of its country (in the case of former colonies, political connections include

politicians from the ruling country that are officers or directors of the firm). In total, we have

political connections for 19 countries circa 1910.

       The book equity in most business directories is given in the currency of the firm's country

of incorporation. We use Rodney Edvinsson's (2016) Historical Currency Converter, Lobell

(2010), and the Ministère des Finances's Annuaire Statistique de l'Egypte (1910) to convert these

to US dollar equivalents.

       We undertake searches of company histories through Wikipedia, Google, and the London

Stock Exchange "Register of Defunct and Other Companies Removed from the Stock Exchange

Official Year-Book." In instances in which the company changes its name (for example, in 1998,

the Compagnie Générale des Eaux changed its name to Vivendi), we continue the search with the

new name. In instances in which two or more companies merge (for example, Banque

Commerciale du Maroc merged with Wafa Bank to form Attijariwafa Bank), we continue with the

name of the merged entity. In the case of acquisitions, we continue with the name of the acquirer,

but only when the target firm is sufficiently large so as to be mentioned either in the acquiror's

web page (typically under the acquiror's history) or in the acquiror's Wikipedia page (for example,

the Eidgenössische Bank A.G. (EIBA) was, in 1945, taken over by the Swiss Bank Corporation).

In some instances, we can find no information on the firm in any of these sources. In such cases,

we assume that, as of 2018, the company is no longer in operation.

       Our next step is to determine whether the large companies circa 1910 are among the largest

in 2018 in each country. For countries included in Worldscope/Datastream, we compile a list of

the 20 largest publicly-traded firms for which book value of equity is available. If one of the 20




                                                10
 


largest firms from the 1910 list is among the 20 largest in its country in Worldscope/Datastream

in 2018, the firm is eligible to be among the largest in 2018. Because Worldscope/Datastream in

2018 does not have book equity for some of the largest privately-held firms from 1910, we access

Mergent, OneSource, and company websites to gather book equity in 2018 for these firms. From

this combined set, the 20 largest firms in each country in 2018 are identified.

        Of the 60 countries for which we can identify the 20 largest firms circa 1910, there are 10

that are not covered in Worldscope/Datastream as of 2018 or for which data in

Worldscope/Datastream are not sufficient to create a list of at least the 10 largest firms.9 In the

analyses, we treat firms that were among the 20 largest in 1910 in these 10 countries, and that are

still active in 2018, in three different ways. First, if we can retrieve book equity, from any source,

for the firm in question, we assume that the firm is among the 20 largest. Second, we assume that

none of those entities are among the 20 largest in their home country in 2018. Third, we exclude

the countries with insufficient coverage in Worldscope/Datastream from the analyses.

        We use the business directories to develop industry classifications with 14 broad

industries.10 The industry classification for some companies requires the authors' subjective

judgement. As a measure of innovation, we adopt the protocol of Braggion and Moore (2013) to

construct an indicator, new tech, in which a firm is assigned the value of one if the firm operates

in one of five sub-sectors: Chemicals (bleaching powder, fertilizers, and explosives), Electricity

supply, Electricity generation, Bicycle, or Motorcar, and zero otherwise. Firms are assigned the

new tech indicator based on the description of the firm's business in the directories. Finally, we




9
  These are Algeria, Azerbaijan, Cuba, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Guinea, Madagascar, North Korea, the
Republic of the Congo, Senegal and Uzbekistan.
10
   The 14 sectors are: Agricultural, Alcoholic beverages and tobacco, Banks, Other financial, Commercial and
industrial, Extractive, Gas, lighting, and water companies, Petroleum, Railroads, Other transportation, Real estate,
Telecommunications, Trusts, and Various.


                                                        11
 


conduct internet searches of companies' histories to determine whether they became state-owned

enterprises at any point following 1910.

I.B    1980s

       We also consider two long but somewhat shorter time periods of analysis. The first is the

nearly four decades of 1980 ­ 2018. It is possible that the Schumpeterian process of replacement

of large firms by new large firms would appear to well-describe the circumstance over the 100-

year interval, but, it is also possible that the process requires 99 years for such replacement to

occur. We are interested in these shorter, but still long, time periods to assess whether the

Schumpeterian process or its alternatives better describe the replacement (or lack thereof) of large

firms through time.

       We consider this second time interval for three reasons all of which are related to data

availability. First, 1980 is the first year in which data on research and development (R&D) expense

are available in an international commercial database. We use this as a more granular proxy of

innovation. The database is Worldscope/Datastream from which we also gather accounting data,

including book equity, market value of equity, net income, total assets, and firms' SIC industry

codes. This data source includes primarily publicly-traded companies.

       Second, 1980 is the first year for which data on officers and directors have been compiled

in a single source for companies across a large set of countries. The data source is the inaugural

issue of Moody's International Manual published in 1981, which provides officers' and directors'

names for 2,897 entities. Using the same counting procedure as for the 1910 sample, hand-

collected data from this source are used to determine, for each firm in the database, the number of

board interlocks with every other firm in the database. Likewise, we follow the procedure used for

the 1910 sample to count the number of firms within a firm's bank-board interlock nexus. The set




                                                12
 


of banks included in these data encompass a much larger set of banks than the circa 1910 data and,

therefore, reduce potential attenuation bias in bank-board interlocks.

         We     further     use    the    1981     Moody's        International     Manual       to    supplement

Worldscope/Datastream in cases in which a relevant data item is not available in

Worldscope/Datastream. By combining the data sources for 1980, we have data on R&D for firms

in 29 countries, and data on board interlocks and bank-board interlocks for 27 countries.

         Third, because Worldscope/Datastream is an electronic database, we are able to extend the

sample beyond the 20 largest companies in each country and conduct our subsequent analyses

using all firms with data in Worldscope/Datastream. The virtue of the larger sample is that we can

determine whether the replacement of old large firms is, at least in part, by smaller old firms as

opposed to new firms. To identify the 20 largest firms in each country in 1980, firms are ranked

according to their book equity in US dollars.11 Similarly, using this data source, the 20 largest are

identified for 2018. The 20 largest firms in 2018 in this analysis are slightly different from the 20

largest described in Section I.A because we consider only publicly-traded firms when using 1980

as the start point for the analysis. To track each firm over time, we use the unique identifier

assigned by Worldscope.

I.C      2000

         The third interval for consideration is 2000­2018. Of the three time periods considered,

this is the richest in terms of data availability. For 2000, book equity along with other accounting

data, industry SIC codes, and unique company identifiers are from Worldscope/Datastream for

publicly-traded firms in 52 countries.12 Data on political connections are available for firms in 47



11
    In robustness tests discussed in Section VII.A, we show that our conclusions are robust to using net income as an
alternative measure of size.
12
    Across three sample periods, as shown in Appendix A, the samples include firms from 75 countries. 


                                                         13
 


countries from Faccio (2006) who considers a firm to have a political connection if one of the

firm's large blockholders or top officers is a member of parliament, is the head of state, is a

government minister, or is closely-tied to a top politician. The names of corporate officers and

directors are hand-collected from the 2001 Mergent International Manuals. These names are used

to count, as before, the number of other firms with which a firm shares officers or directors. The

possible shortcoming of this time period is that it encompasses fewer years.

       To identify the 20 largest firms in each country in 2000, we rank firms by their book equity

in US dollars. The 20 largest in 2018 are the same as described in Section I.B.

II.    Empirical Results: Circa 1910 ­ 2018

       To address Schumpeter's propositions that, over a period of several decades, the

replacement of large firms by other large firms is the norm and that exceptions to that rule are rare,

we calculate the fraction of the 20 largest firms circa 1910 that remain among the 20 largest firms

in their respective countries 10 decades later. As shown in Panel A of Table 1, 13.6% of the 20

largest firms across the 60 countries for which we have sufficient data are among the 20 largest

firms 100 years later. An implication that arises from this statistic is that, over this multi-decade

interval, replacement of large firms by other large firms is, indeed, the norm. After all, of the 20

largest firms in 1910 across the 60 countries, more than 85% are no longer among the 20 largest

by 2018. But, a second, important implication, is that exceptions to the norm are not rare. Indeed,

perhaps astonishingly, 152 of the 1,115 largest 20 firms in the 1910 sample continue to be among

the 20 largest in their home countries over 100 years later.

       What are the impediments to large firms being replaced? Steffens and Brandeis assert that

large firms have the power and the means to suppress competition. If this proposition is correct,

large firms will remain large not by intra-firm innovation as proposed by Schumpeter but by the




                                                 14
 


suppression of competition.

        A measure of size for which we have data for firms in all 60 countries in 1910 is book

equity. With this, we estimate linear probability models of the probability that one of the 20 largest

firms in a country in 1910 was still among the 20 largest firms in its country in 2018. A key

independent variable is the standardized natural log of book equity circa 1910.

        To consider Schumpeter's idea that a firm can establish a culture of innovation that allows

it to overcome the natural forces of creative destruction to remain dominant, each specification in

Table 2 includes the new tech indicator. The models also include country fixed effects. Because

of the inclusion of country fixed effects, the coefficient of the natural log of book equity in 1910,

and that of any other independent variable, shows how the dependent variable varies as the natural

log of book equity in 1910, or the independent variable of interest, varies within a country. The

inclusion of country fixed effects controls for any country-level time-invariant as well as time-

varying factor, such as legal origin, cultural background, and events that occurred during the

interval under consideration such as the rise of communism, world wars, pandemics, and so forth.

        The results of the first regression are reported in column (1) of Table 2. The coefficient of

size is positive and statistically significant. To consider the economic significance of size, a one

standard deviation increase in the natural log of book equity increases the probability that one of

the 20 largest firms in a country in 1910 remains among the 20 largest in its country by 6.50

percentage points. This compares with the 13.6% unconditional probability of a large firm

remaining among the largest. Thus, size is also economically significant. In contrast, perhaps

surprisingly, the new tech indicator, with a p-value of 0.67, does not approach statistical

significance. Indeed, in only one of the 11 regressions reported in the table is our proxy for

innovation statistically significant.




                                                 15
 


       In many countries in 1910, railroads were often the very largest companies. It could be that

size simply captures an industry composition effect. To address this concern, we add industry fixed

effects in the second specification. Relative size in 1910 continues to be a strong predictor of

remaining one of the 20 largest firms in a country more than 100 years later. Thus, size is not an

industry phenomenon.

       Over the century of our analysis, several countries came under the control of the communist

party. In those countries, of which there are 11 in our database as of 1910, private enterprise was

essentially abolished. Of the 210 large firms in 1910 in those countries, as of 2018, only five remain

as large firms in our sample. The disappearance of the largest firms in these countries potentially

gives the appearance that Schumpeter's proposition of replacement of large firms with other large

firms correctly describes the economic order of events in which new large firms replace the old

large firms through the process of creative destruction. The disappearance of the largest firms in

these countries is more accurately described as destruction without creation.

       When we drop these countries from the analysis, the fraction of the 20 largest firms in 1910

that remain among the largest firms in 2018 increases from 13.6% to 16.2%. Thus, dropping the

communist controlled countries makes exceptions to the replacement of large firms by new large

firms even less rare. The third regression of Table 2 re-estimates the first regression after dropping

the 11 communist countries. Firm size in 1910 remains positive and is a statistically and

economically significant predictor of a firm being among the 20 largest in its country in 2018.

       Of course, size could be a proxy for many factors. One such factor, suggested by Brandeis,

is the nexus of connections among firms that allows for collusion to suppress entry. We have data

on board interlocks for 44 countries. Of the 20 largest firms in each country in 1910, 60.0% are

classified as having at least one board interlock with another large firm in the set of firms in the




                                                 16
 


same country. This number is astonishingly high. To give a flavor of the size of the interlock nexus,

the five companies with at least 10 interlocks circa 1910 are the Compagnie belge maritime du

Congo (Democratic Republic of the Congo), the Erie Railroad Co. (U.S.), and the New York

Central & Hudson River Railroad Co. (U.S.), Recherches minières du Bas-Katanga (Democratic

Republic of the Congo), and the United Steel Corporation (U.S.).

        To test that possibility, we re-estimate the first regression in Table 2 and include the natural

log of the number of board interlocks for each firm (plus one). The results of the regression are

given in column (4) of the table. The coefficient of the natural log of the number of board interlocks

is not significant. As a further test of the role of board interlocks, we consider bank-board

interlocks. Of the largest firms in the sample, 25.0% have a board interlock with a large bank. The

fifth regression of Table 2 is the same as the fourth regression except that the natural log of the

number of firms in the bank-board interlock nexus is substituted for the natural log of the number

of board interlocks. As shown in the table, the coefficient of the natural log of the number of bank-

board interlock is negative and not statistically significant.

        The lack of significance of the coefficient of the board interlock variables gives rise to an

immediate temptation to reject Brandeis's contention. However, Brandeis focused his discussion

on J.P. Morgan & Co., which was not one of the largest 20 U.S. firms circa 1910. This observation

illustrates a potential attenuation bias in the board interlock variables. We return to this question

when we consider the data for 1980 and 2000. In each of the regressions in columns (3), (4) and

(5), the coefficients of book equity are positive and statistically significant.

        A separate way in which firms may be able to remain large, as suggested by Steffens, is by

capturing the political process to obtain regulations that suppress entry. To investigate this

possibility, we re-estimate the first regression of Table 2 but include an indicator to identify firms




                                                  17
 


with political connections. We assign that variable a value of one for firms with a political

connection and zero otherwise. We have data on political connections for firms in 19 countries.

Political connections are common, with 30.5% of the largest 20 firms in 1910 having at least one

political connection. The results of the regression are given column (6) of Table 2. The coefficient

of political connections is positive and statistically significant. Having a political connection

increases the probability that one of the 20 largest firms in 1910 remains among the 20 largest

firms in 2018 by 11.5 percentage points. Compared with a 10.0% unconditional probability that,

in these countries, a top 20 firm in 1910 was among the 20 largest firms in 2018, the coefficient

implies a very sizable economic effect of political connections.

       A concern with regression 6 is that the results are based on a sample from only 19 countries.

To test whether these results are robust to including firms from all 60 countries, we assign the

political connections variable defined above a value of zero for (a) all firms in countries for which

we do not have data on political connections and (b) for firms for which we do not have data on

board members. We also create a separate indicator variable that is assigned a value of one for all

such firms and a value of zero for firms for which political connections data are available

regardless of whether the firms have a political connection. The results of this regression are given

in column (7) of Table 2. The coefficient of political connections remains statistically significant

with essentially the same magnitude as in regression 6.

       Among the 19 countries considered in regression 6 are two countries, the Republic of the

Congo and Romania, that became communist. Regression 8 is the same as regression 6 except that

the two communist countries are dropped. The political connections variable continues to be

statistically and economically significant. The results, along with those in regressions 6 and 7, are

consistent with the proposition that political connections play an important role in explaining why




                                                 18
 


exceptions to the replacement of large firms with other large firms over an interval of 100 years is

not rare.

        Over the interval of our analysis, in many countries, a number of large firms were

nationalized even excluding countries that became dominated by the communist party. Indeed, in

the 17 countries included in regression 8, at least 42.3% of the large firms in the regression became

state-owned enterprises at some point over the ensuing 100 years. It is possible that firms with

political connections were more likely to become state-owned enterprises. If so, perhaps it is the

status of being a state-owned enterprise rather than the political connection that allowed such firms

to remain large. To consider this possibility, we re-estimate regression 8 adding an indicator to

denote whether a firm became state owned at any time over the period of circa 1910­2018. This

variable is assigned a value of one even if the firm was reprivatized prior to 2018. The results of

the regression are given in column (9) of Table 2. The coefficient of political connection remains

positive and statistically significant with essentially the same magnitude as in regression 8.

Interestingly, the coefficient of state-owned enterprise is negative and significant. One

interpretation of the negative coefficient of state-owned enterprise is that government ownership

caused the firms to become smaller. A second interpretation is that governments took ownership

of the worst performing large firms.

        We conduct one further robustness test of our political connections variable. Regression

10 of Table 2 is the same as regression 9 except that we now include industry fixed effects. As

shown in the table, the political connections variable continues to be statistically and economically

significant. The table includes one further model, column (11), to which we return in Section V.

        The data that we consider in this section encompass firms from 60 countries that were

among the 20 largest in their home country as of 1910. We document that, around the world, and




                                                 19
 


consistent with Schumpeter's proposition, the replacement of old large firms with new large firms

through time represents the normal course of economic events. We also find that, contrary to

Schumpeter's proposition, old large firms remaining as large firms over 100 years later is not rare.

Indeed, 13.6%, or 152, of the largest firms circa 1910 remain among the largest firms in their home

countries in 2018. We further find that, among large firms, it is the very largest firms that are more

likely to remain large. To be more emphatic, it is not the smaller of the largest firms that evolve to

replace the largest large firms; it is the largest firms that remain large. We, then, consider whether

board interlocks or political connections are frictions that impede the process of replacement of

large firms, or, perhaps, that such firms regenerate by means of intra-firm innovation. We find no

evidence of board interlocks playing a role and little role for innovation, whereas, political

connections are both statistically and economically significant in explaining the extent to which

large firms circa 1910 remain large firms over 100 years later.

        It could be that it is the best firms in each country that become politically connected. If so,

political connections could be spuriously reflecting better firm quality. Data on firm profitability

are, for most of the countries in our 1910 sample, unavailable. It is, thus, difficult to assess whether

it is the case that the politically connected firms are the best firms. Studies based on recent data

suggest that they are not. To investigate formally whether there is evidence that, circa 1910,

politically connected firms were the best firms, we turn to a case study of Italy: a country for which

data on profitability are available, and in which political connections were prevalent.

II.A.   A Case Study: Italy in 1911

        The data on Italian firms' net income, book equity and, when available, market

capitalization, are manually collected from the business directory Notizie Statistiche sulle

principali Società Italiane per Azioni, published by Credito Italiano in 1912. The directory




                                                  20
 


includes balance sheet data, stock prices, detailed descriptions of each firm's business activities,

and detailed information on the political experience of each director. It covers all Italian firms with

a book equity of at least 1,000,000 Italian lira (192,324 U.S. dollars) as of 1911, as well as all

publicly-traded Italian firms, regardless of their book equity, for a total of 793 firms.

       Of the firms in the Italian directory, 25.7% have at least one political connection and two

have seven or more politicians on their board: Banca Commerciale Italiana and La Fondiaria-Vita.

Of the 20 largest Italian companies in 1911, 60.0% have at least one political connection. Of the

793 firms, 18.2% are classified as new tech. The average return on equity (ROE), defined as net

income over book equity, is 4.7%. The average market-to-book ratio (M/B), defined as the average

between the lowest and the highest stock price during the year, multiplied by the number of shares

outstanding, and divided by book equity, is 1.32. (All financial ratios, here and elsewhere in the

paper, are winsorized at the 1% and at the 99% levels.) Summary statistics for these and other

variables are provided in Panel A of Table 3. Of the firms in the directory, 30.8% are publicly-

traded. The firms were established between 1826 and 1911.

       With the data from the directory by Credito Italiano, we estimate linear probability models

that explain whether a firm has a political connection in 1911. Panel B of Table 3 presents the

results. In the first regression, the independent variables are firm size, measured as the natural log

of book equity, the new tech indicator, ROE, and an indicator denoting whether the firm was

publicly-traded in 1911. The results show that bigger firms are significantly more likely to be

politically connected than smaller firms. A one standard deviation increase in size increases the

likelihood that a firm has a political connection by 11.1 percentage points. The positive association

between firm size and political connections is consistent with prior literature (e.g., Faccio (2006),

Ferguson and Voth (2008), Braggion and Moore (2013)). The coefficients of new tech and ROE




                                                  21
 


are negative but not statistically significant. That is, politically connected firms, on average, are

less innovative and have insignificantly lower ROEs than firms that are not politically connected.

       In regression 2, we measure size as the natural log of net income. We rescale net income

so that the minimum value is 1. The results confirm a negative, albeit not statistically significant,

relation between innovation and political connections as well as between ROE and political

connections. The negative association between innovation and political connections is in line with

the evidence in Kim (2017), Qin and Zhang (2019), and Akcigit, Baslandze, and Lotti (2020).

Political connections are also negatively related to net income. This relation is also not statistically

significant. Thus, again, we find no evidence of politically connected firms being the best firms.

       Regressions 3 and 4 are similar to the first regression except that we include industry fixed

effects in Regression 3, and include industry, location of the registered office, and year of

establishment fixed effects in Regression 4. When we do so, the results in the first regression are

confirmed. In the last regression, which includes only firms with stock price available in the

directory, we use M/B as a measure of firm quality. The results show that politically connected

firms have an insignificantly lower M/B than non-connected firms. These results confirm evidence

from studies based on more recent data (Braggion and Moore (2013), Bertrand et al. (2018)).

Importantly, they provide no support for the contention that it is the best companies that have

political connections.

III.   Empirical Results: 1980 - 2018

       The 1980 sample allows for a more refined analysis of Schumpeter's proposition that some

firms create a culture of regeneration that facilitates intra-firm innovation and it is that factor that

allows them to remain large. In this analysis, we use R&D expense scaled by total assets as our

proxy for innovation. In instances in which R&D data are not available in Worldscope, we assign




                                                  22
 


R&D a value of zero. Because doing so introduces attenuation bias, we also include an indicator

variable that is assigned the value of one in instances in which R&D data are not available, and

zero when R&D data are available. The 1980 data encompass up to 29 countries, depending on the

variables included in the analyses. Of the firms in the database in 1980, 33.6% report R&D

expenses.

           The 1980 sample also allows us to re-visit the role of board interlocks and bank-board

interlocks over nearly four decades. Board interlocks with other firms in the same country are

remarkably common, with, as shown in Panel B of Table 1, 71.5% of the firms in our sample have

an interlock with one of the other 2,896 firms in the Moody's international database. On average,

a firm in the 1980 sample shares a director or an officer with five other firms. Bank-board

interlocks are also common, with 36.9% of the firms in the sample having at least one interlock

with a bank in its home country.

           Of the 551 largest 20 firms in each country in 1980, 138, or 25.0% are also among the 20

largest in 2018.13 Additionally, of the 4,352 firms representing 29 countries in the 1980 sample,

191, or 4.4% are among the 20 largest in 2018. Thus, the very largest firms are disproportionately

more likely to remain among the largest almost four decades later. Further, it is not uncommon

that old large firms are replaced by old smaller firms, a result that is also inconsistent with

Schumpeter's theory. For example, 53 (=191-138) of the smaller firms in the 1980 sample are

among the largest 20 in their country in 2018. Of course, these calculations only reflect old firms

for which Worldscope or Moody's report book equity in 1980. A more comprehensive

investigation of the replacement of old large firms by old smaller firms is provided in Section

VII.D.



13
     The 1980 sample includes 14 firms in Brazil, 11 in Colombia, 13 in Ireland, and 13 in Taiwan.


                                                          23
 


           Across the seven regressions in Table 4, size measured either as an indicator denoting

whether a firm was among the 20 largest in its country in 1980, or by the natural log of book

equity, is both statistically and economically significant. As in the 1910 sample, this result

continues to support the views of Steffens and Brandeis that size allows firms to entrench their

positions to remain dominant.

           The regressions of Table 4 further investigate the possibility that old firms remain or

become large because of a culture of innovation. In the first three regressions, the coefficient of

the R&D variable is positive and statistically significant, regardless of whether we include industry

fixed effects, and other controls for firm quality. Thus, the results provide support for

Schumpeter's assertion that the presence of a culture of innovation allows firms to remain or

become big. However, as the results show, the economic impact of size trumps that of R&D. That

is, although R&D is statistically significant, its economic impact is substantially smaller than that

of size.

           Regressions 4 through 7 of Table 4 introduce board interlocks and bank-board interlocks.

The sample is reduced relative to the first three regressions as, for some companies, data on

interlocks are not available in Moody's or company names could not be manually matched

between Moody's and Worldscope. In none of these regressions are the natural log of the number

of interlocks or R&D statistically significant. In contrast, size is statistically and economically

significant in all specifications. These results do not support Brandeis' proposition that large firms

are able to remain or become large because of their nexus of board interlocks.

           In our analyses with the circa 1910 sample, in some of the specifications, we exclude

communist countries from the analysis. There were no communist countries with stock exchanges

open in 1980. Thus, the results in this section portray the process of creative destruction along with




                                                  24
 


its impediments in free countries.

       In sum, the 1980 results confirm that it is the largest of the large firms that remain big over

these nearly-four decades. The results also indicate that intra-firm regeneration plays some role in

allowing a firm to become big or remain big over this relatively extended period of time. However,

over this interval, we find no support for Brandeis' conjecture that firms can remain or become big

because of their network of board interlocks that enables them to pre-empt entry. We do not have

data on political connections for this sample.

IV.    Empirical Results: 2000 - 2018

       The 2000 sample is the most comprehensive and allows us to consider each of the obstacles

to the process of creative destruction suggested by Schumpeter, Steffens, and Brandeis. The

downside of the shorter time period is that, arguably, it does not give the process of creative

destruction sufficient time to competitively replace the very largest firms.

       Holding that concern aside, the regression results in Table 5 indicate that relative firm size

in 2000 is an economically and statistically significant predictor of a firm being among the 20

largest in its country in 2018. Among the very largest firms, exceptions to the process of

replacement almost become the norm over this shorter interval: as shown in Panel C of Table 1,

43.8% of the 20 largest firms in each country in 2000 are also among the 20 largest in 2018. Size

is significant across all specifications even after including country fixed effects, 4-digit SIC

industry fixed effects, and a variety of control variables.

       The results also confirm R&D as a statistically significant exception to the Schumpeterian

process. Regardless of how we combine the standardized coefficient of the R&D/TA ratio with

the coefficient of the R&D missing indicator, their combined economic impact is substantially

smaller than that of size. Thus, these results support Schumpeter's claim that intra-firm innovation




                                                 25
 


can allow firms to remain large at least for some period of time, although the economic magnitude

of R&D is comparatively small.

        We, thus, turn to the question of whether the 1910 results on political connections reflect a

higher propensity for politically connected firms to engage in successful innovation. That appears

not to be the case. As shown in regressions 2 ­ 4, controlling for size and R&D, political

connections remain statistically significant. Their significance is robust to adding a variety of

controls, including industry fixed effects or country x industry fixed effects. Having a political

connection increases the likelihood that a firm is among the 20 largest in 2018 by 2.5 - 3.0

percentage points. This is a large effect when compared with the 2.2% unconditional probability

that a firm in the 2000 sample is among the 20 largest in 2018. These results confirm the concerns

highlighted in Puck and support the proposition of Steffens that political connections enable large

firms to remain large, as well as enabling smaller old firms to become large. They also complement

the results in Akcigit, Baslandze, and Lotti (2020), Kim (2017) and Qin and Zhang (2019) who

show that politically connected firms invest less in R&D than non-connected firms, as well as the

results in Akcigit et al. (2020) who document a lower entry rate in Italian industries where

connections with local politicians are more prevalent. Of course, a caveat with those results is that

higher entry rates do not necessarily imply more replacement of large firms.

        The number of board interlocks (regressions 5 ­ 7) and bank-board interlocks (regressions

8 ­ 10) are statistically significant for this shorter time period. Thereby, the results provide some

support for Brandeis' proposition that interlocks enable large firms to remain large, at least over

the shorter time period.14


14
    Qualitatively similar conclusions are reached when we use data from Worldscope to compute the number of
interlocks and bank-board interlocks. Although Worldscope covers a larger number of companies, it provides, at most,
the names of five officers or directors for each company. Moody's has greater coverage of officers and directors for
each company.


                                                        26
 


       In the 2000 regressions, we have the largest set of data but the shortest time period for the

creative process to work to replace the largest firms in a country. Thus, it is perhaps not surprising

that large firms tend to remain large, even to the extent that remaining large becomes close to being

the norm, and replacement close to being the exception. Each of the factors highlighted by

Schumpeter, Brandeis, and Steffens appears to play a role in impeding the process of replacement,

with size and political connections playing dominant roles.

V.     Size and Political Connections

       Firm size and political connections are both statistically and economically significant

variables across the time intervals considered and across the regressions in each time interval.

What is size capturing? To investigate whether size is capturing political influence, we test whether

its economic impact is greater in the presence of political connections. To do so, in the last

regressions reported in Tables 2 and 5 for the circa 1910 and the 2000 samples, respectively, we

add political connections x size as an interaction variable. For both the circa 1910 sample and the

2000 sample, the coefficient of size is more than 100% greater in the presence of a political

connection. These results are consistent with the idea that size reflects political power that

accompanies political connections. This power may come about in various ways, including the

power of the vote that often resides in the folds of firms with large employee workforces.

VI.    Is it Political Capture?

       Of our results, the most prominent and robust are that size and political connections are

statistically and economically significant predictors of a firm being among the 20 largest in its

country decades, or even a century, later.

       How do political connections enable large firms to entrench their position? It could be that

politically connected firms are the best, and that is why they remain the largest. Perhaps our




                                                 27
 


controls for firm quality and innovation fail to completely account for firm quality. Of course,

good firms do not need protection to maintain their market position. In contrast, the capture

hypothesis predicts that weaker firms can remain dominant because of the protection offered by

regulatory barriers.

       One extreme example of the latter comes from Zimbabwe, wherein President Robert

Mugabe repeatedly intervened via regulation to explicitly impede entry into the cellular phone

market to protect a government-owned cellular phone carrier and another, private, carrier owned

by Mugabe's nephew, Leo. The immediate target was foreign-based Zimbabwean entrepreneur,

Strive Masiyiwa, the founder of cellular phone carrier Econet Wireless Ltd. Mugabe first

attempted, by fiat, to pre-empt Masiyiwa from establishing a cell phone company. When that failed

due a ruling by the Zimbabwean Supreme Court, under the direction of Mugabe, the legislature

made it illegal, and punishable with up to two years in prison, for a private business to build a

cellular network. Eventually Masiyiwa was able to enter the Zimbabwean market and, within two

years his company, Econet, became the largest cell provider in the country (Block, 2000). This

example illustrates how regulatory barriers can enable weak firms to remain dominant.

       How is it that political capture protects large firms from encroachment by competitors?

Presumably, as in Zimbabwe, it is by establishing regulatory barriers to entry. Rajan and Zingales

(2006) propose an interest group theory of financial development in which incumbents protect

their position through cross-border barriers to trade and cross-border barriers to capital flows. In

their theory, both are required for incumbents to successfully protect their position. The same is

true in our setting. We borrow their framework to assess whether those conditions are met.

       Protection against domestic entry is, of course, meaningless absent protection against

foreign entry. As in Rajan and Zingales, we use international trade flows as a de facto measure of




                                                28
 


cross-border openness to entry, i.e., the lack of international barriers to entry. Data on cross-border

trade flows are from the World Bank's World Development Indicators. Trade flows are defined as

the sum of imports and exports, all scaled by gross domestic product.

       Entrants further require access to capital to fund their innovations. Domestic access to

capital can be limited through government ownership of banks or by large firms' influence over

domestic banks. Openness to cross-border capital flows interrupts this channel of control of big

firms over the domestic financial system. We follow Rajan and Zingales' lead and use a measure

of demand for capital to proxy for cross-border capital flows. Their measure, an index of

industrialization by Bairoch (1982), is available only for a limited number of the countries in our

sample. Thus, in the same spirit, as a measure of demand for capital, we use the number of

telephones per capita in 1914 from Kingsbury (1915), which is available for a substantially larger

sample of countries and colonies. Further, for the more recent periods, we use a second, also de

facto, measure of openness to capital flows. The second measure is the dollar value of mergers and

acquisitions (M&A) in a given country and 4-digit SIC industry involving foreign acquirers as a

fraction of the total dollar value of M&A. The M&A data are from Thomson ONE Banker.

       When an economic system is open to both cross-border trade flows and cross-border capital

flows, it is likely to be difficult for domestic politically connected firms to entrench their positions

by suppressing foreign entry. We address this issue with the regressions in Tables 6 and 7. Table

6 reports regressions with the circa 1910 data and Table 7 reports regressions with the 2000 data.

Each of the first two regressions includes an interaction of political connections and openness,

where openness is trade flows x cross-border capital flows. In the first regression in each table,

openness is measured at the country level as the interaction between aggregate trade flows at the

country level and aggregate demand for capital from Kingsbury (1915). In the second regression,




                                                  29
 


capital flows are measured at the country-industry level.

       In the second regression of Table 6, we recognize that banks and utilities are regulated

industries in many countries. Regulations often specifically limit foreign ownership in certain

sectors, thus blocking capital flows into those industry. We, thus, use an indicator to distinguish

banks and utilities from presumably less regulated other industries. In the second regression of

Table 7, we use a measure of regulatory barriers to cross-border capital flows that is based on

recent M&A transactions for which data that are available for the 2000-2018 time period. Between

Tables 6 and 7, three of the four interaction terms in the first two regressions are negative and

statistically significant. Further the economic impact of openness is sizable. For example, the

results of the second regression of Table 6 indicate that a one standard deviation increase in

openness decreases the likelihood that a large politically connected firm remains among the largest

20 over a century later by 8.1 percentage points.

       Of course, more openness does not necessarily prevent politicians from propping up weak

politically connected domestic firms. If that were the case, the coefficient of the interaction

between openness and political connections would be biased toward zero. Thus, propping up of

the kind described here cannot generate the results above.

       As do Rajan and Zingales (2006), we propose that restrictions to either cross-border trade

flows or cross-border capital flows alone is unlikely to be sufficient to restrict entry of foreign

competition. Regressions (3) through (5) of Tables 6 and 7 provide falsification tests in which

political connections are interacted with restrictions to cross-border trade alone or with restrictions

to cross-border capital flows alone. None of those interactions is statistically significant (all p-

value > 0.29) showing that restrictions of either type alone are insufficient.

       The important conclusion is that political connections facilitate the ability of big companies




                                                  30
 


to remain or become big only when their home country is closed to both trade and capital flows.

The presence of regulatory barriers to entry appear to be a necessary condition for politically

connected firms to remain or become dominant.

VII.        Other Considerations

VII.A The Case Study of Fabbrica Italiana di Automobili Torino

           The evolution of Fabbrica Italiana di Automobili Torino, more popularly recognized as

Fiat, provides an illustration of the way in which size, political connections, and regulatory

protection against foreign entry interact to allow a firm to become and then remain big for an

extended period of time. Fiat, the major Italian auto maker, was established in 1899 with an initial

capital of 800,000 Italian lira (or 153,856 U.S. dollars). At that time, worldwide the auto industry

was in its infancy. The creation of Fiat clearly represented a case of revolutionary innovation. As

of 1911, in terms of book equity, Fiat was the 48th largest company in Italy with a capital of 14

million lira. Fiat's capital reached 400 million lira in 1924, and 4 billion lira by 1947. By book

equity, Fiat was one of the largest 20 companies in Italy in 1980, 2000, and 2018.

           Fiat also fits the characterization of a politically-connected firm, albeit not without

interruption. Count Eugenio Rebaudengo, was a member of the company's board of directors

during 1908-1944 and, at various points during 1903 through 1943, was a member of the Congress

and then a Senator of the Italian Kingdom.15 One of the company's founders, Giovanni Agnelli,

was appointed as a Senator by King Victor Emmanuel III in 1923. During the Fascist era of 1922-

1943, the Agnelli family exerted major influence in the political and economic life of the country,

and Fiat reaped the benefits of an increasingly protected domestic market position where, in 1930,

tariffs on car imports were increased from 60% to over 100%, and quotas were introduced (Rossi,



15
     http://www.treccani.it/enciclopedia/eugenio-carlo-angelo-rebaudengo_(Dizionario-Biografico)/


                                                         31
 


1930).16

        Political connections, including those through some of the heirs of the founder, continued

over time and included the founder's grandsons Giovanni "Gianni" Agnelli, Umberto Agnelli, and

granddaughter Susanna Agnelli, who occupied positions in the Italian parliament at various time

periods between the 1970s and the early 2000s. The company is well-known to have continued to

benefit from regulatory barriers after World War II in the form of high tariffs and quotas that

protected their competitive position against entry by foreign auto makers (Fauri (1996)). By 2018,

Fiat Chrysler Automobile NV was the 7th largest firm in Italy and the 8th largest car manufacturer

in the globe with a book equity capital exceeding 28 billion U.S. dollars.

VII.B Net Income as the Measure of Size

        The data for 1980 and for 2000 allow us to consider another measure of size, net income.

This measure possibly more directly captures the idea of temporary rents as proposed by

Schumpeter. Arguably net income better reflects Schumpeter's sentiment that entrepreneurial

success is measured as a flow, i.e. rents, rather than as a stock, variable. From a univariate

perspective, 21.9% of the largest 20 firms by net income in each country in 1980 are still among

the largest 20 in 2018. This univariate statistic is remarkably, and perhaps surprisingly, close to

the one based on book equity (Table 1, Panel B).

        Thus, at least among the very largest firms, net income is also persistent, albeit somewhat

less persistent when a continuous measure of size is used. Interestingly, and possibly surprisingly,

the results provide at least some evidence pointing to the persistence of rents over a nearly four-

decade-long period. As shown in Panel A of Table 8, regressions that parallel those in Table 4, for

the 1980 sample, we find relatively strong support that a culture of intra-firm innovation increases


16
   http://www.treccani.it/enciclopedia/giovanni-agnelli_res-ba2a0a79-87e5-11dc-8e9d-0016357eee51_(Dizionario-
Biografico)/


                                                     32
 


the likelihood that a firm either remains or becomes large. The results also provide some support

for Brandeis' assertion that board interlocks, including bank-board interlocks, enable companies

to remain or become large.

       Of the 20 largest firms by net income in 2000, 41.7% are also among the 20 largest in 2018.

Again, a statistic very similar to that based on book equity in Panel C of Table 1. The regression

results in Panel B of Table 8, which parallel those in Table 5, show that net income in 2000 is

generally a significant predictor of a large firm in 2000 being among the 20 largest in its country

in 2018. For the 2000 sample, it is only the extensive R&D margin that is statistically significant.

In fact, the intensive margin, when significant, is negative. That is, firms that report R&D expenses

are more likely to remain or become big, but reporting relatively higher R&D expenses reduces

the likelihood of a firm becoming or remaining big. Further, both the statistical and economic

significance of political connections is greater than in Table 5 when we use net income as the

measure of size, indicating that the results for 1910 for the broad sample of countries are unlikely

to be due to using a stock variable as the measure of size. Board interlocks and bank-board

interlocks are both statistically significant for the shorter period when net income is the measure

of size. The results using net income as a measure of size are generally consistent with those based

on book equity.

VII.C Mergers and Acquisitions

       Recent literature shows that, in the most recent decades, M&As have enabled dominant

firms to increase their market shares. Perhaps, the results that we have documented spuriously

attribute the ability of large firms to remain large to initial size and political connections, when the

underlying factor that enables large firms to remain large are M&As. We investigate this

possibility using M&A data from ThomsonONE, which are available starting in the 1980s. For




                                                  33
 


each firm in our sample, we compute the total amount spent to acquire other firms either during

the 1980-2018 period or the 2000-2018 period. Since our focus is on M&As explaining the ability

of large firms to remain large, we focus on transactions with a deal value equal or greater than

USD 25 million. We add this aggregate expenditure as a control to our baseline specifications of

Tables 4 and 5. The aggregate price paid in M&A transactions during 1980-2018 is positively and

significantly associated with the likelihood that a firm will be among the largest 20 in its country

in 2018, providing support to the studies we cite at the beginning of this section. Importantly, firm

size in 1980 remains significant in each of the regressions that replicate Table 4, with p-values of

0.001 or less. The aggregate price paid in M&A transactions during 2000-2018 is also positively

and significantly associated with the likelihood that a firm will be among the largest 20 in its

country in 2018. In models that parallel those in Table 5, political connections and board interlocks

generally remain significant after controlling for M&As - - the lone exception being specification

(2) in which the p-value of political connections is 0.106.

VII.D Is It New Firms That Replace the Old?

           In the Schumpeterian process of creative destruction, it is new firms that replace the old.

To wit, according to Schumpeter "new combinations are, as a rule, embodied, as it were, in new

firms which generally do not arise out of the old ones but start producing beside them ... Especially

in a competitive economy, in which new combinations mean the competitive elimination of the

old."17 Our data show that, over a sufficiently long period of time, old large firms are largely

replaced. We have not yet addressed the question of whether the old large firms are replaced by

new firms. Is that the case as Schumpeter theorizes or is it that old smaller firms replace the old

large firms?



17
     Schumpeter (1934), p. 66-67.


                                                   34
 


         As a starting point to determine a company's date of origin, we use the date of

establishment reported in Worldscope/Datastream and in the Moody's international manuals.

When those sources provide no information about the company's date of establishment, we

conduct Google searches to determine the company's starting date. We conduct Google searches

also to verify any instances in which a company's reported starting date is after 1980. For example,

Worldscope/Datastream gives a year of establishment of 1983 for AT&T. AT&T, however, traces

to 1885. Similarly, Worldscope/Datastream gives a year of establishment of 1982 for Credit Suisse

Group AG, when the company can, in fact, be traced to 1856.

         We address the question of whether old large firms are replaced by new large firms in Table

9. In panel A, we consider the 20 largest companies in 2018 in the 52 countries for which data are

available in 2000. Of the 1,017 large firms in this sample,18 450, or 44.2%, were among the 20

largest in their country in 2000; another 502, or 49.4%, were established before 2000; and another

65, or 6.4%, were established in 2000 or after. Thus, over this nearly two-decade period,

replacement of old large firms by the new is truly an exception.

         In panel B of Table 9, we consider the 20 largest companies in 2018 in the 29 countries for

which data are available for 1980. Of the 580 firms in this sample, 138, or 23.8%, were among the

largest 20 in 1980; 338, or 58.3%, were established before 1980 and, thus, are also old firms and

are, therefore, old smaller firms replacing old large firms. The remaining 104, or 17.9%, are newer

firms established in 1980 or later. Thus, the majority of large firms in 2018 are old firms. To the

extent that replacement of large firms occurs, it is largely other old firms that replace old large

firms.

         As for the interval encompassing circa 1910-2018, we return to Italy. Of the 20 largest


18
   For the Czech Republic, Slovakia, and Venezuela, Worldscope/Datastream covers 17, 15, and 5 companies,
respectively, in 2018.


                                                   35
 


Italian firms ranked by book equity in 2018, four can be traced to companies that were among the

20 largest in 1911. An additional eight can be traced to companies that were established prior to

1911. Thus, of the 20 largest Italian firms in 2018, 12 have their origins in firms that are over a

century old. Additionally, only two of the remaining eight firms have origins that commence after

1960 and none have origins that trace to post-1980. The Italian case re-emphasizes that, to the

extent that replacement of large firms occurs, it is not by new firms.

VII.E What Happens to Old Large Firms?

       Of the 1,115 largest firms in 1910, 152 continue to operate and remain among the 20 largest

in their home countries 100 years later. What happened to the other big companies? Through a

search of companies' histories as described in Section I.A, we have determined that another 399

of them continue to operate in 2018, although they do not remain among the largest 20 in their

country. Another 184 were dissolved. And we could not determine the fate, as of 2018, for 380

firms. In short, while many large firms slip from being among the 20 largest in their home countries

over 10 decades, they do not die and some, in fact, remain relatively large.

VII.F Replacement at the Industry Level

       Although Schumpeter allows for the possibility that, over time, industries can be replaced

by other industries (for example, trains replaced stage coaches), a natural curiosity is what happens

to replacement within each industry in each country. Our earlier focus on replacement at the

country-level allows for the type of revolutionary creative destruction considered by Schumpeter.

The analyses described in this section, by contrast, take a more narrow approach. To allow for

competition across industries, we define industries broadly at the 2-digit SIC level. We ask the

question of whether size, political connections, innovation and board interlocks increase the

probability that a firm will remain or become one of the largest five in its industry and country by




                                                 36
 


2018. We focus on the five largest companies in each industry in 2018 rather than the 20 largest

because, in many of the countries in the sample, an industry comprises far fewer than 20 publicly-

traded firms.

       For 1980 and 2000, we estimate regressions (not shown in a table) like those in Tables 4

and 5 in which the dependent variable is an indicator taking the value of one if a firm is among the

five largest in its country and 2-digit SIC industry in 2018, and zero otherwise. The independent

variables are the same as those in the Tables 4 and 5 with two exceptions. The "20 largest firms"

indicator is replaced with a "5 largest" (in the country-industry pair) indicator, and all regressions

include country x (2-digit SIC) industry fixed effects in lieu of the country fixed effects.

       The results show that size in 1980 or in 2000 is an economically and statistically significant

predictor of the likelihood that a firm is among the five largest in its industry and country in 2018.

In both 1980 and 2000, R&D expenses are generally not significantly related to the likelihood that

a firm is among the five largest in its industry and country in 2018. Board interlocks are significant

in the industry-level regressions only in 2000 while bank-board interlocks are never significant.

For 2000, the year for which we have political connections data, this variable continues to be

positively and significantly related to the likelihood that a firm is among the five largest in its

industry and country in 2018. Thus, the two variables that are consistently significant in the

country-level regressions, size and political connections, are also significant in country-industry

level regressions.

VII.G How Long Does It Take for Exceptions to Become the Norm?

       Over the various time intervals considered so far, replacement of old large firms is the

norm. Exceptions, however, become increasingly less rare as we shorten the time interval under

consideration. Exceptions become the norm, i.e. represent more than 50% of the observations,




                                                 37
 


when the time interval is 16 years or shorter.

VII.H Endogeneity of Political Connections

        Some readers will object that political connections are endogenous. Specifically, the best

firms will tend to match with the best politicians, and vice-versa. However, because in the

Schumpeterian world rents are temporary, the endogenous matching between the best politicians

and the best firms (which is rejected empirically in Braggion and Moore (2013), Bertrand et al.

(2018), Kim (2017), Qin and Zhang (2019), and Akcigit et al. (2019), among many others) would

not explain why politically connected firms remain large decades or even a century later.

VII.I Robustness of the Results for the 1910-2018 Period

        The results reported in the tables using the 1910 sample rely on the assumption that, for

countries with insufficient coverage in Worldscope/Datastream, a firm is among the 20 largest in

its country in 2018 if book equity can be retrieved from any source. In robustness tests, we re-

estimate the regressions assuming that none of those firms are among the 20 largest in their home

country in 2018 or we exclude the countries with insufficient data from the analyses. In regressions

not reported in a table, the coefficient of size is positive and significant in 18 of the 22 regressions,

and its interaction with political connections is significant in the two regressions with the

interaction term. The coefficient of political connections is positive and significant, with a p-value

of 0.046 or lower, in all specifications that do not include an interaction term. Thus, the results for

the 1910 sample are not specific to using book equity to classify firms as being among the 20

largest in their countries in 2018.

VIII. Conclusion

        In this study we investigate the competing propositions set forth over a century ago by

Schumpeter, Brandeis and Steffens. As theorized by Schumpeter "...new combinations are, as a




                                                   38
 


rule, embodied, as it were, in new firms which generally do not arise out of the old... Especially in

a competitive economy, in which new combinations mean the competitive elimination of the old

... Exceptions are rare... In fact, the upper strata of society are like hotels which are indeed always

full of people, but people who are forever changing."19 Or by Brandeis "[t]he practice of

interlocking directorates is the root of many evils. It offends laws human and divine. Applied to

rival corporations, it tends to the suppression of competition..."20 Or by Steffens "big business ...

is the crux of the situation. Our political corruption is a system, a regularly established custom of

the country, by which our political leaders are hired, by bribery, by the license to loot, and by quiet

moral support, to conduct the government of city, State and Nation, not for the common good, but

for the special interests of private business."21

        Using various samples of large firms encompassing as many as 75 countries and covering

up to ten decades, we find that Schumpeter's proposition that large firms are replaced by other

firms over time is largely accurate, but inconsistent with his proposition, exceptions to that

proposition are not rare and, to the extent that large firms remain large, as proposed by Steffens,

they are disproportionately politically connected. Further, to the extent that old large firms are

replaced, they are largely replaced by old smaller firms.

        Over shorter periods of time, and consistent with Schumpeter's observation, a culture of

intra-firm innovation allows large firms to remain large. What we do not find is strong evidence

in support for Brandeis' contention that it is the nexus of board interlocks among large firms that

enable big business to stifle entry and, thereby, remain large. Nevertheless, we do find that political

connections enable big businesses to remain large, particularly when regulatory barriers to cross-



19
   Schumpeter (1934), p. 66-67 and p. 156.
20
   Brandeis (1914), p. 51.
21
   Steffens (1906, p. 4-5). 


                                                    39
 


border entry and cross-border capital flows are in place. The implication is that in an unimpeded

market the Schumpeterian process of creative destruction of large firms is likely to prevail. To the

extent that it does not, the data suggest that it is because the political process impedes entry.




                                                  40
 


References

Aghion, Philippe, and Peter Howitt. 1992. "A Model of Growth Through Creative Destruction."

       Econometrica 60 (2): 323-51.

Akcigit, Ufuk, Salomé Baslandze, and Francesca Lotti. 2020. "Connecting to Power: Political

       Connections, Innovation, and Firm Dynamics." University of Chicago, BFI Working

       Paper.

Baldovino, Simone, Antoni Montserrat Moliner, Domenica Taruscio, Erica Daina, Dario

       Roccatello. 2016. "Rare Diseases in Europe: from a Wide to a Local Perspective." The

       Israel Medical Association Journal 18 (6): 359-363.

Bertrand, Marianne, Francis Kramarz, Antoinette Schoar, and David Thesmar. 2018. "The Cost of

       Political Connections." Review of Finance 22 (3): 849-876.

Block, Robert. 2000. "Businesses Bristle as Mugabe Wages A War on His Political `Enemies'."

       Wall Street Journal, April 20.

Bloemen, Erik, Jan Kok, and Jan L. van Zanden. 1993. De top 100 van industriële bedrijven in

       Nederland 1913-1990. Den Haag: Adviesraad voorhet Wetenschapsen Technologiebeleid.

Braggion, Fabio, and Lyndon Moore. 2013. "The Economic Benefits of Political Connections in

       Late Victorian Britain." Journal of Economic History 73 (1): 142-76.

Brandeis, Louis D. 1914. Other People's Money, and How the Bankers Use It. New York:

       Frederick A. Stokes Company.

Brandeis, Louis D. 1934. The Curse of Bigness: Miscellaneous Papers of Louis D. Brandeis.

       Edited by Osmond K. Fraenkel. New York: The Viking Press.

Crouzet, Nicolas, and Janice Eberly. 2018. "Intangibles, Investment, and Efficiency." AEA Papers

       and Proceedings, 108: 426-431.




                                              41
 


Cunningham, Colleen, Florian Ederer, and Song Ma. 2020. "Killer Acquisitions." London

       Business School working paper.

De Loecker, Jan, Jan Eeckhout, and Gabriel Unger. 2020. "The Rise of Market Power and the

       Macroeconomic Implications." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 135(2): 561-644.

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2002. "The

       Regulation of Entry." Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (1): 1-37.

Edvinsson, Rodney. 2016. "Historical Currency Converter (test version 1.0)."

Faccio, Mara, and Luigi Zingales. 2019. "Political Determinants of Competition in the Mobile

       Telecommunication Industry." NBER Working Paper No. 23041.

Faccio, Mara, Ronald W. Masulis, and John J. McConnell. 2006. "Political Connections and

       Corporate Bailouts." Journal of Finance 61 (6): 2597-2635.

Fauri, Francesca. 1996. "The Role of Fiat in the Development of the Italian Car Industry in the

       1950's." The Business History Review 70 (2): 167-206.

Ferguson, Thomas, and Hans-Joachim Voth. 2008. "Betting on Hitler: The Value of Political

       Connections in Nazi Germany." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (1): 101-137.

Fogel, Kathy, Randall Morck, and Bernard Young. 2008. "Big Business Stability and Economic

       Growth: Is What's Good for General Motors Good for America? Journal of Financial

       Economics 89: 83-108.

Graham, Ann. 2010. "Too Good to Fail." Strategy+business, February 23.

Grossman, Gene M., and Elhanan Helpman. 1991. "Quality Ladders in the Theory of Growth."

       Review of Economic Studies 58 (1): 43-61.

Hannah, Leslie. 2015. "A Global Corporate Census: Publicly Traded and Close Companies in

       1910." Economic History Review 68 (2): 548-73.




                                              42
 


Houston, Joel F., Liangliang Jiang, Chen Lin, and Yue Ma. 2014. "Political Connections and the

       Cost of Bank Loans." Journal of Accounting Research 52 (1): 193-243.

Kamepalli, Sai Krishna, Raghuram Rajan, and Luigi Zingales. 2019. "Kill Zone." University of

       Chicago working paper.

Khwaja, Asim Ijaz, and Atif Mian. 2005. "Do Lenders Favor Politically Connected Firms? Rent

       Provision in an Emerging Financial Market." Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (4):

       1371-1411.

Kim, Taehyun. 2017. "Does a Firm's Political Capital Affect Its Investment and Innovation?"

       University of Notre Dame Working Paper.

King, Robert G., and Ross Levine. 2003. "Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right." The

       Quarterly Journal of Economics 108(3): 717-737.

Klapper, Leora, Luc Laeven, and Raghuram Rajan. 2006. "Entry Regulation as a Barrier to

       Entrepreneurship." Journal of Financial Economics 82 (3): 591-629.

Kogan, Leonid, Dimitris Papanikolaou, Amit Seru, and Noah Stoffman. 2017. "Technological

       Innovation, Resource Allocation, and Growth." Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (2):

       665-712.

Kroszner, Randall S., and Thomas Stratmann. 1998. "Interest-Group Competition and the

       Organization of Congress: Theory and Evidence from Financial Services' Political Action

       Committees." American Economic Review 88 (5): 1163-87.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Guillermo Zamarripa. 2003. "Related Lending."

       Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (1): 231-68.




                                              43
 


Lobell, Håkan. 2010. "Foreign Exchange Rates 1804­1914." In Historical Monetary and Financial

       Statistics for Sweden," edited by Tor Jacobson, Rodney Edvinsson, and Daniel

       Waldenström, 291-339. Stockholm: Ekerlids Förlag.

Masani, Zareer. 2015. "What Makes the Tata Empire Tick?" The Independent, February 5.

Ministère des Finances. 1910. Annuaire statistique de l'Egypte. Direction de la Statistique. Le

       Caire: Imprinterie Nationale.

Morck, Randall, M. Deniz Yavuz, Bernard Yeung. 2011. "Bank Control, Capital Allocation, and

       Economic Performance." Journal of Financial Economics 100(2): 264-283.

Philippon, Thomas. 2019. The Great Reversal: How America Gave Up on Free Markets.

       Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.

Qin, Xiuting, and Xueyong Zhang. 2019. "De-Politicization and Innovation: A Study Based on

       Chinese A-Share Companies." Journal of Accounting and Public Policy 38(4): 106668.

Rajan, Raghuram G., and Luigi Zingales. 2003. "The Great Reversals: The Politics of Financial

       Development in the Twentieth Century." Journal of Financial Economics 69 (1): 5-50.

Ramaswamy, Vivek. 2020. "Antitrust Can't Bust a Monopoly of Ideas. Consumer-protection tools

       won't be effective against the larger threat to American democracy." Wall Street Journal,

       August 5.

Rossi, Ernesto. 1930. "La Questione Doganale Dopo la Guerra." In Un Trentennio di Lotte

       Politiche (1894-1922), edited by Antonio de Viti de Marco, 449-480. Rome: Collezione

       Meridionale Editrice.

Sapienza, Paola. 2004. "The Effects of Government Ownership on Bank Lending." Journal of

       Financial Economics 72 (2): 357-384.




                                              44
 


Schumpeter, Joseph A. 1934. The Theory of Economic Development: An Inquiry Into Profits,

      Capital, Credit, Interest, and the Business Cycle. New Brunswick, NJ. Translated from the

      1911 original German, Theorie der wirtschaftlichen Entwicklung.

Schumpeter, Joseph A. 1942. Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy. New York: Harper &

      Brothers.

Stigler, George J. 1971. "The Theory of Economic Regulation." Bell Journal of Economics and

      Management Science 2 (1): 3-21.

The Economist. 2020. "A Healthy Dose of Competition: From Hospitality to Hipsterism." The

      Economist 436 (9206): 55-56.




                                             45
 


Table 1. Summary Statistics for the Cross-Country Samples.
Variables are defined in Appendix B. Accounting ratios are winsorized at the 1% and 99% levels.

Panel A: Summary Statistics for the 1910 Sample
                                      N. Obs.    Mean          Std. Dev.   Median       Min         Max
Top 20 in 2018 | Top 20 in 1910        1,115      0.136          0.343       0           0            1
Book Equity ($ 000)                    1,115     19,200         61,300     4,301         8         984,000
New Tech                               1,115      0.045          0.207       0           0            1
Board Interlocks                        720       0.600          0.490       1           0            1
Bank-Board Interlocks                   720       0.250          0.433       0           0            1
Number of Board Interlocks              720       1.731          2.236       1           0           13
Number of Bank-Board Interlocks         720       0.856          1.920       0           0           11
Political Connections                   331       0.305          0.461       0           0            1
State-Owned Enterprise                  291       0.423          0.495       0           0            1
Panel B: Summary Statistics for the 1980 Sample
                                      N. Obs.    Mean          Std. Dev.   Median        Min         Max
Top 20 in 2018 | Top 20 in 1980         551       0.250          0.434        0           0             1
Top 20 in 2018                         4,352      0.044          0.205        0           0            1
Top 20 in 1980                         4,352      0.127          0.333        0           0            1
Top 20 in 2018 | Top 20 in 1980 NI      547       0.219          0.414        0           0            1
Top 20 in 1980 NI                      4,352      0.126          0.332        0           0            1
Book Equity ($ 000)                    4,352    414,552        1,487,859   110,030    -104,000    49,400,000
Net Income ($ 000)                     4,255    50,628          263,344    11,908    -1,709,700   9,327,395
R&D/TA                                 4,352      0.008          0.021      0.000       0.000        0.116
R&D Missing                            4,352      0.664          0.472        1           0            1
Board Interlocks                       1,144      0.715          0.452        1           0            1
Bank-Board Interlocks                  1,144      0.369          0.483        0           0            1
Number of Board Interlocks             1,144      5.010          8.324        2           0            90
Number of Bank-Board Interlocks        1,144      3.651          8.209        0           0            90
M/B                                    3,250      1.281          0.761      1.028       0.629        5.670
ROE                                    4,253      0.127          0.137      0.124      -0.532        0.641
Leverage                               4,268      0.238          0.211      0.186       0.000        0.963
Panel C: Summary Statistics for the 2000 Sample
                                      N. Obs.    Mean          Std. Dev.   Median         Min       Max
Top 20 in 2018 | Top 20 in 2000        1,028      0.438          0.496        0            0           1
Top 20 in 2018                        30,891      0.022          0.146        0            0          1
Top 20 in 2000                        30,891      0.033          0.179        0            0          1
Top 20 in 2018 | Top 20 in 2000 NI     1,027      0.417          0.493        0            0          1
Top 20 in 2000 NI                     30,891      0.033          0.179        0            0          1
Book Equity ($ 000)                   30,891    421,041        2,511,835   47,287    -20,700,000 210,000,000
Net Income ($ 000)                    30,779     39,483         401,344    1,875      -7,738,450 16,000,000
R&D/TA                                30,891      0.019          0.066      0.000        0.000      0.462
R&D Missing                           30,891      0.683          0.465        1            0          1
Board Interlocks                       7,000      0.590          0.492        1            0          1
Bank-Board Interlocks                  7,000      0.090          0.287        0            0          1
Number of Board Interlocks             7,000      2.182          3.389        1            0          40
Number of Bank-Board Interlocks        7,000      0.617          2.562        0            0          40
Political Connections                 11,416      0.033          0.179        0            0          1
M/B                                   26,739      2.317          4.372     1.130         0.435     35.723
ROE                                   28,557     -0.160          1.036      0.060       -7.911      0.888
Leverage                              28,251      0.264          0.312      0.188        0.000      1.986




                                                          46
 


Table 2. Regression Results: Circa 1910 Sample.
The dependent variable is assigned the value of one if the firm is among the largest 20 in its country (by book equity) in 2018, and zero otherwise. Independent
variables are defined in Appendix B. Accounting ratios are winsorized at the 1% and 99% levels. Continuous variables are standardized. P-values based on robust
standard errors are reported in parentheses. *, **, and ***, denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
                                 (1)               (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)        (6)          (7)           (8)           (9)          (10)          (11)
ln(Book Equity)              0.0650***         0.0645***     0.0770***     0.0822***   0.0810***   0.0761**    0.0634***     0.0889***     0.0972***      0.0434        0.0321
                               (0.003)          (0.001)       (0.002)       (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.013)      (0.004)       (0.008)       (0.004)      (0.129)       (0.254)
New Tech                       0.0219           0.1052*        0.0375        0.0023      0.0004     -0.0911      0.0208       -0.0882       -0.0731       0.0341        0.0468
                               (0.666)          (0.083)       (0.567)       (0.975)     (0.995)     (0.364)     (0.685)        (0.380)      (0.465)       (0.755)       (0.667)
ln(Number of Board Interlocks + 1)                                          -0.0092
                                                                            (0.456)
ln(Number of Bank-Board Interlocks + 1)                                                 -0.0033
                                                                                        (0.820)
Political Connections                                                                              0.1148***                 0.1163***     0.1230***     0.0748**       0.0601*
                                                                                                    (0.004)                    (0.008)       (0.004)      (0.026)       (0.063)
Political Connections, set to 0 when Missing                                                                   0.1114***
                                                                                                                (0.006)
Political Connections Missing                                                                                   -0.0022
                                                                                                                (0.960)
Political Connections x ln(Book Equity)                                                                                                                                0.0410**
                                                                                                                                                                        (0.043)
State-Owned Enterprise                                                                                                                    -0.1468***     -0.1472**     -0.1536**
                                                                                                                                            (0.006)       (0.014)       (0.010)
Number of Observations          1,115            1,115          905           720         720         331        1,115          291           291           291           291
Adjusted R-squared              0.192            0.308         0.179         0.254       0.253       0.184       0.197         0.185         0.203         0.439         0.442
Country Fixed Effects             Y                Y             Y             Y           Y           Y           Y             Y             Y             Y             Y
Industry Fixed Effects                             Y                                                                                                         Y             Y
Countries Included               All              All      Non-communist      All         All         All         All      Non-communist Non-communist Non-communist Non-communist
Number of Country FEs            60                60            49           44          44          19          60             17            17            17            17
Number of Industry FEs                             14                                                                                                        12            12




                                                                                            47
 


Table 3. Italian Sample, 1911.
Panel A reports summary statistics for the full sample of Italian firms, in 1911, from the directory by Credito Italiano.
In Panel B, the dependent variable is assigned the value of one if the firm is politically connected in 1911, and zero
otherwise. Independent variables are defined as in Appendix B, except that the variables are measured in Italian lira.
Accounting ratios are winsorized at the 1% and 99% levels. Continuous variables are standardized. P-values based on
robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *, **, and ***, denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and
1% levels, respectively.

Panel A: Summary Statistics for the Italian Sample
                                     N. Obs.         Mean         Std. Dev.       Median         Min           Max
Political Connections                 793            0.257          0.437            0             0             1
Book Equity ($ 000)                   793            1,025          2,805           433           69          40,388
Net Income ($ 000)                    762              58            219            22          -1,077        3,423
Market Capitalization ($ 000)         207            3,270          7,990         1,189           15          83,834
New Tech                              793            0.182          0.386            0             0             1
ROE                                   762            0.045          0.116         0.058         -0.571         0.421
M/B                                   207            1.324          0.736         1.125         0.200          4.340
Listed                                793            0.308          0.462            0             0             1
Year Established                      793            1899          12.341          1905          1826          1911

Panel B: Y = 1 if the Firm is Politically Connected in 1911
                                          (1)           (2)                   (3)              (4)             (5)
ln(Book Equity)                       0.1112***                           0.1002***        0.1053***       0.1450***
                                        (0.000)                             (0.000)          (0.000)         (0.000)
New Tech                               -0.0141       -0.0129
                                        (0.722)      (0.752)
ROE                                    -0.0247       -0.0186                  -0.0246       -0.0241         -0.0046
                                        (0.106)      (0.271)                  (0.142)       (0.190)         (0.863)
M/B                                                                                                         -0.0200
                                                                                                            (0.595)
ln(Net Income + |Min| + 1)                                -0.0119
                                                          (0.434)
Listed                                  -0.0928***         0.0030             -0.0701*     -0.0888*
                                          (0.007)         (0.931)              (0.061)      (0.076)
Intercept                                0.2870***       0.2573***
                                          (0.000)         (0.000)
Number of Observations                      762             762                 756           699             144
Adjusted R-squared                         0.055           0.000               0.075         0.078           0.253
Sector Fixed Effects                                                             Y             Y               Y
Location of Registered Office Fixed Effects                                                    Y               Y
Year Established Fixed Effects                                                                 Y               Y
Number of Sector FEs                                                            70             67              33
Number of Location FEs                                                                         49              9
Number of Year Established FEs                                                                 49              24




                                                             48
 


Table 4. Regression Results: 1980 Sample.
The dependent variable is assigned the value of one if the firm is among the largest 20 in its country (by book equity) in 2018, and zero otherwise. Independent
variables are defined in Appendix B. Accounting ratios are winsorized at the 1% and 99% levels. Continuous variables are standardized. P-values based on robust
standard errors are reported in parentheses. *, **, and ***, denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                     (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)
ln(Book Equity)                                                 0.0471***       0.0363***        0.1199***       0.1171***       0.1140***       0.1153***
                                                                  (0.000)         (0.000)          (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)
Top 20 in 1980                                  0.2561***
                                                  (0.000)
R&D/TA                                          0.0064**        0.0099***          0.0091*         0.0349          0.0352          0.0329          0.0388
                                                  (0.023)         (0.001)          (0.054)         (0.107)         (0.106)         (0.116)         (0.234)
R&D Missing                                      -0.0012          0.0004           -0.0070         0.0417          0.0428          0.0470          0.0650
                                                  (0.850)         (0.959)          (0.478)         (0.317)         (0.306)         (0.273)         (0.325)
ln(Number of Board Interlocks + 1)                                                                 0.0067
                                                                                                   (0.582)
ln(Number of Bank-Board Interlocks + 1)                                                                            0.0135           0.0188         -0.0065
                                                                                                                   (0.235)         (0.202)         (0.770)
M/B                                                                                 0.0019                                        -0.0186**        -0.0105
                                                                                    (0.604)                                        (0.042)         (0.624)
ROE                                                                                0.0102**                                       0.0219**          0.0002
                                                                                    (0.028)                                        (0.031)         (0.992)
Leverage                                                                            0.0099                                         -0.0226         -0.0485
                                                                                    (0.151)                                        (0.282)         (0.115)
Number of Observations                             4,352           4,332             2,672         1,141            1,141            642              432
Adjusted R-squared                                 0.167           0.110             0.173         0.148            0.150           0.163            0.331
Country Fixed Effects                                Y               Y                 Y             Y                Y                Y               Y
Industry Fixed Effects (4-digit SIC)                 N               N                 Y             N                N                N               Y
Number of Country FEs                                29              29                25            27               27              24               21
Number of Industry FEs                                                                394                                                             112


                                                                              49
 


Table 5. Regression Results: 2000 Sample.
The dependent variable is assigned the value of one if the firm is among the largest 20 in its country (by book equity) in 2018, and zero otherwise. Independent
variables are defined in Appendix B. Accounting ratios are winsorized at the 1% and 99% levels. Continuous variables are standardized. P-values based on robust
standard errors are reported in parentheses. *, **, and ***, denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)         (9)          (10)        (11)
ln(Book Equity)             0.0365***     0.0719***   0.0636***   0.0505***   0.0727***   0.0698***    0.0582***   0.0725***   0.0697***    0.0568***   0.0480***
                              (0.000)       (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)
R&D/TA                      0.0032***     0.0103***   0.0066***   0.0048***     0.0021      0.0017       0.0001      0.0023      0.0022       0.0005    0.0047***
                              (0.000)       (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.005)     (0.497)     (0.620)      (0.976)     (0.456)     (0.506)      (0.887)     (0.006)
R&D Missing                 -0.0043**      -0.0011    -0.0096**    -0.0013     -0.0113*    -0.0112*     -0.0044     -0.0114*    -0.0111      -0.0044     -0.0009
                              (0.046)       (0.776)     (0.032)     (0.775)     (0.055)     (0.099)      (0.573)     (0.052)     (0.102)      (0.575)     (0.843)
Political Connections                      0.0249*     0.0252*     0.0297*                                                                              -0.0363**
                                            (0.095)     (0.093)     (0.064)                                                                               (0.042)
ln(Number of Board Interlocks + 1)                                            0.0060**    0.0072**      0.0069*
                                                                               (0.041)     (0.033)      (0.052)
ln(Number of Bank-Board Interlocks + 1)                                                                            0.0089**    0.0107***    0.0158***
                                                                                                                    (0.014)      (0.009)      (0.001)
Political Connections x ln(Book Equity)                                                                                                                 0.0713***
                                                                                                                                                          (0.003)
M/B                                                     0.0092*    0.0009                 0.0140***      0.0087                0.0139***      0.0087      0.0009
                                                        (0.071)    (0.688)                  (0.006)      (0.130)                 (0.005)      (0.124)     (0.693)
ROE                                                   -0.0105*** -0.0113***               -0.0103***    -0.0064                -0.0103***    -0.0063    -0.0108***
                                                        (0.000)    (0.000)                  (0.000)      (0.130)                 (0.000)      (0.146)     (0.000)
Leverage                                              0.0124*** 0.0084***                 0.0141***    0.0125***               0.0138***    0.0118***   0.0086***
                                                        (0.000)    (0.001)                  (0.001)      (0.004)                 (0.001)      (0.006)     (0.001)
Number of Observations         28,660      11,126       10,522      8,142       6,842        5,981        4,067      6,842        5,981        4,067       8,142
Adjusted R-squared              0.114       0.178        0.215      0.426       0.151        0.193        0.371      0.153        0.195        0.376       0.429
Country Fixed Effects             Y           Y            Y                      Y            Y                       Y            Y
Industry Fixed Effects (4-digit SIC)                       Y                                   Y                                    Y
Country x Industry Fixed Effects                                      Y                                   Y                                    Y            Y
Number of Country FEs             52         47            43                    46           41                      46           41
Number of Industry FEs                                    694                                557                                  557
Number of Country x Industry FEs                                    1,548                                1,000                                1,000       1,548




                                                                                 50
 


Table 6. Regression Results: Openness and Political Connections (1910 Sample).
The dependent variable is assigned the value of one if the firm is among the largest 20 in its country (by book equity)
in 2018, and zero otherwise. Independent variables are defined in Appendix B. Accounting ratios are winsorized at
the 1% and 99% levels. Continuous variables are standardized. Columns (3)-(5) report falsification tests. P-values
based on robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *, **, and ***, denote statistical significance at the 10%,
5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
                                                                                    ----------FalsificationTests----------
                                                         (1)          (2)            (3)              (4)             (5)
ln(Book Equity)                                      0.0862***      0.0391      0.0892***        0.0864***          0.0413
                                                       (0.010)      (0.175)       (0.008)          (0.010)         (0.154)
New Tech                                              -0.0948       0.0016        -0.0860          -0.0959         -0.0046
                                                       (0.353)      (0.991)       (0.395)          (0.344)         (0.969)
Political Connections                                0.1082***      0.1054       0.0965**         0.0969**          0.1043
                                                       (0.010)      (0.410)       (0.035)          (0.020)         (0.414)
Political Connections x Openness                       0.0262
                                                       (0.491)
Political Connections x Openness Ind. Level                         -0.0872*
                                                                     (0.064)
Trade x (Non-Bank & Non-Utilities)                                    0.0031
                                                                     (0.982)
Political Connections x (Non-Bank & Non-Utilities)                   -0.0681                                     (0.0442)
                                                                     (0.604)                                      (0.741)
Political Connections x Trade                                                     -0.0814
                                                                                  (0.391)
Political Connections x Telephones per 100 People in 1914                                        0.0351
                                                                                                 (0.320)
Number of Observations                                  291           291           291            291             291
Adjusted R-squared                                     0.184         0.422         0.185          0.187           0.423
Country Fixed Effects                                    Y             Y             Y              Y               Y
Industry Fixed Effects                                   N             Y             N              N               Y
Number of Country FEs                                    17            17           17              17              17
Number of Industry FEs                                                 12                                           12




                                                               51
 


Table 7. Regression Results: Openness and Political Connections (2000 Sample).
The dependent variable is assigned the value of one if the firm is among the largest 20 in its country (by book equity)
in 2018, and zero otherwise. Independent variables are defined in Appendix B. Accounting ratios are winsorized at
the 1% and 99% levels. Continuous variables are standardized. Columns (3)-(5) report falsification tests. P-values
based on standard errors clustered at the country level are reported in parentheses. *, **, and ***, denote statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
                                                                                       ----------Falsification Tests----------
                                                       (1)                (2)         (3)                (4)            (5)
ln(Book Equity)                                    0.0714***          0.0481***   0.0713***         0.0714*** 0.0489***
                                                     (0.002)           (0.002)     (0.002)            (0.002)        (0.002)
R&D/TA                                             0.0107***          0.0068***   0.0106***         0.0107*** 0.0065***
                                                     (0.001)           (0.004)     (0.001)            (0.001)        (0.004)
R&D Missing                                          0.0003            -0.0122      0.0003             0.0003        -0.0139
                                                     (0.970)           (0.273)     (0.963)            (0.965)        (0.230)
Political Connections                               -0.0029             0.0230      0.0187             0.0029        0.0261*
                                                     (0.882)           (0.124)     (0.242)            (0.910)        (0.081)
Political Connections x Openness                   -0.0403**
                                                     (0.016)
Political Connections x Openness Ind. Level                           -0.0167**
                                                                       (0.047)
Fraction Foreign Transactions (Industry-country Pair)                  -0.0045                                      -0.0013
                                                                       (0.277)                                      (0.669)
Openness Ind. Level                                                     0.0052
                                                                       (0.176)
Political Connections x Trade                                                      -0.0002
                                                                                   (0.976)
Political Connections x Telephones per 100 People in 1914                                           -0.0258
                                                                                                    (0.298)
Political Connections x Fraction Foreign Transactions (Industry-country Pair)                                       -0.0117
                                                                                                                    (0.456)
Number of Observations                                  10,905          9,255      10,905            10,905          9,401
Adjusted R-squared                                      0.179           0.169      0.179             0.179           0.168
Country Fixed Effects                                     Y               Y          Y                 Y               Y
Industry Fixed Effects (4-digit SIC)                                      Y                                            Y
Number of Country FEs                                    45              44           45               45              45
Number of Industry FEs                                                   607                                          607




                                                                 52
 


Table 8. Net Income as the Measure of Size.
The dependent variable is assigned the value of one if the firm is among the largest 20 in its country (by net income) in 2018, and zero otherwise. Independent
variables are defined in Appendix B. Accounting ratios are winsorized at the 1% and 99% levels. Continuous variables are standardized. P-values based on robust
standard errors are reported in parentheses. *, **, and ***, denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Panel A reports the results
for the 1980 sample, and Panel B reports the results for the 2000 sample.

            Panel A. 1980 Sample.
                                                            (1)           (2)             (3)        (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)
             ln(Net Income+|Min|+1)                                     0.0128         0.0119*    0.1158**      0.1148**       0.0865        0.0417
                                                                        (0.237)        (0.069)     (0.022)       (0.024)       (0.108)       (0.475)
             Top 20 in 1980 NI                          0.2015***
                                                         (0.000)
             R&D/TA                                     0.0072**       0.0075** 0.0125***          0.0409*       0.0418*       0.0291        0.0571*
                                                         (0.020)        (0.024)  (0.007)           (0.081)       (0.077)       (0.215)       (0.091)
             R&D Missing                                 -0.0040        -0.0125  -0.0146            0.0324       0.0320        0.0080        0.0454
                                                         (0.578)        (0.110)  (0.186)           (0.445)       (0.452)       (0.862)       (0.510)
             ln(Number of Board Interlocks + 1)                                                   0.0321***
                                                                                                   (0.010)
             ln(Number of Bank-Board Interlocks + 1)                                                            0.0272**       0.0297*       0.0228
                                                                                                                 (0.017)       (0.053)       (0.321)
             M/B                                                                       -0.0067*                              -0.0271***      -0.0236
                                                                                        (0.050)                                (0.005)       (0.329)
             ROE                                                                       0.0098**                                 0.0001       -0.0229
                                                                                        (0.035)                                (0.990)       (0.144)
             Leverage                                                                   0.0041                                 -0.0230       -0.0471
                                                                                        (0.498)                                (0.267)       (0.123)
             Number of Observations                        4,352         4,255           2,676      1,099         1,099          642           432
             Adjusted R-squared                            0.124         0.058           0.102      0.064         0.064         0.063         0.144
             Country Fixed Effects                           Y             Y               Y          Y             Y             Y             Y
             Industry Fixed Effects (4-digit SIC)            N             N               Y          N             N             N             Y
             Number of Country FEs                          29             29              25         27            27            24            21
             Number of Industry FEs                                                       394                                                  112


                                                                                  53
 


Panel B: 2000 Sample.
                                           (1)       (2)        (3)         (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)       (9)       (10)       (11)
ln(Net Income+|Min|+1)                 0.0260*** 0.0334*** 0.0328*** 0.0261** 0.0579** 0.0468**           0.0345   0.0589** 0.0475**      0.0345    0.0235*
                                        (0.009)    (0.002)    (0.004)    (0.036)    (0.012)    (0.035)   (0.205)     (0.011)   (0.033)   (0.203)    (0.052)
R&D/TA                                -0.0020*** -0.0014      0.0003     -0.0010    -0.0046    0.0025     0.0039    -0.0050*   0.0028     0.0041    -0.0008
                                        (0.000)    (0.301)    (0.873)    (0.589)    (0.116)    (0.402)   (0.190)     (0.087)   (0.359)   (0.169)    (0.691)
R&D Missing                           -0.0137*** -0.0191*** -0.0248*** -0.0176*** -0.0281*** -0.0257*** -0.0213** -0.0294*** -0.0272*** -0.0216** -0.0174***
                                        (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.001)   (0.026)     (0.000)   (0.001)   (0.026)    (0.000)
Political Connections                             0.0346** 0.0277* 0.0330**                                                                          0.0124
                                                   (0.016)    (0.065)    (0.039)                                                                    (0.392)
ln(Number of Board Interlocks + 1)                                                 0.0175*** 0.0144*** 0.0123***
                                                                                    (0.000)    (0.000)   (0.003)
ln(Number of Bank-Board Interlocks + 1)                                                                            0.0123*** 0.0097** 0.0141***
                                                                                                                     (0.001)   (0.012)   (0.003)
Political Connections x ln(Net Income+|Min|+1)                                                                                                    0.0519***
                                                                                                                                                    (0.002)
M/B                                                           0.0087     0.0045                0.0029     0.0025               0.0031     0.0026     0.0044
                                                              (0.100)    (0.152)               (0.265)   (0.296)               (0.300)   (0.285)    (0.150)
ROE                                                           0.0017     -0.0005              0.0064** 0.0074*                0.0067**    0.0075     0.0001
                                                              (0.446)    (0.852)               (0.024)   (0.099)               (0.019)   (0.101)    (0.954)
Leverage                                                     0.0058**    0.0034              0.0110*** 0.0117***              0.0108** 0.0111*** 0.0038
                                                              (0.044)    (0.197)               (0.009)   (0.005)               (0.010)   (0.007)    (0.150)
Number of Observations                   30,814    11,399     10,522      8,142      6,987      5,981     4,067       6,987     5,981     4,067      8,141
Adjusted R-squared                       0.093      0.119      0.179      0.403      0.129      0.175     0.329       0.127     0.174     0.331      0.409
Country Fixed Effects                       Y         Y          Y                     Y          Y                     Y         Y
Industry Fixed Effects (4-digit SIC)                             Y                                Y                               Y
Country x Industry Fixed Effects                                             Y                               Y                               Y          Y
Number of Country FEs                      52         47         43                    46         41                    46        41
Number of Industry FEs                                          694                              557                             557
Number of Country x Industry FEs                                          1,548                            1,000                          1,000      1,548




                                                                            54
 


Table 9. Tracing the Origins of the 20 Largest Firms in Each Country in 2018.
Panel A includes the firms in the countries for which data are available in Wordscope/Datastream in 2000; Panel B
includes the firms in the countries for which data are available in Wordscope/Datastream or Moody's in 1980.

                                                                                         N. Obs.   Fraction of Total
Panel A: Number of 20 largest firms in 2018 in the 52 countries in the 2000 sample        1,017
 Of which:
    Firms that were also among the 20 largest in 2000                                      450          0.442
    Firms established before 2000 that were not among the 20 largest in 2000               502          0.494
    New firms, likely established in 2000 or later                                          65          0.064
    Total                                                                                 1,017         1.000
Panel B: Number of 20 largest firms in 2018 in the 29 countries in the 1980 sample         580
 Of which:
    Firms that were also among the 20 largest in 1980                                      138          0.238
    Firms established before 1980 that were not among the 20 largest in 1980               338          0.583
    New firms, likely established in 1980 or later                                         104          0.179
    Total                                                                                  580          1.000



Table 10. What Happened to the Large Firms from the 60 Countries in the 1910 Sample?
The table reports outcomes, as of 2018, for the largest 20 firms in each country in the 1910 sample.

                                                                 N. Obs.        Fraction of Total
Still among the 20 largest in 2018                                152                 0.136
Still active but not among the 20 largest in 2018                 399                 0.358
Dissolved                                                         184                 0.165
Unknown                                                           380                 0.341
Total                                                              1,115               1.000




                                                         55
 


Appendix A. Sample Composition.

    Countries                          Circa 1910 Sample                         1980 Sample                      2000 Sample

                                          Political          Board                         Board                   Political      Board
                           Included?     Connections       Interlocks        Included?   Interlocks   Included?   Connections   Interlocks
    1.   Algeria             yes                              yes
    2.   Argentina           yes             yes              yes                                       yes           yes          yes
    3.   Australia           yes             yes              yes              Yes             yes      yes           yes          yes
    4.   Austria                                                               Yes             yes      yes           yes          yes
    5.   Azerbaijan          yes                              yes
    6.   Belgium             yes                              yes              yes             yes      yes           yes          yes
    7.   Bolivia             yes
    8.   Brazil              yes                              yes              yes             yes      yes           yes          yes
    9.   Canada              yes             yes              yes              yes             yes      yes           yes          yes
    10. Channel Islands                                                                                 yes
    11. Chile                yes                              yes                                       yes           yes          yes
    12. China                yes                                                                        yes                        yes
    13. Colombia             yes                                               yes             yes      yes           yes          yes
    14. Cuba                 yes
    15. Czech Republic                                                                                  yes           yes          yes
    16. Dem. Rep. of the
        Congo                yes                              yes
    17. Denmark              yes             yes              yes              yes             yes      yes           yes          yes
    18. Ecuador              yes
    19. Egypt                yes                                                                        yes                        yes
    20. Finland              yes                                               yes             yes      yes           yes          yes
    21. France               yes                                               yes             yes      yes           yes          yes
    22. French Guiana        yes                              yes
    23. Germany              yes             yes              yes              yes             yes      yes           yes          yes
    24. Greece               yes                              yes                                       yes           yes          yes

                                                                        56
 


    25. Guinea                  yes   yes   yes
    26. Hong Kong                                      yes   yes   yes   yes   yes
    27. Hungary                                                    yes   yes   yes
    28. India                   yes                    yes   yes   yes   yes   yes
    29. Indonesia               yes         yes                    yes   yes
    30. Ireland                                        yes   yes   yes   yes   yes
    31. Israel                                                     yes   yes   yes
    32. Italy                   yes   yes   yes        yes   yes   yes   yes   yes
    33. Ivory Coast             yes   yes   yes
    34. Japan                   yes                    yes   yes   yes   yes   yes
    35. Kenya                   yes         yes
    36. Latvia                  yes         yes
    37. Luxembourg              yes         yes                    yes   yes   yes
    38. Madagascar              yes   yes   yes
    39. Malaysia                                       yes   yes   yes   yes   yes
    40. Mexico                  yes   yes   yes        yes   yes   yes   yes   yes
    41. Morocco                 yes   yes   yes                    yes
    42. Myanmar                 yes
    43. Netherlands             yes                    yes   yes   yes   yes   yes
    44. New Zealand             yes   yes   yes        yes   yes   yes   yes   yes
    45. Nigeria                 yes         yes
    46. North Korea             yes         yes
    47. Norway                  yes                    yes   yes   yes   yes   yes
    48. Pakistan                                                   yes         yes
    49. Peru                    yes                                yes   yes   yes
    50. Philippines                                                yes   yes   yes
    51. Poland                  yes         yes                    yes   yes   yes
    52. Portugal                                                   yes   yes   yes
    53. Republic of the Congo   yes   yes   yes


                                                  57
 


    54. Romania              yes   yes   yes
    55. Russian Federation   yes         yes                    yes   yes
    56. Senegal              yes   yes   yes
    57. Singapore                                   yes   yes   yes   yes   yes
    58. Slovakia                                                yes
    59. South Africa         yes         yes        yes   yes   yes   yes   yes
    60. South Korea          yes         yes        yes   yes   yes   yes   yes
    61. Spain                yes         yes        yes   yes   yes   yes   yes
    62. Sri Lanka            yes   yes   yes                    yes   yes   yes
    63. Sweden               yes         yes        yes   yes   yes   yes   yes
    64. Switzerland          yes         yes        yes   yes   yes   yes   yes
    65. Taiwan                                      yes         yes   yes   yes
    66. Thailand                                                yes   yes   yes
    67. Tunisia              yes   yes   yes
    68. Turkey               yes         yes                    yes   yes   yes
    69. Ukraine              yes         yes
    70. United Kingdom       yes   yes   yes        yes   yes   yes   yes   yes
    71. United States        yes   yes   yes        yes         yes   yes
    72. Uruguay              yes
    73. Uzbekistan           yes         yes
    74. Venezuela            yes                                yes   yes   yes
    75. Zimbabwe             yes         yes
    Number of Countries      60    19    44         29    27    52    47    46




                                               58
 


Appendix B. Variables Definitions.
    Variable name             Definition
    Top 20 in 2018 | Top 20   is an indicator that is assigned the value of one if a company that was among the 20 largest, by book equity, in its country in 1910
    in 1910                   is still among the 20 largest in its country in 2018, and zero otherwise.
    Top 20 in 2018 | Top 20   is an indicator that is assigned the value of one if a company that was among the 20 largest, by book equity, in its country in year
    in 1980                   1980 is still among the 20 largest in its country in 2018, and zero otherwise.
    Top 20 in 2018 | Top 20   is an indicator that is assigned the value of one if a company that was among the 20 largest, by book equity, in its country in year
    in 2000                   2000 is still among the 20 largest in its country in 2018, and zero otherwise.
                              is an indicator that is assigned the value of one if the company was among the 20 largest, by book equity, in its country in year
    Top 20 in 1980
                              1980, and zero otherwise.
                              is an indicator that is assigned the value of one if the company was among the 20 largest, by book equity, in its country in year
    Top 20 in 2000
                              2000, and zero otherwise.
    Top 20 in 2018            is an indicator that is assigned the value of one if the company is among the 20 largest in its country in 2018, and zero otherwise.
    Top 20 in 2018 | Top 20   is an indicator that is assigned the value of one if the company that was among the 20 largest, by net income, in its country in 1980
    in 1980 NI                is still among the 20 largest in its country in 2018, and zero otherwise.
    Top 20 in 2018 | Top 20   is an indicator that is assigned the value of one if the company that was among the 20 largest, by net income, in its country in 2000
    in 2000 NI                is still among the 20 largest in its country in 2018, and zero otherwise.
                              is an indicator that is assigned the value of one if the company was among the 20 largest, by net income, in its country in year
    Top 20 in 1980 NI
                              1980, and zero otherwise.
                              is an indicator that is assigned the value of one if the company was among the 20 largest, by net income, in its country in year
    Top 20 in 2000 NI
                              2000, and zero otherwise.
                              is an indicator that is assigned the value of one if the company was among the 20 largest, by net income, in its country in year
    Top 20 in 2018 NI
                              2018, and zero otherwise.
                              is the "shareholders' investment in a company" (Worldscope datatype WS03501) in either 1980, 2000, or 2018, converted into
    Book Equity ($000)        thousands of U.S. dollars. When the data are available, Book Equity for the circa 1910 sample includes both reserves and preferred
                              stock.
    Fraction Foreign
    Transactions (Industry-   is the ratio of the dollar value of mergers and acquisitions, during 2000-2018, in a given country and 4-digit SIC industry involving
    country Pair)             foreign acquirers divided by the total dollar value of M&A, during the same period.
                              is the ratio of total debt, defined as "all interest bearing [debt] and capitalized lease obligations" (WS03255), divided by total
    Leverage                  assets, defined as "the sum of total current assets, long term receivables, investment in unconsolidated subsidiaries, other
                              investments, net property plant and equipment and other assets" (WS02999).
    Listed                    is an indicator that is assigned the value of one if the company is publicly-traded, and zero otherwise.
                              is the ratio of the market value of equity, defined as "Market Price-Year End * Common Shares Outstanding" (WS08001) divided
                              by book value of equity, defined as the "shareholders' investment in a company" (WS03501). M/B for the Italian sample of 1911 is
    M/B
                              defined as the number of common shares outstanding multiplied by the average between the maximum and the minimum stock
                              price for the year, all divided by book equity.


                                                                                 59
 


    Net Income ($000)        is the net income available for common shareholders (WS01751) either in 1980, 2000, or 2018 in, thousands of U.S. dollars.
    New Tech                 is an indicator that is assigned the value of one if the firm operates in one of five industry sub-sectors: chemicals (bleaching
                             powder, fertilizers, and explosives), electricity supply, electricity generation, bicycle, or motorcar, and zero otherwise.
    Number of Bank-Board     is, if a firm's nexus of interlocks includes a bank, the number of other firms (including banks) with which the firm shares officers
    Interlocks               or directors, and zero otherwise. The 1910 bank-board interlocks only include interlocks with other large firms.
    Number of Board          is the number of other firms with which the firm shares officers or directors. The 1910 board interlocks only include interlocks
    Interlocks               with other large firms.
    Openness                 is the interaction between Trade and Telephones per 100 People in 1914.
                             is, for the 1910 sample, defined as the interaction between Trade and an indicator denoting firms operating in industries other than
                             banks and utilities (i.e., gas, lighting, and water companies). For the 2000 sample, the variable is defined as the interaction between
    Openness Ind. Level      Trade and the fraction of incoming foreign M&As, defined as the ratio of the dollar value of mergers and acquisitions, during
                             2000-2018, in a given country and 4-digit SIC industry involving foreign acquirers divided by the total dollar value of M&A,
                             during the same period.
                             is an indicator that is assigned the value of one if a director or officer of the firm is a member of the central government or a
    Political Connections    member of the parliament of its country. For the 1910 sample, in the case of former colonies, political connections include
                             politicians from the ruling country. For the 2000 sample, political connections also include close-ties to politicians.
    Political Connections    is an indicator variable that is assigned a value of one for (a) all firms in countries for which we do not have data on political
    Missing                  connections and (b) for firms for which we do not have data on board members, and zero otherwise.
                             is an indicator that is assigned the value of the Political Connections indicator when data on political connections are available, and
    Political Connections,
                             is assigned the value of zero for (a) all firms in countries for which we do not have data on political connections and (b) for firms
    set to 0 when Missing
                             for which we do not have data on board members.
    R&D Missing              is an indicator that is assigned the value of one if data on R&D are missing, and zero otherwise.
                             is the ratio of R&D expenditures, defined as "all direct and indirect costs related to the creation and development of new processes,
                             techniques, applications and products with commercial possibilities" (WS01201), divided by total assets, defined as "the sum of
    R&D/TA                   total current assets, long term receivables, investment in unconsolidated subsidiaries, other investments, net property plant and
                             equipment and other assets" (WS02999), either in 1980 or in 2000. R&D expenditures are set equal to zero when the data are
                             missing.
                             is the ratio of net income, defined as net income to common shareholders (WS01751), divided by book equity, defined as
    ROE
                             "shareholders' investment in a company" (WS03501).
                             is an indicator that is assigned the value of one if the firm became state owned at any time over the period of circa 1910 ­ 2018,
    State-Owned Enterprise
                             and zero otherwise.
    Telephones per 100
    People in 1914           is the number of telephones per 100 residents, in the country (or colony), in 1914, from Kingsbury (1915).
                             is defined as the sum of imports and exports, all scaled by gross domestic product. All items are from the World Bank's World
    Trade                    Development Indicators. Trade is averaged over 1960-2018 (1960 is the first year for which data are available from the World
                             Bank) for the period starting circa 1910, and is averaged over 2000-2018 for the period starting in 2000.
    Year Established         is the year in which the firm was established.



                                                                                 60
