                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 A THEORY OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE INTERVENTIONS

                                        Sebastián Fanelli
                                         Ludwig Straub

                                      Working Paper 27872
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27872


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2020




We would like to thank the editor and three anonymous referees for useful suggestions and
comments, as well as Mark Aguiar, Manuel Amador, Javier Bianchi, Luigi Bocola, Ricardo
Caballero, Andres Fernandez, Robert Kollmann, Matteo Maggiori, Diego Perez, Jeremy Stein,
Adrien Verdelhan, Guido Lorenzoni, for his discussion at the NBER, and especially Ivan
Werning for his support during our PhD. We also would like to thank participants at the 2018
Chicago International Macro/Finance conference, the 2018 NBER Summer Institute IFM and
EFMB sessions, the 2018 Barcelona GSB Summer Forum, the SED in Mexico City, the 2017
Seminar on Financial Volatility and Foreign Exchange Intervention of the Central Bank of Peru,
the 2015 RIDGE conference in Montevideo, the MIT Macro Lunch and the MIT Sloan Asset
Pricing Reading Group for many useful comments. Ludwig Straub appreciates support from the
Macro-Financial Modeling Group. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Sebastián Fanelli and Ludwig Straub. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
A Theory of Foreign Exchange Interventions
Sebastián Fanelli and Ludwig Straub
NBER Working Paper No. 27872
September 2020
JEL No. F31,F32,F41,F42

                                          ABSTRACT

We study a real small open economy with two key ingredients: (i) partial segmentation of home
and foreign bond markets and (ii) a pecuniary externality that makes the real exchange rate
excessively volatile in response to capital flows. Partial segmentation implies that, by intervening
in the bond markets, the central bank can affect the exchange rate and the spread between home-
and foreign-bond yields. Such interventions allow the central bank to address the pecuniary
externality, but they are also costly, as foreigners make carry-trade profits. We analytically
characterize the optimal intervention policy that solves this trade-off: (a) the optimal policy leans
against the wind, stabilizing the exchange rate; (b) it involves smooth spreads but allows exchange
rates to jump; (c) it partly relies on "forward guidance", with non-zero interventions even after
the shock has subsided; (d) it requires credibility, in that central banks do not intervene without
commitment. Finally, we shed light on the global consequences of widespread interventions,
using a multi-country extension of our model. We find that, left to themselves, countries over-
accumulate reserves, reducing welfare and leading to inefficiently low world interest rates.


Sebastián Fanelli
CEMFI
Calle Casado del Alisal, 5
Madrid, 28014
Spain
fanelli@cemfi.es

Ludwig Straub
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer 211
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
ludwigstraub@fas.harvard.edu
1      Introduction
Volatile capital flows present complex trade-offs to central banks around the world. Chief
among them is Mundell's famous trilemma, which in economies with open capital accounts
manifests itself in a tough trade-off between employment and exchange rate stabilization.
In search of solutions, the vast majority of open economies has turned to foreign exchange
(FX) interventions. Traditionally a popular tool mostly among developing countries--nine
out of ten rely on it1 --it has recently emerged as the first line of defense among several
advanced economies as well, e.g. among Euro neighbors. Across the board, intervening
central banks often do not hesitate to put large sums on the line. Brazil, in the wake of
the "taper tantrum", sold around US$ 110 billion worth of reserves within two years;
Switzerland, fending off appreciation, has accumulated US$ 800 billion worth of reserves
since 2010.
    Despite the popularity of FX interventions in practice, there is little theoretical work to
guide their implementation. Scant convincing empirical evidence on their effectiveness,
and an influential irrelevance result by Backus and Kehoe (1989), shaped a pessimistic
view within academia. In recent years, however, this view has started to shift. Serious
empirical work has demonstrated their effectiveness (e.g. Kearns and Rigobon, 2005);
financial frictions in capital mobility have emerged as a central ingredient in explaining
puzzles at the core of international macroeconomics (Gabaix and Maggiori, 2015); and
normative aspects of FX interventions have begun to move into the sights of academic
economists (Liu and Spiegel, 2015; Cavallino, 2019).
    Yet, many fundamental questions remain open. What kind of inefficiencies should
be addressed with FX interventions? How should costs of interventions be measured?
How should interventions be implemented over time? Are optimal FX interventions
time consistent? What are the implications of the increasingly widespread usage of FX
interventions for the world economy?
    In this paper, we propose a tractable and microfounded framework that speaks to these
questions. It rests on two key ingredients, the first of which is limited capital mobility. In
our framework, intermediation between home and foreign bond markets is restricted due
to a fixed transaction cost and position limits. These restrictions imply that intermediaries
cannot arbitrage away all return differentials between markets. A portfolio balance channel
thus emerges: changes in the portfolio of the central bank induce short-lived interest rate
spreads between domestic and foreign bonds, as in Kouri (1976), Branson and Henderson
    1 See   Canales-Kriljenko (2003).



                                              2
(1985) and, more recently, Gabaix and Maggiori (2015). Thus, FX interventions are effective.
    The second ingredient is an inefficiency in the competitive equilibrium that makes
the path of the exchange rate suboptimal absent interventions. Inspired by Cravino and
Levchenko (2017), this occurs in our baseline model due to a novel pecuniary externality:
rich households do not take into account the effect of their spending decisions on the
purchasing power of the poor via the real exchange rate. More precisely, we build a
real small open economy model with two types of households: one of them is rich and
Ricardian, while the other is poor and hand-to-mouth. Households have Stone-Geary
preferences with subsistence needs in tradable goods, rationalizing the fact that tradable
expenditure shares decrease with income (Cravino and Levchenko, 2017). When the world
interest rate increases, the rich cut back their consumption, depreciating the exchange rate,
and hurting the poor.2 FX interventions can be used to affect home interest rates, thereby
altering rich households' spending behavior and exchange rates. Thus, FX interventions
are desirable.
    We analyze this model through the lens of the small open economy's central bank as the
social planner and ask: how should it optimally manage its holdings of foreign bonds? Our
first contribution is to show that the problem can be entirely framed in terms of the interest
rate spread that the central bank's portfolio choice generates. The logic is straightforward:
to depreciate the exchange rate, the central bank sells home bonds and purchases foreign
ones, generating a positive interest rate spread. Crucial to our analysis, interest rate spreads
are inherently costly, over and above the standard costs from distorting (home) households'
consumption profiles. The reason is that interest rate spreads invite foreign intermediaries
to make profits from carry trades, representing costs to the country. These additional costs
are naturally convex in the level of the spread--as more foreign intermediaries become
active carry traders when spreads are higher--and increasing in the openness of the capital
account--as foreign intermediaries then find it easier to take larger positions.
    Our second contribution is a full characterization of the optimal FX intervention policy.
We summarize our findings in six main insights or "principles". First, FX interventions
should lean against the wind of global capital flows, dampening exchange rate movements.
In our baseline model, this is desirable because it stabilizes the welfare of the poor.3 Second,
   2 This  model is meant to capture a significant concern of policymakers in emerging markets: the pass-
through of exchange rate movements into food prices - an important component of the consumption basket
of low income households. However, our results are much more general than this particular setup. We
present a general framework in Section 4.1 and three alternative applications in Appendix D.
    3 In other applications, studied in Appendix D, leaning against the wind is desirable for different reasons.

For example, in an environment with aggregate demand externalities, leaning against the wind incentivizes
agents to spend more during recessions, which increases welfare. In a model with endogenous terms of trade


                                                       3
FX interventions should be smooth in terms of interest rate spreads. This helps spread out
the costs from FX interventions over time, reminiscent of the famous tax-smoothing model
of Barro (1979). Notably, our cost term is not equal to a simple quasi-fiscal cost, which is
the standard cost measure used in the literature (Adler and Mano, 2018). In fact, in our
calibration, it is one order of magnitude smaller as it takes into account the financial benefits
directly accruing to home households. We demonstrate that our idea of FX intervention
smoothing does not imply that the exchange rate path should be smooth. That is, the
exchange rate must be allowed to "jump" in response to the shock. A price-based policy
(e.g. a "crawling peg") that tries to slow the adjustment over time necessitates large interest-
rate spreads and thus carries large welfare costs. Our third insight is a direct consequence
of FX-intervention smoothing, namely that the optimal policy involves promises of future
FX interventions even when the actual shock has already passed--a form of "FX forward
guidance".
    Our fourth insight is that these promises naturally lead to a new time inconsistency
problem, as central banks would renege on their promised FX interventions after the shock
has subsided. When FX interventions cannot be credibly promised at all, we show that
no FX intervention will be chosen in the associated time-consistent Markov equilibrium,
highlighting the role of central bank credibility as an essential input into successful conduct
of FX intervention policies. Our fifth insight echoes the common perception that it is
"easier" to resist appreciation than to fight depreciation. We rationalize this on the basis that
households have asymmetric access to foreign markets. Simply put, if households can save
in dollars more than they can borrow, the central bank needs to commit more resources to
defend the currency against depreciation than against appreciation. Finally, for our sixth
insight, we consider a "non-fundamental" shock, such as the noise shocks in Gabaix and
Maggiori (2015). In contrast with fundamental capital flow shocks, we argue that these
shocks are not costly and instead lead to financial gains for the intervening country.
    We offer a rich set of extensions in Section 4 and Appendix D. Among others, we
propose a general framework that can nest alternative motives of interventions and show
the robustness of our results; we introduce long-term assets in the economy and prove that
our time inconsistency cannot be mended by maturity management as in Lucas and Stokey
(1983); and, finally, we study whether our interest rate spreads correspond to uncovered-
or covered-interest-rate-parity violations.
    Our last contribution is to characterize the positive and normative consequences of
and home bias, curbing exchange rate movements helps increase the price of exports when net exports are
large. We identify the common thread across applications in our general framework of Section 4.1.



                                                  4
widespread FX interventions for the international monetary system. We embed our baseline
model in a world composed of a continuum of small open economies, which are subject
to limited capital mobility as before. We simulate a global savings glut by symmetrically
increasing all households' desires to save, capturing recent trends like population aging
or a growth slowdown. We show that in response to other countries' savings behavior,
each country finds it individually optimal to engage in FX interventions and accumulate
reserves. Yet, this only "pushes" more savings into the other countries, which amplifies
their desired interventions in the Nash equilibrium, resulting in "reserve wars". We find
that reserve wars are characterized by large public cross-border capital flows (as in Aguiar
and Amador, 2011 and Gourinchas and Jeanne, 2013) and by significantly depressed world
interest rates. Strikingly, a planner that could coordinate all countries' interventions would
optimally ban their usage in response to symmetric shocks (such as a global savings glut),
and only allow them in response to country-specific asymmetric shocks, where they have
insurance benefits.

Literature. Our paper builds on a recent literature studying FX interventions using fully
microfounded frameworks with limited capital mobility.4 Our financial friction is, in
reduced form, the same as in Gabaix and Maggiori (2015). They introduce it in a general
equilibrium environment and illustrate that FX interventions can be effective in moving
exchange rates. Chang and Velasco (2017) study FX interventions in an environment with
borrowing constraints, and show they are effective when these constraints are binding. Liu
and Spiegel (2015) numerically solve for the jointly optimal response of taxes on financial
assets, FX interventions, and monetary policy to fundamental shocks in a New-Keynesian
model, finding that FX interventions lean against the wind. Cavallino (2019) also uses a
New-Keynesian model and studies optimal FX interventions against non-fundamental
capital inflow shocks, characterizing the solution to first-order around the steady state.
Amador et al. (2020) characterize the FX interventions that are necessary to sustain a
given exchange rate path in an environment with a zero lower bound on nominal interest
rates. They also measure the cost of FX interventions in Switzerland as the product of the
covered-interest-rate-parity (CIP) deviation and the stock of reserves. Relative to these
papers, we contribute on the positive side by deriving an expression for the costs of FX
interventions, emphasizing the residence of home-bond holders and the maturity structure.
On the normative side, we contribute by proposing new motives for interventions and by
identifying several new principles.
   4 Ostry  et al. (2012), Benes et al. (2015), Devereux and Yetman (2014), and Blanchard et al. (2014) study the
effects of interventions without a fully microfounded model.

                                                       5
    Our paper is also connected to the burgeoning literature on optimal capital controls,
which also characterizes optimal paths of tax-induced interest rate spreads.5 Indeed, two
of our alternative models share common themes with Farhi and Werning (2012, 2014) but
allow for limited capital mobility. We show that their prescription that the optimal policy
should lean against the wind after world interest rate shocks, stabilizing movements in the
real exchange rate, carries over to our environment. However, none of the other principles
is present in their optimal capital controls problem.
    Our paper is also related to a large literature studying the long-drawn process of reserve
accumulation by emerging market central banks in the past decades.6 Closest to us in
this literature are Benigno and Fornaro (2012), Jeanne (2012) and Bacchetta et al. (2013,
2014), which investigate the role of reserve accumulation in economies in which the private
sector lacks access to foreign markets. However, in these models there is no region in
which the planner balances the benefits of FX interventions with costs (beyond distorting
consumption)--which is at the center of our analysis.
    Finally, our study of a world equilibrium with reserve accumulation in Section 5 is
related to Obstfeld (2013), who emphasizes the dangers of currency wars through reserve
accumulation and its consequences for global interest rates. Models of low global interest
rates are also put forth by Coeurdacier et al. (2015) and Caballero and Farhi (2018). We
contribute to this literature by showing how decentralized FX interventions can be a
powerful amplification mechanism of an initial rise in global savings.


Layout. The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present our baseline model
and derive the planning problem. In Section 3, we characterize the optimal policy, orga-
nizing the exposition around six main insights or "principles". In Section 4, we develop
a general framework that nests the baseline model and use it to show the robustness of
our results. We also extend our baseline model to include long-term assets and currency
forwards. In Section 5, we present a multi-country version of our model. Section 6 con-
cludes. The appendix contains all proofs, as well as additional extensions and details on
the calibration and data used in the paper.
    5 See, among many others, Bianchi (2011); Magud et al. (2018); Farhi and Werning (2012, 2014); Costinot et

al. (2014); Heathcote and Perri (2016).
    6 See, for instance, Aizenman and Lee (2007); Alfaro and Kanczuk (2009); Korinek and Serven (2016);

Jeanne and Ranci`   ere (2011); Benigno and Fornaro (2012); Bianchi et al. (2018); Hur and Kondo (2016); Jeanne
(2012); Gopinath and Stein (2018).




                                                      6
2     Baseline Model
In this section, we focus on a model inspired by the work of Cravino and Levchenko (2017).
We study an abstract general framework that nests this model as a special case in Section
4.1. We consider alternative applications of the general framework in Appendix D.


2.1   Model setup
We study a real small open economy (SOE) model in continuous time. There are three
kinds of agents: the SOE's households, its central bank, and financial intermediaries. The
agents interact in two asset markets, one for the SOE's home bonds, and one for foreign
bonds. We describe all three kinds of agents in turn.


Households and goods markets. There are two types of households i  { R, P} in the
home country--a mass 1 - µ Ricardian, or rich, (i = R) and a mass µ poor (i = P) households.
Households trade and consume tradable and nontradable goods, of which the SOE's total
endowments are y T and y N . Each household maximizes a Stone-Geary utility function
                                  
                                     e-t u (ciTt - c) (ciNt )1- dt                      (1)
                              0

where ciTt is tradable consumption and ciNt is nontradable consumption of a household
                                                           1- 
of type i;  represents the degree of openness; u(c) = c   1- is a CES flow utility function;
and c represents a subsistence level in tradable goods consumption (e.g. food). The
latter introduces a non-homotheticity in consumption, which captures the fact that poor
households spend a higher fraction of their income on tradables, and within tradables, on
goods with systematically lower nontradable components (Cravino and Levchenko, 2017).
As a result, the cost of poor households' consumption baskets is particularly sensitive to
exchange rate fluctuations, which, as we discuss at great length below, has immediate
consequences for central bank policies.
     Ricardian and poor households differ in two aspects: (i) their income stream, and
(ii) their access to financial markets. Ricardian households own a share 1 -  > 1 - µ
of the SOE's endowments, have unfettered access to home financial markets, and some
restricted access to international financial markets. Poor households own a share  < µ of
endowments in the economy and lack access to any financial markets.
     Throughout our analysis, we normalize the foreign good's price to 1 and refer to
that numeraire as "dollars". The consolidated dollar budget constraint of all Ricardian


                                                7
households is then

                     pt c R      R                                    
                          Nt + c Tt + b Ht + b Ht = y T + rt b Ht + rt b Ht + tt + t ,                   (2)

where pt is the relative price of the nontradable good, b Ht and b     Ht are the households'
positions in home and foreign bonds, tt are transfers to or from the central bank, t are
intermediation profits (to be specified below), and rt and rt  are the returns of the home

and foreign bond, respectively (both in dollars).7 pt can be regarded as the inverse of the
                                                            - (1-  )
exchange rate, which, up to a constant factor, is equal to pt        . The position in foreign
bond markets is assumed to be restricted,

                                                             
                                              bHt  [ b H , b H ]

                                              
where b                          
         H  0  b H , and | b H |  b H .
                                           8 This assumption captures the idea that it is

difficult for many households in emerging markets to frictionlessly access international
financial instruments without having to rely on financial intermediaries, especially so
when borrowing abroad. This specification allows as special cases the commonly assumed
case where households cannot access financial markets at all without intermediaries,
                                          
b                                                                            
  H = b H = 0, as well as the case where b H is significantly larger than | b H | and thus access
is asymmetric.
    For a poor household, the dollar budget constraint is given by

                                         P
                                       µzt =  p t y N +  y T - µ c.                                      (3)

where zi      i            i
         t  c Tt - c + pt c Nt denotes the (net-of-subsistence) dollar expenditure by a house-
hold of type i. When µc > y T , the poor's endowment of the tradable good is insufficient to
cover their subsistence needs. Thus, a depreciation forces them to cut their non-subsistence
spending significantly in order to finance their subsistence needs. Formally, ztP moves more

than proportionally with pt . Henceforth, we assume this is the case, in line with the idea
that devaluations particularly hurt the poor.
   7 Sincethe model is deterministic, the currency denomination of the returns is irrelevant when the country
has zero net liabilities in the home currency at t = 0. We allow for non-zero home currency liabilities in
Section 4.3.
   8 Although there are restrictions on holdings of foreign bonds, we refer to these households as Ricardian

because the timing of lump-sum transfers is irrelevant to them.




                                                      8
    The optimal demands for tradable and nontradable goods are given by

                                            ciTt = zi
                                                    t+c                                                    (4)
                                           ciNt = p- 1         i
                                                   t (1 -  ) z t                                           (5)

                                     R , as it will play a prominent role in the analysis. Unlike
Below, we often write zt instead of zt
poor households, Ricardian households have unfettered access to home bond markets.
Thus, their total expenditure zt satisfies the following Euler equation,

                                  t
                                  z   1                    -1p
                                                             t
                                     = (r t -  ) + (1 -  )     .                                           (6)
                                  zt                        pt
                                                                               
Their demand for foreign bonds is at the upper bound, b                        
                                                          Ht = b H , when rt > rt , and vice
                                 
versa at the lower bound, b                                      
                           Ht = b H , when rt < rt . When rt = rt , b Ht is indeterminate.


Financial intermediaries. The key ingredient in our model that makes FX interventions
effective is a finite elasticity of the demand for home bonds. As a result, a change in
the portfolio of the central bank affects the return of home assets rt relative to its foreign
counterpart rt  , henceforth referred to as the interest rate spread. Backus and Kehoe (1989)

pointed out that these portfolio balance effects are muted in general equilibrium in a world
with free movement of capital, as the private sector would perfectly undo any actions by
the central bank.
    We break this result by modeling limited asset market participation, in the spirit of
Bacchetta and Van Wincoop (2010) and Gabaix and Maggiori (2015). In particular, we
assume that there exists a continuum of intermediaries owned by foreigners, labeled by
j  [0, ), which can trade in both foreign and home bond markets.
    Foreign intermediaries' investment decisions are subject to two important restrictions.
First, each intermediary is subject to a net open position limit X > 0.9 Second, we follow
Alvarez et al. (2009) in assuming that intermediaries face heterogeneous participation costs.
In particular, each intermediary j active in the home bond market at time t is obliged to
pay a participation cost of exactly j per dollar invested.
    Putting these ingredients together, intermediary j optimally invests an amount x jt ,
   9 It
      is worth noting that many emerging market central banks do impose position limits on intermediaries'
investments as a form of capital controls, hence artificially decreasing X , see e.g. Canales-Kriljenko (2003).




                                                      9
solving

                                                                 
                                       max           x jt (rt - rt ) - j| x jt |.
                                    x jt [- X ,X ]


Intermediary j's cash flow conditional on investing is X |rt - rt  | while participation costs

are jX . Thus, investing is optimal for all intermediaries j  [0, j], with the marginal active
intermediary j given by j = |rt - rt |. The aggregate investment volume is then


                                                               
                                       b It = jX · sign (rt - rt ).

Defining   X -1 and substituting out j, we obtain

                                                1          
                                                  (r t - r t
                                             b It =          ).                               (7)
                                                
Equation (7) embodies that foreign intermediaries' demand for home bonds has a finite
(semi-)elasticity to the return spread. This equation is crucial to our analysis because it
implies that changes in home bond demand, e.g. induced by FX interventions, can indeed
affect home interest rates.
    The critical parameter in (7) is the inverse demand elasticity . If  is large, e.g. due
to tight position limits X , intermediation is impeded. In equilibrium, this implies both
small levels of b It and a small sensitivity of b It to the interest rate spread. In the extreme
case where   , foreign intermediation is absent, b It = 0, and home households have
no access to foreign investments beyond their own. By contrast, if  is small, e.g. due to
relaxed position limits X , the equilibrium will feature both large b It and a large sensitivity
of b It to the interest rate spread. In the extreme case where   0, bond demand adjusts so
that rt = rt  and the elasticity is infinite. Henceforth, we assume   (0,  ).

    We also allow for intermediaries owned by households in the home country. Similar to
their foreign counterparts, home intermediaries' optimal home bond position is given by

                                                         1          
                                           b I Ht =        [r t - r t ]                                (8)
                                                         H

where  H  (0, ) is the inverse demand elasticity.10 Profits generated by home intermedi-
                         ], are paid to Ricardian households.
aries, t  b I Ht [rt - rt
  10 We assume that participation costs constitute transfers to Ricardian agents in the home economy. Thus,
no extra cost terms enter the budget constraint (2).




                                                          10
Central bank. The home central bank acts as the home country's social planner in our
                                                                  , t } consisting of home
model. It chooses a foreign exchange intervention policy {bGt , bGt  t
                                                   
bond investments bGt , foreign bond investments bGt , and transfers tt to Ricardian house-
holds, subject to the central bank budget constraint11

                                        + b                
                                      bGt  Gt = rt bGt + rt bGt - tt .                                         (9)

The central bank's interventions must also ensure that the country satisfies a no-Ponzi
condition,
                                         t 
                                 lim e- 0 rs ds nfat = 0                            (10)
                                            t

where nfat       b Ht + bHt
                                       
                              + bGt + bGt
                                      is the net foreign asset position of the country. Observe
                                                  +b
that in this economy, it is without loss to set bGt   Gt = 0 due to the availability of transfers
between the central bank and Ricardian households.


Competitive equilibrium.            The model is closed with the goods market clearing condition
in nontradables,
                                          (1 - µ ) c R        P
                                                     Nt + µ c Nt = y N                                       (11)

and the home bond market clearing condition,

                                        b Ht + b It + b I Ht + bGt = 0.                                      (12)

We formally define the competitive equilibrium in this environment as follows.

Definition 1. Given initial debt positions (b H0 , b I 0 , b I H0 , bG0 , bG           ), a path for the interna-
                                                                                        0
                               
tional interest rate {rt }, and a central bank FX intervention policy {bGt , bGt                  , t }, an alloca-
                                                                                                      t
        i      i             
tion {c Nt , c Tt , b Ht , b Ht , b It , b I Ht , t } together with prices { pt , rt } is a competitive equilibrium
iff they jointly solve (2)­(12).

   We assume that the aggregate tradable endowment y T is sufficiently large to guarantee
the existence of a competitive equilibrium.
  11 We                                                                                          . One might
         implicitly assume that the relevant interest rate for marginal changes in reserves is rt
                                
argue that negative levels of bGt are associated with a different, higher interest rate. In reality, however,
reserves are (almost) always positive. Thus, marginal changes in reserves are associated with the foreign
                           .
interest rate on savings, rt




                                                       11
2.2    Equilibrium characterization and implementability
Next, we characterize the competitive equilibrium, with the goal to derive "implementabil-
ity conditions" describing the set of competitive equilibria that can be attained by different
FX intervention policies. Substituting nontradable consumption demands (4) into the
goods market clearing condition (11) gives us an expression for the price of nontradable
goods,

                                             1-
                      pt = p(zt )  y-
                                    N
                                      1
                                                       ((1 - µ)zt + y T - µc).                          (13)
                                          1 -  (1 -  )

    This equation shows that, when the expenditure zt of Ricardian agents increases by 1%,
the price of nontradables rises by more than 1%. Together with (3), this implies that poor
households' expenditures are more volatile than Ricardian households' expenditures in
the competitive equilibrium. Is this efficient? Replacing consumption demands (4) and
(5) into flow utility (1), it follows that households have identical preferences in terms of zi
                                                                                              t.
Thus, expenditures are equally volatile in the first best, i.e. an environment where poor
households can also access financial markets. This already suggests that, in a constrained
efficient allocation, the planner may be willing to reduce the volatility of the expenditure
path of the Ricardian agents to smooth the expenditure path of the poor.12
    Using the Ricardian households' consolidated dollar budget constraint (2), we obtain

                                            = y T + rt b Ht + r  b + tt + t ,
                                     Ht + b
                    p(zt )y N + c + b       Ht                  t Ht                                    (14)
                 1-
        
where 1-  p ( zt ) y N + c is the total consumption of tradable goods. In (14), variables tt
and t can be eliminated by adding the central bank's budget constraint (9) as well as
the expression of home intermediaries' profits. This allows us to rewrite the households'
budget constraint as a country-wide budget constraint,

               t = yT -                                                                  
             nfa               p ( z t ) y N - c + (r t - r t )(b Ht + bGt + b I Ht ) + rt nfat .       (15)
                            1-

In this equation, policy variable bGt can be expressed as -b Ht - b It - b I Ht using home bond
market clearing (12), where intermediaries' bond demand b It is given by (7). After this
  12 Notethat we have not resorted to arguments based on ex ante distributional considerations, which cannot
be improved upon by intertemporal tools such as FX interventions (see Costinot et al., 2014 for a similar
remark in the context of capital controls). Indeed, in a stationary environment, the planner would not use FX
interventions whatever her distributional objectives may be--a corollary of Proposition 2.




                                                     12
substitution, the country-wide budget constraint (15) simplifies to

             t = yT -                                                            1           2
           nfa               p(zt )y N - c +          rt nfat        -             (r t - r t )             .    (16)
                          1-                                                     
                                                   interest income
                            net exports                                  costs from interest rate spreads


Up to the last term, equation (16) is a standard open economy budget constraint. It states
that home's net foreign asset position improves if the net exports are large or if the country
is a creditor. By contrast, the last term is novel. It captures the costs the country incurs if
the interest rate spread rt - rt  is different from zero.

    Why does the country face costs from nonzero interest rate spreads? Suppose the spread
       is positive. This invites foreign intermediaries to enter the home bond market and
rt - rt
take a position b It = 1           ). As a result, they earn
                         (r t - r t

                                                          1           2
                                     b It · (rt - rt )=     (r t - r t ) .                                       (17)
                                                          

These carry trade profits are an economic cost to the SOE, which is taking the other side
of the carry trade. These costs increase when foreign intermediaries' demand becomes
more elastic (low ), since intermediaries take larger positions for any given interest
rate spread. Crucially, these costs are independent of home agents' access to financial
                                         
markets (independent of  H , b   H and b H ). The reason is that any profits earned by home
intermediaries are paid to Ricardian households at home, leaving the total wealth of the
country unaltered.
    Next, we study the set of all equilibria that are implementable by FX interventions. For
this result and the remainder of the paper, we introduce as notation for the interest rate
spread t  rt - rt  . Rewriting the budget constraint (16) in present value terms we obtain

the following implementability result.

Proposition 1 (Implementability conditions.). Let t = rt - rt                be the spread between home

and foreign interest rates. Then, given an initial net foreign asset position nfa0 and a path for the
                               }, the paths { c R , c R , c P , c P } and { p , r } are part of a competitive
international interest rate {rt                 Tt Nt Tt Nt                  t t
equilibrium iff the corresponding {zt , t } solve the following two conditions: the Euler equation,

                                                  zt    
                                          (zt )      = rt + t -                                                 (18a)
                                                  zt




                                                     13
                                             p (zt )zt
where (z)   + (1 - )(1 -  )                   p(zt )
                                                         and the country-wide present value budget constraint,13

                                  t                                1
                            e-   0 rs ds      p(zt )y N + c - y T + t2 dt = nfa0 .                        (18b)
                     0                     1-                      

     Proposition 1 gives us a simple characterization of the set of competitive equilibria as
it is commonly used in models of optimal Ramsey taxation (see, e.g. Lucas and Stokey,
1983 or Chari and Kehoe, 1999). A key difference with this literature is that the planner in
our model does not choose a path of taxes, but rather an FX intervention policy as defined
above. Proposition 1 is important because it implies that setting interventions--which are
paths of asset positions--is equivalent to setting interest rate spreads t --which behave
like taxes.
     Having described the set of implementable allocations, we next turn to the full planning
problem.


2.3       Planning problem
We consider the problem of a utilitarian planner putting equal weight on each type of
household, and we envision the central bank as fulfilling this role. The planner's problem
is, therefore, to maximize the sum of home households' welfare by choosing among the
competitive equilibria it can implement using FX interventions.
     Using equations (3)-(5) and (11), we can state the planning problem as14
                                                               
                                                max               e-t V (zt )dt                            (19)
                                                {zt ,t }   0


where

           V (z) = p(z)-(1-)(1-) (1 - µ)u (z) + µu p(z)µ-1 y N + µ-1 y T - c                               (20)

subject to the two implementability conditions (18a) and (18b).
    In the planning problem (19), the freedom of setting different FX intervention policies
is completely embodied in the choice of the interest rate spread t . When the central bank
desires to raise consumption in period t relative to the next, it lowers t . Such a policy
would then be implemented by selling reserves and purchasing home bonds, which, due
                              1- 
  13 We  assume  + (1 - ) 1-   (1-  )
                                      > 0 to ensure (z) > 0 (see Appendix B.2). This condition is satisfied in
our calibration.
  14 See Appendix B.2 for a derivation and a proof that V ( z ) is strictly increasing and concave.




                                                               14
to a finitely elastic foreign demand function, affects the home interest rate rt and thus t .
    One possibility for the central bank in this baseline model is to set t = 0 in all periods.
This is feasible because the central bank has unrestricted access to both bond markets. If
                                                                            
home households have sufficient access to foreign markets, i.e. b   H and b H are sufficiently
large, no intervention is required to implement t = 0. By contrast, if home households
have minimal access, then there is a clear role for the central bank to step in and do the
intermediation itself, taking positions to ensure rt = rt   . While this may be realistic in

certain situations of sudden illiquidity in FX markets, we henceforth focus our attention
on the more interesting case where the financial friction does not affect the competitive
equilibrium, i.e. when home households have enough access such that t = 0 is feasible
absent any interventions.


2.4   Discussion
We next discuss the main assumptions behind our model, as well as alternative tools the
planner might have access to.


Main ingredients. Our model has two key ingredients. The first ingredient is an ineffi-
ciency in the competitive equilibrium allocation, providing the planner with a motive for
intervening. In our baseline model, the source of inefficiency is a pecuniary externality:
Ricardian households do not take into account that their spending decision affects the
income of the poor. Indeed, as we argued before, the expenditure path of Ricardian agents
is too volatile in the competitive equilibrium (we show this formally in Section 3). We
further demonstrate in Section 4.1 that similar motives for intervening are implied by
alternative sources of inefficiency, such as terms-of-trade manipulation and aggregate
demand management. One way to see this already now is that the planning problem solely
depends on the planner's objective as a function of home agents spending, V (z), and the
inverse elasticity of private spending to the interest rate, (z). In Section 4.1, we identify
the crucial properties of these two objects that explain the robustness of our results across
applications.
    The second ingredient is limited capital mobility, providing the planner with the ability
to affect allocations through interventions. This works because the private sector is at a
disadvantage to undo its actions: both households and arbitrageurs face position limits.
Our microfoundation of limited capital mobility rests on two main components. The
first is rationality, that is, agents only participate if they make profits; the second is the



                                              15
property that participation increases in the size of the spread.15 These two assumptions
have important implications: going "against the market" entails costs for the government;
and costs increase more than proportionally with the intervention size, as more agents are
encouraged to exploit the arbitrage opportunity.
   In sum, the first ingredient gives the planner a motive to intervene, while the second
implies interventions are effective, but increasingly costly. These features are at the core of
our characterization of optimal policy in Section 3.


Alternative tools. In our main model, the planner cares about the distribution of wealth
across types. One may think that this suggests that the most appropriate tool to address
this problem are transfers. Indeed, a full set of agent-specific and time-varying transfers can
trivially attain the first best by replicating the path of desired asset positions of the poor.
In realistic settings, however, such a rich set of tools is likely unavailable.16 Observe that
time-invariant transfers are not sufficient. These would only allow planner to redistribute
wealth on average, but cannot solve the issue of "excess" volatility of private spending
present in our environment.17
    Furthermore, given that our planner is trying to affect the path of private spending
over time, one may wonder if taxes on financial flows (capital controls) are not a better and
more direct policy tool. In fact, a reader that is familiar with the recent literature on capital
controls (see, e.g. Bianchi (2011); Farhi and Werning (2012, 2014); Jeanne (2012); Heathcote
and Perri (2016)) may notice that after taking the limit    the planning problem (19)
becomes formally equivalent to the archetypical optimal capital controls problem: The
planner directly controls the wedge between between rt and rt      at a zero resource cost. One

must be careful, however, with the economic interpretation of this limit. If the private
sector is in financial autarky, which is precisely the case when    and b                ¯
                                                                                    H = b H = 0,
taxes are non-allocative, so the only implementable allocation is the one in which trade is
  15 We  assumed above that participation increases linearly with the spread to simplify the exposition. We
generalize to arbitrary nonlinear increasing demand schedules b It = g(rt - rt     ) in Section D.1.
   16 Second-best or third-best environments like ours are motivated by the challenges associated with

implementing these ideal policy tools. For example, it is a well-understood problem in public finance that the
government faces a severe incomplete information problem when devising its tax policies (Mirrlees, 1971). In
addition, fiscal policy is typically far too slow to respond to business-cycle-frequency shocks and movements
in exchange rates.
   17 One may also wonder whether taxes on nontradables help. The answer depends on how the proceeds

from these taxes is rebated. That is, it is again a question of whether one can use them to redistribute wealth.
Let Nt denote the ad-valorem tax. If taxes on nontradables are available but the proceeds are rebated in
a "neutral" manner, i.e. in proportion to the ownership of the nontradable endowment TtP = Nt pt y N
and TtR = (1 - )Nt pt y N , they do not affect equilibrium allocations and are merely reflected in a lower
nontradable price before taxes.


                                                      16
always balanced. By contrast, this is the parametrization that makes FX interventions most
effective.
    When the private sector is not in financial autarky, i.e. when b      ¯
                                                                      H , b H = 0 or when  < ,
taxes on financial assets seem very effective: they can implement the desired wedge at a
zero resource cost. However, this argument presumes that taxes are perfectly enforceable.
In practice, an important concern of policymakers when deciding whether to implement
taxes on financial flows is the ability of the private sector to circumvent them, i.e. whether
capital controls may "leak", as in Bengui and Bianchi (2014). Explicitly modeling the ability
of foreigners to avoid the taxes imposed on cross-border transactions would lead to a
resource cost term in the budget constraint that is similar to the one studied in our optimal
FX-intervention problem.18
    In this sense, the planning problem studied in this paper is a third-best problem. The
first best is having time-varying agent-specific taxes; the second best is controlling the
wedge costlessly (either    in our setup or  <  and perfectly enforceable taxes); the
third best adds an additional resource cost related to the "undoing" activity of the private
sector.
    Finally, we focused the discussion on a particular capital control: taxes on inflows. In
reality, capital controls include a broader array of tools, such as position limits and reserve
requirements, which can effectively put "sand in the wheels" of private intermediation.
In the language of our model, such capital controls may serve to increase . Thus, they
are complementary to FX interventions. This is in line with recent evidence showing that
capital controls are usually not cyclical (Fern´ andez et al., 2016), and that FX interventions
become more effective when capital controls are in place (Kuersteiner et al., 2018). Note,
however, that to the extent that  reflects institutional barriers such as capital controls,
the private sector may learn to circumvent them. We address this concern in Appendix
D.6, where we let the degree of capital market frictions t fall over time. Such a falling
t precisely captures the idea that markets become more and more frictionless as an
intervention persists.19




                                              17
                           Table 1: Illustrative calibration (details in Appendix A).

             Parameter                    Symbol     Value                       Calibration

     Share poor households                   µ        0.2                   population share
   Endowment share of poor                           0.078              expenditure share of poor
 Preference weight on tradables                      0.051             tradable expenditure shares
        Subsistence level                    c       0.19              tradable expenditure shares
      Tradable endowment                    yT       0.23                       zero NFA
    Nontradable endowment                  y NT        1                      normalization
           Inverse EIS                                 2                     standard value
          Discount rate                              0.075          5yr Treasury yield, EMBI+Brazil
   Capital immobility (home)               H           3        relative balance sheet of Brazilian banks
  Capital immobility (foreign)                         9      Kohlscheen and Andrade (2014) intervention


3      Six Principles of Optimal FX Interventions
We are now in a position to study the planning problem (19) and distill six insights, or
"principles", about optimal FX interventions in response to capital flows. We explain our
principles with model simulations using an illustrative calibration based on Brazil, shown
in Table 1. All details on the calibration can be found in Appendix A.


3.1      Leaning against the wind
The setting of the first five principles is that of a temporary shock to world interest rates,
                                              
                                              r  +   r 
                                                     T (T    - t)   t<T
                                     rt   =                                                                (21)
                                              r                     tT

where r  and T are the size and duration of the shock, respectively. Our first principle
concerns the direction of the intervention.

Proposition 2 (Leaning against the wind.). In response to capital inflows, r  < 0, optimal FX
                                              > 0, thus inducing a positive interest-rate spread
interventions require reserve accumulation, bGt
t > 0 and dampening the appreciation of the exchange rate.
Conversely, in response to capital outflows, r  > 0, optimal FX interventions require reserve
    18 The
         revealed preference of policy makers for FX interventions instead of time-varying capital controls,
which are rarely employed in practice (Fern´   andez et al., 2016), may reflect that these costs are perceived as
higher relative to the carry-trade profits by the private sector.
  19 Recall that t denotes the time since the arrival of a shock, not calendar time.




                                                       18
decumulation, bGt  < 0, inducing a negative interest-rate spread  < 0 and containing the
                                                                 t
depreciation of the exchange rate.

    Proposition 2 shows that optimal FX interventions lean against the wind, accumulating
reserves when capital flows into the country and vice versa. To understand this result,
consider the case of a capital inflow shock, illustrated in Figure 1. The black line shows
the response with laissez-faire, i.e. with t  0. In response to the low foreign interest
rates, Ricardian households borrow abroad. This increases the demand for nontradables
and leads to an appreciation of the exchange rate. The green lines show the response with
optimal FX interventions for different degrees of financial frictions  in global capital flows,
 = 9 being our calibrated value.
    Why is the laissez-faire response suboptimal? Recall that poor households' total expen-
ditures ztP are relatively more sensitive to the exchange rate than Ricardian households', z
                                                                                                 t
                                                                              i    P
(see our discussion below (13)). Since preferences are identical in terms of zt , zt is too steep,
or volatile, intertemporally under laissez-faire. By buying reserves and selling home bonds,
the central bank increases the yield on the home bond, lowering the desired borrowing of
Ricardian households. This depreciates the exchange rate, stabilizes the income of the poor,
and partially eliminates the excess volatility in their consumption.
    The planner thereby finds it optimal to increase reserves sharply at the onset and then
continually reinvests to keep them persistently high. The sharp jump is necessary since
the central bank needs to undo the frictionless borrowing from home households (i.e.
up to b H ) to have an effect on the spread. While the intervention successfully improves
home's net foreign asset position, private capital inflows (i.e. from intermediaries and
households) are exacerbated by the intervention. This "second round" effect is particularly
large when capital is fairly mobile, that is, when  is small (light green line). In this case,
the central bank prefers smaller interest rate spreads, which, nevertheless, require larger
reserve purchases.


3.2    Smooth interest rate spreads, not smooth exchange rates
A striking feature of the response in Figure 1 is that interest rate spreads are "smooth", in
that t is continuous over time, with 0 = limt t = 0. This is true despite jumps in the
                        and the exchange rate. The next proposition shows that this is a
foreign interest rate rt
robust property of optimal FX interventions.20
  20 Thisresult is more general than the interest rate process considered in (21). Indeed, it holds for any
                         , provided that r =   s > T for large enough T . In particular, r  may jump many
integrable process for rt                 s                                                t


                                                    19
            Figure 1: Optimal foreign exchange interventions in response to capital inflows.

                           Real exchange rate                                 World interest rate r 
               2%                                                 8%
               0%
                                                                  7%
             -2 %
                                                                  6%
             -4 %
             -6 %                                                 5%
                     0    2      4           6   8   10                 0     2      4           6   8   10
                                     years                                               years
                          Interest rate spread t                                  Reserves / GDP

               1%                                                 1%


             0.5 %                                              0.5 %


               0%                                                 0%
                     0    2      4           6   8   10                 0     2      4           6   8   10
                                     years                                               years
                     Net foreign assets (NFA) / GDP                         NFA excl. reserves / GDP
               0%                                                 0%

            -0.1 %
                                                               -0.5 %
            -0.2 %

            -0.3 %                                              -1 %
                     0    2      4           6   8   10                 0     2      4           6   8   10
                                     years                                               years
                         Ricardian expenditure zt                                               P
                                                                              Poor expenditure zt
               6%                                                 8%
               4%                                                 6%
                                                                  4%
               2%
                                                                  2%
               0%                                                0%
             -2 %                                               -2 %
                     0    2      4           6   8   10                 0     2      4           6   8   10
                                     years                                               years
                          No intervention            =1                     =9             = 50

Note. This figure shows the optimal foreign exchange intervention in response to a temporary 2% cut in
world interest rates, for three different degrees of financial frictions  in global capital flows.




                                                          20
                           Figure 2: Why smoothing exchange rates is a bad idea.

                           Real exchange rate                               NFA excl. reserves / GDP
                1%                                                0%
                0%
                                                               -0.5 %
              -1 %
                                                                -1 %
              -2 %
              -3 %                                             -1.5 %
                      0   2      4           6   8   10                 0     2      4           6   8   10
                                     years                                               years
                          Interest rate spread t                                  Reserves / GDP
              2.5 %                                             1.5 %
                2%
              1.5 %                                               1%
                1%                                              0.5 %
              0.5 %
                0%                                                0%
                      0   2      4           6   8   10                 0     2      4           6   8   10
                                     years                                               years
                                Optimal ( = 9)                 Smooth exchange rate
 Note. This figure contrasts the optimal policy with a constrained policy that adds the requirement that the
exchange rate does not jump on impact, i.e. p0 = p  ¯ . The "exchange-rate-smoothing" policy is very costly
since it induces large carry trade returns.



Proposition 3 (Smooth interest rate spreads.). Under optimal FX interventions, the path of
interest rate spreads t is continuous in t, with 0 = limt t = 0.

    This result consists of two conceptually separate parts. The first is the continuity of t .
This follows directly from the cost term in the countrywide budget constraint (18b): since
the cost of interventions is convex in the interest rate spread t , it is optimal to smooth it
out over time. This bears some similarity to the logic behind the renowned tax-smoothing
model of Barro (1979).
    The second part is the limiting behavior of t for t = 0 and t  . Initially, 0 is
optimally equal to zero since it has a negligible effect on home households' consumption
decisions while it bears a nontrivial flow cost. The limit limt t is also optimally equal
to zero as interventions far after the shock has passed do not affect household behavior
during the time of the shock.
times and  would still be continuous, start at zero and converge back to zero. This is immediately apparent
from the proof of this result in Appendix C.



                                                          21
               Figure 3: The costs from optimal FX interventions and smooth exchange rates.

                                      Intervention cost (present value, % of GDP)


                               1%


                              0.1 %


                             0.01 %


                            0.001 %


                                  0.01          0.1            1          10      100
                                                      financial friction 
                  Optimal                                Smooth exchange rate
                  Optimal (quasi-fiscal cost)            Smooth exchange rate (quasi-fiscal cost)
 Note. This figure shows the present-value budgetary cost of FX interventions in response to a capital inflow
shock (see text). Green lines correspond to the fully optimal policy; red lines add the constraint that the
exchange does not jump on impact, i.e. p0 = p   ¯ . Solid lines represent the model-consistent cost, while dashed
lines plot the "quasi-fiscal cost" typically computed in practice, which is significantly larger.



    One might have expected that the central bank optimally intervenes by smoothing out
the exchange rate adjustment over time, given the prevalence of such policies in practice
(see e.g. Calvo and Reinhart, 2002). This is not the case. To illustrate why, amend the
planning problem (19) with the additional requirement that the exchange rate be continuous
at t = 0, that is, p0 be equal to the pre-shock steady state price of nontradables, and consider
the same inflow shock as before.
    Figure 2 compares the responses with (red) and without (green) the additional smooth
exchange rate requirement. As will become clear in Section 3.3, the further an intervention
is in the future, the smaller the effect is on the current exchange rate. Thus, to achieve a
given exchange rate target on impact, the planner has no choice but resort to substantial
interventions to defend the current value of the exchange rate, generating sizable interest
rates spreads. By contrast, the optimal intervention policy allows the exchange rate to
jump on impact but mitigates the size of the jump by promising a stream of interventions.
This is because the pecuniary externality that the planner is trying to address is inherently
intertemporal in nature: the level of the exchange rate does not matter per se but rather
relative to its value in the future.
    Figure 2 suggests that slowing the adjustment of the exchange rate over time can be


                                                          22
very costly, due to the large size of the associated carry trade losses. Figure 3 computes
                                                    t 
the present value of these costs, C  0 e- 0 rs ds        1 2
                                                          t dt, for various degrees of capital
market frictions . The costs associated with optimal FX interventions (green, solid) are
dramatically below the costs associated with a smooth-exchange-rate policy (red, solid).
Indeed, the costs associated with an optimal intervention never exceed 0.001% of GDP,
whereas the costs from ensuring a smooth exchange rate can be large, on the order of 1% of
GDP for an almost frictionless country ( = 0.01).
    Two more observations are noteworthy in Figure 3. First, the costs from optimal
interventions are hump-shaped in  and therefore largest for intermediate degrees of
capital market frictions. This is because when  is large, there is little carry trading, while
when  is small, interest rate spreads are also small. Second, the figure also shows the
                                                              t 
corresponding quasi-fiscal cost, defined as C q f c = 0 e- 0 rs ds bGt
                                                                      (dashed lines). This is
                                                                       t
the measure traditionally used to assess costs from FX interventions (e.g. Adler and Mano,
2018). As is evident, our measure of costs is one order of magnitude lower, suggesting
that interventions are significantly less costly than previously thought. The reason for
this discrepancy lies in the fact that quasi-fiscal costs do not incorporate that some home
households may also be on the "winning" side of the carry trade. This is especially salient in
the case of large  (no foreign intermediation), where households are the only beneficiaries
of the carry trade: quasi-fiscal costs are still positive and large even though the economic
costs for the country as a whole are zero.


3.3   Forward guidance
The principle of smooth interest rate spreads suggests that the optimal policy partly relies
on interventions at a point in time when the shock has faded entirely and the world interest
rate is back to r  . In other words, the central bank engages in a kind of "FX forward
guidance". The next proposition shows such forward guidance is indeed a robust property
of the optimal policy.

Proposition 4 (FX forward guidance.). Optimal FX interventions remain active even after the
                                      > 0 for t > T if r  < 0 and  < 0 and b < 0 for
shock has faded, that is, t > 0 and bGt                            t           Gt
t > T if r > 0.
           


   Formally, this result is closely related to Proposition 2. The intuition can be gleaned
from the Euler equation (18a). Promising interventions after the shock has passed is still a
powerful way for the central bank to move consumption in all prior periods. Thus, this can
be an especially cost-effective way to affect the path of the real exchange rate.

                                             23
    This result connects two seemingly disparate views on the effectiveness of interven-
tions--the "signaling" and the "portfolio-balance" channels. In the empirical literature,
the former is typically linked to a movement of the exchange rate at the time of the an-
nouncement, while the latter is associated with an effect when the intervention is effectively
carried out. Proposition 4 suggests this approach to disentangle both views can be mis-
leading. Our model, firmly in the portfolio-balance camp, implies a strong reaction of the
exchange rate when the intervention is announced. By contrast, it does not necessarily
imply a movement in the "expected" direction when the intervention occurs. For example,
a reserve accumulation policy, relative to a no-intervention counterfactual, depreciates the
exchange rate initially but eventually leads to real appreciation.
    The fact that announcements of future policy actions are optimal bears a resemblance
to the recent literature on forward guidance in monetary policy (Eggertsson and Wood-
ford, 2003; Werning, 2012). One striking result in this literature is the "forward guidance
puzzle"--the fact that the immediate effect of promises of future monetary policy does
not decline with the horizon of those promises (Del Negro et al., 2015; McKay et al., 2016).
There is no such puzzle in our model. While FX interventions in our model also operate by
altering the path of real interest rates, our model does not have nominal rigidities and thus
output is not demand determined. This implies that the response of home households to
FX interventions is most closely comparable to the "partial equilibrium" effects of forward
guidance in closed economies (Farhi and Werning, 2019). Figure 4 plots the exchange rate
effect of interventions at different horizons. While there clearly is an immediate effect of
the announcement, it falls rapidly with the horizon of the intervention.
    One may worry that announcements can raise the attention of foreign intermediaries,
lowering . Interestingly, while it is correct that lower  makes an intervention of any
given size less powerful, it also increases the elasticity of the cost to the spread. Therefore,
the planner has a stronger incentive to smooth interventions over time. Indeed, Figure 1
shows that lower  implies a more (not less) back-loaded path of interest rate spreads t . In
other words, announcing an intervention should go hand-in-hand with greater reliance on
forward guidance (see also Appendix D.1).
    Of course, relying on forward guidance for FX interventions requires either sufficient
credibility or commitment devices. We discuss the role of credibility and the consequences
of a lack thereof next.21
  21 In   Section 4.2, we study whether intervening in futures markets could act as a commitment tool.




                                                      24
                                  Figure 4: No "puzzle" for FX forward guidance.

                          Real exchange rate                                             Reserves / GDP

        10 %                                                              5%
                                                                          4%
         5%                                                               3%
                                                                          2%
         0%                                                               1%
                                                                          0%
       -5 %                                                              -1 %
               0      2       4           6         8          10               0   2        4           6      8   10
                                  years                                                          years
                   Intervention at t = 0                 Intervention at t = 3          Intervention at t = 6
Note. This figure illustrates that FX forward guidance does not suffer from a "puzzle" (as in Del Negro et al.
2015; McKay et al. 2016). Future interventions are effective but less powerful than the current interventions.



3.4    Credibility is crucial
The reliance on promises about future interventions raises an obvious question: How much
can and should a central bank intervene if it lacks credibility?
    The answer to this question naturally hinges on the horizon for which a central bank
can commit to its policies. For instance, one could imagine that there is a commitment
horizon  > 0 beyond which the central bank cannot commit to policies. This effectively
divides time into distinct intervals [i , (i + 1)), i  N, during each of which a separate
policy maker i runs the central bank. We focus here on strategies that are only allowed to
depend on the asset position b inherited by i and time t. A Markov equilibrium in such
a setting can then be summarized by policy functions t = Tt (b) and zt = Zt (b), which
jointly solve two conditions. First, t = Tt (bi ) solves the planning problem

                                              ( i +1) 
                   Vi (bi ) = max                        e-(s-i) V (zs )ds + e- V(i+1) (b(i+1) )                         (22)
                                  t ,zt    i

subject to the Euler equation (18a), the countrywide resource constraint (18b) and the ter-
minal condition z(i+1) = Z(i+1) (b(i+1) ). Second, zt = Zt (b) is the optimal consumption
policy of Ricardian households at time t, with current asset position b, and facing interest
rate spreads t .
    Figure 5 shows the Markov equilibrium, by simulating the response of our model,
assuming various commitment horizons. As the commitment horizon shrinks, smaller and
smaller interventions are optimal for the central bank. In the limit   0, the planner's

                                                                    25
                   Figure 5: Smaller commitment horizons mean smaller optimal interventions.

            Effect of intervention on the real exchange rate                      Interest rate spread t

      1.5 %                                                         1%

        1%
                                                                  0.5 %
      0.5 %
                                                                    0%
        0%

    -0.5 %                                                       -0.5 %
               0       2       4           6   8       10                 0   2         4           6      8    10
                                   years                                                    years
     Full commitment                 Horizon = 2.5          Horizon = 1           Horizon = 0.1            Horizon = 0

 Note. This figure illustrates that optimal FX interventions require the ability to commit. As the commitment
horizon shrinks, it becomes harder to sustain large interest rate spreads t resulting in smaller effects on the
real exchange rate (relative to the equilibrium path). In the limit where the commitment horizon approaches
zero, no intervention is optimal. (Remark: None of the paths for t is ever negative, even if it may seem like
that in the plot.)


optimal policy t = Tt (b) solves the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation

                                                                1
                            Vt (b) = max V (zt ) + Vt (b) rt b -  2 - h(zt )                                         (23)
                                                                

where zt = Zt (b). This immediately yields the following proposition.

Proposition 5 (No intervention without credibility.). A central bank without credibility,   0,
                                                           = 0 at all times t.
solving (23), chooses not to intervene at all: t = 0 and bGt

    This is a stark result: irrespective of the magnitude of the shock hitting the economy,
the solution of the time-consistent planning problem (22) is always not to intervene at all.
To gain some intuition, suppose the planner has a very small commitment horizon  > 0
and contemplates a constant change in policy d . This affects zt as it changes the slope of
consumption in the Euler equation. This effect is of order O ( · d ). Thus, the effect of the
policy change on flow utility V (zt ) is also of that order, while the effect on the total utility
(22), integrated from t to t + , of the decision maker is of order O (2 · d ). By contrast,
the direct effect of the policy change on flow costs is at least of order O (d 2 ), with an effect
on total cost of order O ( · d 2 ), when flow costs are again integrated from t to t + . Thus,
the benefits of such a policy change vanish relative to costs asymptotically as   0.22
  22 This    logic can be formalized as follows. With change d for a small interval , we have dzt =


                                                            26
   This reasoning offers an especially striking perspective on the case where  = .
A glance at the planning problem (19) reveals that when  = , the original planning
problem is already time consistent. Thus, nonzero interventions and interest rate spreads
are optimal, and credibility plays no role in that case. Proposition 5 highlights that this
result is "fragile": for any large but finite , the (unique) time-consistent solution involves
zero interventions and interest rate spreads.


3.5    It takes larger interventions to support an exchange rate
So far, our discussion of positive and negative shocks has been symmetric: Central banks
accumulate reserves when capital flows into the economy and sell them when capital flows
out. However, as we show next, there is an important asymmetry: for the same shock size
|r  |, the central bank needs to sell more reserves to stabilize the economy after capital
outflows than it accumulates during capital inflows.
                     ( r  ) be optimal in response to shock r  . For t > 0, b ( r  ) has a kink
Proposition 6. Let bGt                                                       Gt
at r = 0, with
    
                                         
                                      dbGt                 
                                                         dbGt
                                 lim           lim
                                r  0 d  r        r  0 d  r 
                           
with strict inequality if b H > |bH |. In words, to first order in r , it takes greater interventions to
                                                                    

support an exchange rate (avoid depreciation) than it takes to undervalue it (avoid appreciation).
                                                                                
   This result is a direct consequence of our assumption that b H  |b      H |: when home
households have an easier time saving than borrowing in foreign assets, an intervention
generating a negative interest rate spread t , e.g. in response to outflows, faces larger
carry trades, and thus requires larger interventions. The result is especially important in
emerging markets in which many households can save abroad but cannot borrow. In such
countries, it can be challenging to support the exchange rate against downward pressure.23
zt+
(zt+ )
       d    = O (d ). This follows directly from (18a) and the fact that bt+ and zt+ only change to
the order of O (2 d ), which is a consequence of the flow budget constraint (16). Thus, the decision maker's
total utility Vt in (22) changes with order O (2 d ), too. Moreover, flow costs in (16) change by at least
 d t = O ( d  ), which integrated from t to t +  gives O (  d  ).
2    2         2                                                2
  23 Observe that in our model, however, this does not mean that interventions generating negative spreads

are more costly in welfare terms, due to their greater size. Indeed, through the lens of the model, any carry
trading activity by home agents is welfare-neutral, so that the implications for welfare and spreads are
symmetric around r  = 0, rather than asymmetric as in Proposition 6.




                                                     27
3.6    Non-fundamental shocks are not costly
Policymakers often state that they intervene to curb FX volatility that is "unjustified" by
fundamentals (Mohanty and Berger, 2013). For our sixth and last principle, we take this
statement at face value and explore the optimal response to a "non-fundamental" shock.
We model this shock as a shifter  t in foreign intermediaries' demand for home bonds (i.e.
a taste shock, see also Gabaix and Maggiori, 2015),

                                                   1
                                          b It =     (r t +  t - r  ) .
                                                   

Greater  t implies a greater attractiveness of home bonds only for foreigners, i.e. it is
"unjustified" from the point of view of the home country.24 The presence of this shifter now
implies that the "cost" term from nonzero interest rate spreads is

                                                            2           2
                                          1        t                  1 t
                                 t b It =      t +                  -              .                       (24)
                                                   2                   4
                                               cost term        monopoly benefit


    Here, the central bank is able to derive a benefit from interventions, rather than a cost. To
see this, note first that the central bank can always fully avoid this shock by implementing
the policy t = 0, which sets the cost (24) to zero and also avoids any effects on home
households' behavior as the Euler equation (18a) is unchanged. But, it turns out that the
central bank can do better and strictly benefit. This is because a  t shock makes the central
bank the monopoly supplier of bonds foreigners love. The flow benefit in equation (24)
is maximized by leaning against the wind, i.e. setting t = - t /2. Deviations from this
policy are subject to nonzero costs. Thus, the planner now seeks to smooth out t +  t /2,
rather than t .
    Thus, the key difference between fundamental and non-fundamental shocks is that
costs are always dominated by benefits, as Proposition 7 shows.

Proposition 7. Non-fundamental shocks  t are associated with benefits rather than costs (in present
value), that is,
                                               t 
                               C          e- 0 ru du t b It  0
                                               0

   Due to the optimality of the t = 0 allocation in the absence of a  t shock, an optimal
deviation from t = 0 must induce a first order gain in welfare.
  24 This could capture, for example, heterogeneous beliefs, a convenience yield for liquidity properties of the
asset, or a change in foreigners' appetite for the risk-profile of the home bond (unmodeled).


                                                       28
4     Extensions and Robustness
We next present extensions and discuss the robustness of our results. First, we study
the reduced form version of our planning problem in Section 2.3 and identify the crucial
properties of V (z) and (z) that drive our results. Appendix D uses these results to
demonstrate that the principles identified in Section 3 are robust to other well known
settings in international macroeconomics, e.g. terms-of-trade manipulation and aggregate
demand externalities. Second, we present an extension with long-term assets and discuss
whether they may be used to address the credibility issues identified in Section 3.4. Finally,
we relax the assumption that the return of both bonds is denominated in dollars, and
use this extension to discuss whether the interest-rate spread in the model should be
interpreted as a covered- or uncovered-interest-rate-parity deviation (henceforth, CIP and
UIP, respectively).


4.1   General model
In reduced form, our planning problem in Section 2.3 has a very natural representation.
It involves the maximization of social welfare as a function of some notion of spending
V (z) subject to two constraints. First, there is an agent in the economy that is choosing
the path for said spending as a function of the interest rate it perceives. This is a standard
Euler equation, where (z) is the equilibrium value of the inverse elasticity of spending to
the interest rate. Second, there is a standard budget constraint that includes a penalization
terms for deviations between the home and the foreign interest rate.
    In Appendix C we study this problem for an arbitrary increasing and concave function
V (z) and positive function (z). Two lessons emerge from this analysis. First, we find that
a sufficient condition for leaning against the wind is

                                - V ( z ) z /V ( z )   ( z )  z.                         (25)

This condition has a very natural interpretation: it states that the planner prefers smoother
expenditure paths than the agent. This condition is satisfied in all the other applications
we present in Appendix D. For example, in our model with sticky prices (Appendix D.3),
the exchange rate cannot appreciate after capital flows into the country and the economy
booms, which can be mitigated by postponing consumption.
   The second lesson that emerges from the general model in Appendix C is that the
remaining principles from Section 3 carry over, regardless of whether equation (25) holds.


                                              29
Thus, while the reason for intervening may differ across applications, our principles do
not.


4.2        Long-term assets
Many cross-country capital flows are not in short-term assets, as assumed in our baseline
model in Section 2. Here we relax this assumption. We start by deriving the correct cost
term in the presence of long-term assets.

A generalized cost term. We allow agents to trade, at each time t, contracts that promise
a stream of payments in the home market { xt,s }s and in the foreign market { xt           } . Let
                                                                                           ,s s
            s 
        -
 t,s  e t    r u du
                    denote the state price density for an international dollar payment at time s,
measured at time t. That is, if a country buys a stream of payments { xt         } in the foreign
                                                                                 ,s s
bond market at time t, and has no other external assets or liabilities, its time-t net foreign
                                                                     s
                                                                  - t ru du denotes the state price
asset position is nfat = t t        ,s xt,s ds. Similarly, t,s  e
density for a promised payment in the home bond market at time s, measured at time t.
Following the same steps as in Section 2, we arrive at a consolidated budget constraint
similar to the one in (18b)

                                                                                 
                          
                          0, t       p(zt )y N + c - y T + t b It +                 t,s b It,s ds   = nfa0    (26)
                   0              1-                                         t

where b It,s are the claims on home date-s payments owned by foreign intermediaries at time
                                                                                   
t and b It continues to denote their position in short-term bonds.25 Here, b It + t t,s b It,s ds
is the net present value of the intermediary position at date t. While it appears that
                                 
the present value of t b It + t t,s b It,s ds is the right cost term, this would be ignoring
important revaluation effects in nfa0 . Indeed, we can split the initial net foreign asset
position into what it was before the intervention was announced, nfa0- , and a revaluation
term,
                                                    
                                                          
                        nfa0 =      nfa0-       +       0, t - 0,t b I 0,t dt              (27)
                                                                 0
                                         pre-intervention NFA
                                                                     revaluation term

In the case of short-term bonds, there was no revaluation term and nfa0- = nfa0 . With this
decomposition in mind, we can rewrite (26),

                                                                             
                       
                       0, t         p(zt )y N + c - y T + t b It +               t,s b It,s ds      = nfa0-   (28)
               0                 1-                                      t
  25 All   derivations for this subsection can be found in Appendix D.2.

                                                            30
where b It,s  b It,s - b I 0,s . The generalized cost term is therefore

                                              t                           
                          C=            e-   0 rs ds   t b It +               t,s b It,s ds dt
                                 0                                    t

                                                                
To interpret this expression, observe that t t,s b It,s ds is the value of any additional
long-term assets that have been purchased by intermediaries since the start of the FX
interventions. Thus, while the current stock of short-term assets b It is relevant for costs, it is
only the recent inflow b It,s = b It,s - b I 0,s of long-term assets since FX interventions began
that matter.

Optimal policy. Having derived the correct general cost term, we explore the influence
of long-term assets on the optimal policy next. To do this, we return to our formulation of
intermediary demand from Section 2.1. Assuming position limits now apply to the total
value of an intermediary's position yields a straightforward generalization of intermediary
demand (7),
                                                      1       
                            b It +     t,s b It,s ds = (rt - rt ).
                                   t                  
Similar to Section 4.3, the planner has the possibility of extracting a time-zero valuation
gain, given by second term in (27). However, in this case the planner has commitments at
different points in time, so the whole path of home interest rates matters, which makes it
difficult to derive general results. One can nevertheless gain some insight into the solution
by approximating the revaluation term to first order around t = 0,
                                                                     t                         s 
                        
                        0, t - 0,t b I 0,t dt                  e-   0 ru du   t          e-   t ru du   b I 0,s dsdt.   (29)
                 0                                      0                         t

                            s 
Defining  0,t  t e- t ru du b I 0,s ds, we see that the problem is approximately the same as
the one with non-fundamental shocks (Section 3.6). Indeed, the economics are very similar.
In both cases, there is a demand for the home asset paying at some time t that is not justified
by fundamentals (from the point of view of the home economy). Here, the reason is that
the decision to buy these assets was already made in the past, whereas in Section 3.6 the
decision to buy was caused by a taste shock.

Time consistency. The date-0 revaluation effects that appear in a model with long-term
assets raise an important question, namely whether those could be used to solve the time
inconsistency problem that we identified in Section 3. The idea is that even though assets
are linearly dependent and, hence, redundant, they are revalued differently in response

                                                               31
to policy changes. Thus, if a planner can choose which assets are held in equilibrium, it
can select a combination of assets today whose revaluation effects would "punish" future
planners upon deviations (Lucas and Stokey, 1983).
      Clearly, according to our previous results, if the planner were able to choose {b It,s }, the
time inconsistency problem could be resolved by inducing an equivalent sequence of { t,s }
which makes the full-commitment solution {t } optimal for any future decision maker. In
that sense, the logic in Lucas and Stokey (1983) would fully apply to our model if today's
planner can influence the maturity structure of the entire country's liabilities.
      This is not the case in our model, however, as the planner cannot directly control
b It,s . Both households and intermediaries are indifferent across all maturities, so that the
                                                 -
composition of the revaluation term 0 0,          t     0,t b I 0,t dt is indeterminate and cannot
be influenced by the planner alone. This is the reason why the time inconsistency we
identified in Section 3.4 cannot be solved by maturity management--the planner in our
model cannot choose the maturity structure of the entire country.


4.3       CIP vs. UIP
So far, we have modeled the restrictions on capital mobility as constraints on cross-country
holdings of otherwise identical assets, i.e. a "home" and a "foreign" bond with non-
contingent dollar returns. Here, instead, we assume that the home bond b Ht has returns
denominated in home currency. Defining qt to be the real exchange rate at date t,26 we
write the interest-rate spread as
                                               t
                                               q     
                                     t = rt - - rt    .                                 (30)
                                               qt
By definition, this spread represents a UIP deviation. To study whether it purely stems
from an underlying CIP deviation or not, we allow agents to trade currency forwards {dt,s }.
In particular, we assume that at time t agents can sign a contract that promises f t,s units of
home currency in exchange for one dollar at time s.
    We analyze two cases, depending on whether these forward markets are frictional or
not.


Frictionless forward markets: Interventions create CIP deviations. Suppose forward
markets are unconstrained, i.e. any agent can buy them and sell forwards without paying
any participation costs or facing any position limits. Then, it must be that the expectation
  26 We   adopt the convention that a higher q denotes a more depreciated home currency.



                                                     32
hypothesis holds, i.e. forward prices are equal to expected future spot prices

                                                                                 - (1-  )
                                     f t,s = q s    ( 1 -  ) (1-  ) p s                                              (31)

or else agents would make infinite profits.
    To investigate whether the spread t represents an underlying CIP deviation or not,
consider the following investment strategy. An intermediary sells one unit of dollar bonds
at date t, buying qt units of home currency bonds. It sells the proceeds of those bonds at
t +  in forward markets. Thus, effectively, the intermediary purchases a home currency
bond that was swapped into dollars. The return of this investment strategy at date t +  is
the cross-currency basis,

                     qt            t+
                                      ru du
                                                        t+ 
                                                          ru du        qt        t+
                                                                                    ru du
                                                                                                  t+ 
                                                                                                    ru du
                              e   t           -e       t          =         e   t           -e   t                   (32)
                   f t,t +                                            qt+
                                  CIP deviation                                 UIP deviation

and thus, due to frictionless forward markets (31), the UIP deviation t stems entirely from
a CIP deviation. Thus, t should be interpreted as a CIP deviation.


Frictional forward markets: Interventions create UIP deviations. Now suppose for-
ward markets are also constrained. That is, home agents face a constraint on the total value
of their promises to deliver dollars
                                                                                     
                                                                             
                                      bHt -
                                                          
                                                          t ,s d Ht,s ds  [ b H , b H ],                             (33)
                                                   t

while foreign agents have to pay a participation cost to trade either home bonds b It and/or
currency forwards d It,s and face a constraint on the total value of their promises to deliver
home currency,
                                                   
                                     b It +            t,s f t,s d It,s ds  [- X , X ].                              (34)
                                               t
These restrictions capture standard constraints on open cross-currency positions faced by
financial intermediaries.
    As before, FX interventions induce UIP deviations given by equation (30). Are they
again reflecting underlying CIP deviations? Consider again the investment strategy above.
Its return is still given by the cross-currency basis (i.e. the CIP deviation) in (32). However,
as f t,s is no longer equal to qs , it does not necessarily equal the UIP deviation. In fact,
                                                                                     q    t+
observe that the investment strategy involves b It = qt and d It,t+ = - f t e t ru du .
                                                                                                            t,t + 




                                                                33
Substituting this into (34) shows that the investment strategy involves zero exposure to
home currency and thus can be engaged in arbitrarily by intermediaries.27 Thus, its excess
return and thus the CIP deviation must be equal to zero,

                                           qt            t+
                                                            ru du
                                                                          t+ 
                                                                            ru du
                                                    e   t           -e   t          = 0.
                                         f t,t + 

Thus, in the case of frictional forward markets, the UIP deviations (30) do not reflect
underlying CIP deviations.28
    Should the spread in the model should be interpreted as a CIP or a UIP deviation in
the data? Our analysis above emphasizes that to answer this question one must identify
whether agents face higher restrictions shifting funds between home and foreign bond
markets or across currencies. In reality, frictions on both margins exist and, depending
on the situation, one may be more important than the other. For example, UIP deviations
may be more important in emerging markets, which put in place several restrictions on
cross-currency positions (Canales-Kriljenko, 2003), while CIP deviations may be more
relevant in countries close to the zero lower bound (Amador et al., 2020).


Optimal policy. The remainder of the analysis carries over almost verbatim. Indeed, in
our deterministic economy and with commitment, the only difference is that initial wealth
depends on the realization of the exchange rate at t = 0,29

                              t                                1         - (1-  )
                        e-   0 rs ds      p(zt )y N + c - y T + t2 dt = p0        nfa0 .
                 0                     1-                      

If initial wealth were zero, the planning problem would be exactly the same as before.
Otherwise, there is a well-known incentive to inflate away the value of debt (Fischer, 1983;
Calvo, 1988). This "optimal revaluation" problem is somewhat similar to the "smooth-
exchange-rate" problem studied in Section 3.2 in that the planner directly cares about the
initial value of the exchange rate. For example, if the country is a debtor, the planner
would trade off depreciating the currency at t = 0 to decrease the burden of debt with the
large carry-trade costs this kind of intervention entails. As in Section 3.2, this would entail
  27 A similar argument works for home agents.
  28 Note that, if t > 0, the home currency forward is cheap i.e. f t,t+ > qt+ and vice versa when t < 0.
That is, when t > 0, there is excess demand of both home currency assets and home currency forwards by
foreigners. On the flip side, home households would like to borrow more in dollar bonds or sell dollars
forward (i.e. buy home currency forward).
  29 We assume agents are not trading forwards for this derivation. Otherwise, we would also have an

additional revaluation term owing to the fact that forwards are long-term assets, as in Section 4.2.


                                                                34
interest rate spreads t which jump at t = 0 and then monotonically decrease over time.
Aside from the valuation effect at time zero, or whenever the planner re-optimizes, the
analysis in Section 3 carries over unaltered.


The role of uncertainty. Since our model is deterministic, any UIP deviation is costly--it
reflects foreign intermediaries taking the opposite position and making riskless profits. In
a richer model with uncertainty, UIP deviations may also occur due to risk and not due
to imperfect arbitrage. Suppose that y Nt is stochastic and intermediaries value wealth in
different states of the world according to some exogenous stochastic discount factor m . In
this case, the intertemporal budget constraint becomes30

                                t                                 1         - (1-  )
             Em           e-   0 rs ds      p(zt )y Nt + c - y T + t2 dt = p0        nfa0
                   0                     1-                       

where Em is the risk neutral measure implied by the intermediaries and the wedge is
given by
                                       1 Em dqt    
                              t = rt -          - rt .
                                       qt dt
In other words, only the part unjustified by risk is costly--a point also stressed by Amador
et al. (2020). Thus, one should be careful when computing the costs of FX interventions
from UIP deviations in the data.
    More subtly, one may expect  to depend on policy via the exchange rate when there
are financial frictions in currency markets, as in Gabaix and Maggiori (2015) and Itskhoki
and Mukhin (2019). In particular, since the arbitrage is no longer riskless, foreigners may
endogenously choose the size of their position X depending on exchange rate volatility.
This may give rise to additional forces that are not present in our model. For example, the
planner may "noise up" the exchange rate to increase . In this case, while our results
still illustrate one of the main forces at play, they are no longer a full description of the
optimal policy, which would take into account its effect on . While we think this is a very
promising line of research, it is outside the scope of this paper.
  30 Note  that given market incompleteness, one would also need to keep track of sequential budget con-
straints in the planning problem.




                                                      35
5       Competitive Interventions and Reserve Wars
So far, we have analyzed the optimal policy of a small open economy (SOE) against a
passive rest of the world. Yet, in light of the growing popularity of FX interventions
around the globe, and their potential effects on welfare, world interest rates and global
capital flows, a natural next step is to study the strategic interaction between intervening
economies. This is what we do in this section.


5.1         A world extension of our model
The model consists of a unit mass of (symmetric) small open economies and a unit mass of
global financial intermediaries. Each of the small open economies is like the one described
in Section 2. The home interest rate in a small open economy continues to be denoted by r,
while r  refers to a single world interest rate that is the rate of return of a global reserve
asset (assumed to be in zero net supply). We extend our model to allow for shocks to the
tradable endowment {y Tt }, which will give rise to the (endogenous) innovation in the
world interest rate. For simplicity, we focus on a two-period version of the model, with
periods t = 0, 1.


Financial intermediaries. Each of the global financial intermediaries is assigned to a
specific country, with respect to which it operates exactly as modeled in Section 2. It has
unfettered access to the global reserve asset and limited access (subject to participation
costs) to the home bonds of its assigned country. Applying the discrete-time version
of the microfoundation from before, the home bond demand function comes out to be
           r -r 
b I =  -1 1  +r  . Intermediaries do not have any wealth and any profits they make are
assumed to be consumed by them.


Small open economies (SOE). Each SOE is inhabited by poor and Ricardian households,
exactly as before, so that the planner's per-period objective can be written as Vt (zt ), with
zt still being the Ricardian household's total dollar spending (net of subsistence). In each
period, zt pins down the price of nontradables p(zt ), see (13), so that each SOE solves31

                                               max V0 (z0 ) + V1 (z1 )                   (35)
                                               { z t },

    31 To   simplify, we focus on the case of  = 1 (log utility) for this section.




                                                           36
                             1                        1 2                1
            p ( z0 ) y N +            p ( z 1 ) y N +      y T 0 - c +       (y T1 - c)     (36)
         1-                1 + r 1 -                                   1 + r
                                   z1
                                      = (1 + r  )(1 +  )                                    (37)
                                   z0
        
Here, 1-  p ( zt ) y N is the net-of-subsistence tradable spending in period t. We define the
                                                 +r
discrete-time interest rate spread as   11+       r  - 1. As is easily seen, the cost term from
foreign intermediation is still given by b I  = -1  2 in this model. Problem (35) is therefore
the exact two-period analogue of (19).


Equilibrium. We characterize symmetric equilibria conditional on the central bank poli-
cies, which we identify with the implied interest rate spread  for convenience.

Definition 2. A symmetric world equilibrium with central bank FX intervention policy  is
an allocation {z0 , z1 }, where z0 , z1 solve (35) conditional on  ; and tradable goods markets
clear in both periods,

                                1                       
                  p ( z0 ) y N +  2 = y T 0 - c,          p ( z1 ) y N = y T 1 - c.         (38)
               1-                                      1-

    We are especially interested in how the world equilibrium responds to a global savings
glut, which we model by assuming that y T1 < y T0 . This assumption could for instance
capture slowing future growth rates or population aging. Critical for the response of the
world economy to this shock is the determination of the central banks' FX intervention
policy  . We consider two possibilities. First,  is determined in an uncoordinated fashion
("reserve wars") as Nash equilibrium outcome. Second,  is determined as a coordinated
solution to a worldwide planning problem.


5.2   Reserve wars
When central banks do not coordinate, each takes the world interest rate r  as given and
responds by choosing the FX intervention policy  optimally. An instructive way to study
the influence of world rates on the trade-offs determining optimal interventions is to look
at the country's indirect utility function V ( ; r  ). We define V ( ; r  ) as the objective (35)
after substituting out z0 and z1 using constraints (36) and (37). The location of the peak of
V ( ; r  ) precisely corresponds to the optimal policy   (r  ) in response to a given world
interest rate r  .



                                               37
         Figure 6: Best response to the world interest rate and the FX intervention policy of others.

           V                                                   best response  BR
                                    
                                   r1   =   r  (   = 0)
                                     = r  (  Nash )                                               45 line
                                   r2

                , )
            V (r1
                                                                                         best response
                                                                                             (r  ( ))

                                                         , )
                                                     V (r2
                                                                                                         
                           (r1
                              )   (r  )
                                    2


Note. The left panel illustrates that lower world interest r  reduce an individual country's welfare and lead to
larger FX interventions (higher interest rate spreads  ). The right panel illustrates that this induces a strategic
complementarity between countries' FX interventions.



     The left panel in Figure 6 sketches V ( ; r  ) for two levels of the world interest rate
r  , one of them at the SOEs' autarky level and one of them at a lower level. The figure
illustrates two ideas. First, the entire indirect utility function may in fact shift down in
response to lower interest rates r  . This stands in sharp contrast to a model without
subsistence needs or without heterogeneity where changes in the interest rate away from a
country's autarky level are always welfare improving. We prove below that this can indeed
be the case if c is especially large, leading V (z) to be very elastic with respect to z. Second,
the optimal response   to lower world interest rates r  is to increase interventions, that is
  (r  ) is decreasing in r  . This is exactly in line with our observations in Section 3.
     Obviously, the world interest rate is endogenous to the intervention policy  of the
rest of the world, so that r  = r  ( ). Together with the optimal policy of any individual
country, this characterizes the best response policy  BR ( )    (r  ( )). We plot the best
response policy in the right panel in Figure 6 as function of the other countries' policy
 . As can be seen, the best response is upward sloping, implying that there is a strategic
complementarity between countries' policies. One implication of this is that any shifts in
the best response schedule, e.g. when the desired savings of the countries increase, are
amplified considerably by the strategic complementarity. Still, however, there is a unique
intersection at the (Nash) equilibrium policy.
     Another way to see the amplification is to plot world savings bG         by central banks

against world net private borrowing -b         H , as we do in Figure 7. Clearly, they have to
be equal in equilibrium. When central banks keep a fixed stock of reserves bG           (e.g. at



                                                          38
                                   Figure 7: World savings equilibrium

      r
                                                            r




                                                                                  net private borrowing
                                net private borrowing
                                                                                              savings
                                            savings
                        reserves                                                    reserves
                  (no FX intervention)                                       (with FX interventions)
Note. This figure illustrates the world savings equilibrium. Without FX interventions, reserves are unrespon-
sive to world interest rates r  . With privately optimal FX interventions, countries accumulate reserves in
response to lower r  , exacerbating net private borrowing.



zero), independent of world interest rates r  , and the world sees an increase in private
saving, interest rates fall somewhat and net private saving remains unchanged (left panel in
Figure 7). When central banks, however, implement their best response policies, increasing
reserves precisely as interest rates fall, their savings supply curve becomes downward
sloping and any shift in net private borrowing now has amplified effects on world interest
rates and private borrowing (right panel in Figure 7).
    How does this play out in practice, when the world economy experiences a global
savings glut? Figure 8 simulates world interest rates r  , interest rate spreads  , reserves, and
welfare for various levels of financial market openness, contrasting the Nash equilibrium
with an economy in which all agents commit to a  = 0 policy. Clearly, both responses are
equal in case of completely open financial markets,  = 0. Incomplete levels of openness,
however, give SOEs the power to intervene in FX markets. This unleashes a "rat race" of
reserve accumulation, driving world interest rates down below their no-intervention value
and interest rate spreads up above zero. At the same time, no country gains from the rat
race, which only benefits the intermediation sector: aggregate country welfare falls in the
Nash equilibrium relative to a no-intervention world. In other words, welfare is distributed
away from the intervening countries and towards the financial sector. Interestingly, the
welfare losses are largest for intermediate values of financial market openness . This is
because interventions are costly but hardly possible when markets are relatively open and
possible but hardly costly when markets are relatively closed.
    We summarize these insights in the following proposition.

                                                      39
                        Figure 8: Reserve wars vs. a world without FX interventions.

                           World interest rate                              Interest rate spread
              4%                                               4%
              3%                                               3%
              2%
                                                               2%
              1%
                                                               1%
              0%
                                                               0%
                   0               50               100             0                50                100
                           financial friction                                financial friction 
                       World reserves / world GDP                       Average welfare of countries
                                                                0

              1%




              0%
                   0               50               100             0                50                100
                           financial friction                                financial friction 
                         No interventions           Individually optimal interventions
Note. These figures compare an world without FX interventions (red) and the Nash equilibrium in which
countries choose individually optimal FX interventions (green), as the degree of international financial
frictions  is varied.




                                                          40
Proposition 8 (Reserve wars.). Assume central banks intervene non-cooperatively. Then:

   1. Countries buy reserves, bG  > 0, inducing a positive interest rate spread,  > 0, precisely

      when world interest rates are low, r  < -1 - 1. In this sense, FX interventions are strategic
      complements across countries.

   2. If the elasticity of V (zt ) exceeds 2, FX interventions have negative externalities ("beggar thy
      neighbor") on non-intervening countries.

   3. There exists a unique Nash equilibrium with strictly positive interest rate spreads, i.e.  > 0.32
      In this equilibrium, countries accumulate reserves, i.e. bG > 0.


Compared to a no-intervention world ( = 0 or  = 0), the Nash equilibrium is characterized by:

   1. Greater public outflows (reserve accumulation), and at the same time greater private inflows.

   2. Lower world interest rates r  .

   3. Lower welfare of all countries.

   4. Higher profits for the financial intermediation sector.


5.3       Coordination
The self-defeating nature of interventions suggests that there may be gains from policy
coordination among central banks. This is what we consider next. The world equilibrium
is the outcome of a planning problem in which all central banks get together to maximize
their joint objective (35), subject to the country-specific constraints (36), (37), but in addition
take into account their effect on the world interest rate r  , which is determined by the
goods market clearing conditions (38). We can characterize the coordination outcome as
follows.

Proposition 9 (Central bank cooperation.). Assume central banks cooperate. Then they find it
optimal not to intervene at all, implying zero reserves and zero interest rate spreads  .

   In other words, the coordination outcome coincides with the no-intervention outcome
in Figure 8. In that sense, any reserve accumulation in this model is in excess of the
  32 Inthis environment with simple quadratic costs we cannot rule out another Nash equilibrium in which
an extreme, negative  becomes self-fulfilling by destroying sufficiently many resources in the first period,
leading to a high r  and hence rationalizing  . This equilibrium does not exist in any of our simulations in
Figure 8.


                                                    41
cooperative outcome. The reason for this is that the coalition of central banks internalize
that competitive devaluations are self-defeating, benefiting only the intermediation sector.
Therefore, they set  = 0. This fact emphasizes that effective regulation of the international
financial system may require tools to foster cooperation between central banks and prevent
individually optimal but socially harmful interventions.


Symmetric vs asymmetric shocks. The need for regulation in this setting stems from the
fact that, here, all countries are shocked symmetrically. If instead shocks are asymmetric
(i.i.d.) across countries, there would not be a need for regulation. In fact, regulation would
be harmful in that case for it would inhibit countries' abilities to use FX interventions to
address distributional concerns but would not affect the world economy.
     This highlights that the nature of the shock is crucial for efficient global regulation of
FX interventions: during episodes of symmetric shocks restrictions on interventions are
warranted, while during episodes of asymmetric shocks, those same restrictions can be
detrimental to welfare.


6    Conclusion
FX interventions are a well-established policy instrument for both emerging and advanced
economies. In this paper, we have developed a theory of such interventions. Our theory
builds on the idea that choosing interventions is equivalent to managing interest rate
spreads between home and foreign bonds. We emphasized that interventions are costly
as they induce nonzero interest rate spreads, opening up profit opportunities for foreign
carry traders. We showed these costs are convex in spreads, as larger spreads invite
further speculation. This convexity lies at the heart of our optimal policy design, which we
summarized in six main insights.
    Our first insight is that FX interventions should lean against the wind. We showed that
this is the case for four different intervention motives: in the main body of the paper we con-
sidered a distributional motive (our baseline model); in the appendix we considered models
with macroeconomic-stabilization motive, sectoral heterogeneity, and a terms-of-trade-
management motive. We identified the commonality across these models--excessively
volatile expenditure and exchange rate paths absent interventions--and argued that FX
interventions are helpful to correct precisely this class of externalities.
    Among our other insights, we found that the convexity of the cost, together with the
intertemporal nature of the externality, implies that interventions should induce small and


                                              42
smooth spreads. Furthermore, promising future interventions--FX forward guidance--is
powerful, yet not subject to a "forward guidance puzzle". This induces an inherent time
inconsistency problem, giving a crucial role to credibility and a rules-based approach. We
also showed that the optimal policy is better approximated by a quantity rule rather than a
smooth exchange rate rule.
    Finally, we proposed a multi-country version of the model to address the question of
spillovers of FX interventions across countries and the need for policy coordination. We
concluded that coordination is, indeed, necessary to avoid wasteful competitive interven-
tions and reserve over-accumulation. These "reserve wars" were shown to have important
amplification effects on the fall of the world interest rate, hurting all countries alike. As
a result, committing to a world without interventions led to a strict Pareto improvement
over the Nash equilibrium in the presence of symmetric shocks.
    While our results are mainly normative, we made some important positive points along
the way. We derived a micro-founded version of the cost of interventions, emphasizing the
importance of the maturity and residence of the holder of financial assets, and clarified the
relation between the "portfolio balance" and the "signaling" channels. We hope our results
will help guide future empirical research on the topic.
    Our model was purposefully stylized to derive clean results and accommodate different
rationales for interventions. A natural next step would be a full-blown quantitative analysis
with a richer model. On the theoretical front, extending our model to allow for infrequent
adjustment of portfolios, such as the one in Bacchetta and Van Wincoop (2010), and an
explicit modeling of risk with incomplete markets and cross-currency financial frictions,
seem like two especially relevant and promising avenues for future research.


References
Adler, Gustavo and Rui C Mano, "The Cost of Foreign Exchange Intervention: Concepts
 and Measurement," Journal of Macroeconomics, 2018.

Aguiar, Mark and Manuel Amador, "Growth in the Shadow of Expropriation," Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 2011, 126 (2), 651­697.

Aizenman, Joshua and Jaewoo Lee, "International Reserves: Precautionary versus Mer-
  cantilist Views, Theory and Evidence," Open Economies Review, 2007, 18 (2), 191­214.

Alfaro, Laura and Fabio Kanczuk, "Optimal Reserve Management and Sovereign Debt,"
  Journal of International Economics, 2009, 77 (1), 23­36.

                                             43
Alvarez, Fernando, Andrew Atkeson, and Patrick J. Kehoe, "Time-varying Risk, Interest
  Rates, and Exchange Rates in General Equilibrium," Review of Economic Studies, 2009, 76
  (3), 851­878.

Amador, Manuel, Javier Bianchi, Luigi Bocola, and Fabrizio Perri, "Exchange Rate Poli-
 cies at the Zero Lower Bound," The Review of Economic Studies, 2020, 87 (4), 1605­1645.

Bacchetta, Philippe and Eric Van Wincoop, "Infrequent Portfolio Decisions: A Solution
  to the Forward Discount Puzzle," American Economic Review, 2010, 100 (3), 870­904.

  , Kenza Benhima, and Yannick Kalantzis, "Capital Controls with International Reserve
  Accumulation: Can This be Optimal?," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2013,
  5 (3), 229­262.

  , , and , "Optimal Exchange Rate Policy in a Growing Semi-Open Economy," IMF
  Economic Review, 2014, 62 (1), 48­76.

Backus, David K. and Patrick J. Kehoe, "On the Denomination of Government Debt: A
  Critique of the Portfolio Balance Approach," Journal of Monetary Economics, 1989, 23,
  359­376.

Barro, Robert J, "On the Determination of the Public Debt," Journal of Political Economy,
  1979, 87 (5), 940­971.

Benes, Jaromir, Andrew Berg, Rafael A Portillo, and David Vavra, "Modeling Sterilized
  Interventions and Balance Sheet Effects of Monetary Policy in a New-Keynesian Frame-
  work," Open Economies Review, 2015, 26 (1), 81­108.

Bengui, Julien and Javier Bianchi, "Capital Flow Management when Capital Controls
  Leak," 2014.

Benigno, Gianluca and Luca Fornaro, "Reserve Accumulation, Growth and Financial
  Crises," CEP Discussion Paper No 1161, 2012.

Bianchi, Javier, "Overborrowing and Systemic Externalities in the Business Cycle," Ameri-
  can Economic Review, 2011, 101 (7), 3400­3426.

  , Juan Carlos Hatchondo, and Leonardo Martinez, "International Reserves and Rollover
  Risk," American Economic Review, 2018, 108 (9), 2629­70.




                                           44
Blanchard, Olivier, Irineu de Carvalho Filho, and Gustavo Adler, "Can Sterilized For-
  eign Exchange Intervention Stem Exchange Rate Pressures from the Global Financial
  Cycle?," 2014.

Branson, William H. and Dale W. Henderson, Chapter 15 The Specification and Influence of
  Asset Markets, Vol. 2, Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., 1985.

Caballero, Ricardo J. and Emmanuel Farhi, "The Safety Trap," Review of Economic Studies,
  2018, 85 (1), 223­274.

Calvo, Guillermo A., "Servicing the Public Debt: The Role of Expectations," American
 Economic Review, 1988, 78 (4), 647­661.

   and Carmen M. Reinhart, "Fear of Floating," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2002, 116
  (2), 379­420.

Canales-Kriljenko, Jorge I., Foreign Exchange Interventions in Developing and Transition
 Economies: Results of a Survey, International Monetary Fund, 2003.

Cavallino, Paolo, "Capital Flows and Foreign Exchange Intervention," American Economic
  Journal: Macroeconomics, 2019, 11 (2), 127­70.

Chamon, Marcos, M´ arcio Garcia, and Laura Souza, "FX Interventions in Brazil: A Syn-
 thetic Control Approach," Journal of International Economics, 2017, 108, 157­168.

Chang, Roberto and Andr´es Velasco, "Financial Frictions and Unconventional Monetary
 Policy in Emerging Economies," IMF Economic Review, 2017, 65 (1), 154­191.

Chari, V. V. and Patrick J. Kehoe, "Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy," Handbook of
 Macroeconomics, 1999, 1 (Part C), 1671­1745.

                        ephane Guibaud, and Keyu Jin, "Credit Constraints and Growth
Coeurdacier, Nicolas, St´
 in a Global Economy," American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (9), 2838­2881.

                                         an Werning, "A Theory of Capital Controls
Costinot, Arnaud, Guido Lorenzoni, and Iv´
 as Dynamic Terms-of-Trade Manipulation," Journal of Political Economy, 2014, 122 (1),
 77­128.

Cravino, Javier and Andrei A. Levchenko, "The Distributional Consequences of Large
  Devaluations," American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (11), 3477­3509.



                                          45
Cull, Robert, Maria Soledad Martinez Peria, and Jeanne Verrier, Bank Ownership: Trends
 and implications, The World Bank, 2018.

Del Negro, Marco, Marc Giannoni, and Christina Patterson, "The Forward Guidance
 Puzzle," 2015.

Devereux, Michael B and James Yetman, "Globalisation, Pass-through and the Optimal
 Policy Response to Exchange Rates," Journal of International Money and Finance, 2014, 49,
 104­128.

Eggertsson, Gauti and Michael Woodford, "The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Opti-
  mal Monetary Policy," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2003, 34 (1), 139­235.

Farhi, Emmanuel and Iv´ an Werning, "Dealing with the Trilemma: Optimal Capital Con-
  trols with Fixed Exchange Rates," 2012.

  and Ivan Werning, "Dilemma not Trilemma? Capital Controls and Exchange Rates with
  Volatile Capital Flows," IMF Economic Review, 2014, 62 (4), 569­605.

  and Iv´an Werning, "Monetary Policy, Bounded Rationality, and Incomplete Markets,"
  American Economic Review, 2019, 109 (11), 3887­3928.

Fern´andez, Andr´
                es, Michael W. Klein, Alessandro Rebucci, Martin Schindler, and Mar-
  tin Uribe, "Capital Control Measures: A New Dataset," IMF Economic Review, 2016, 64
  (3), 548­574.

Fischer, Stanley, Welfare Aspects of Government Issue of Indexed Bonds, MIT Press, 1983.

Gabaix, Xavier and Matteo Maggiori, "International Liquidity and Exchange Rate Dy-
 namics," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2015, (November), 1369­1420.

Gelfand, I. M. and S. V. Fomin, Calculus of Variations 1963.

Gopinath, Gita and Jeremy C. Stein, "Trade Invoicing, Bank Funding, and Central Bank
 Reserve Holdings," AEA Papers and Proceedings, 2018, 108, 542­46.

Gourinchas, Pierre Olivier and Olivier Jeanne, "Capital Flows to Developing Countries:
 The Allocation Puzzle," Review of Economic Studies, 2013, 80 (4), 1484­1515.

Grigorian, Alexander, "Ordinary Differential Equations," 2007.



                                            46
Heathcote, Jonathan and Fabrizio Perri, "On the Desirability of Capital Controls," IMF
 Economic Review, 2016, 64 (1), 75­102.

Hur, Sewon and Illenin O Kondo, "A Theory of Rollover Risk, Sudden Stops, and Foreign
 Reserves," Journal of International Economics, 2016, 103, 44­63.

Itskhoki, Oleg and Dmitry Mukhin, "Exchange Rate Disconnect in General Equilibrium,"
  Available at SSRN 3423435, 2019.

Jeanne, Olivier, "Capital Account Policies and the Real Exchange Rate," in "NBER Inter-
  national Seminar on Macroeconomics 2012" University of Chicago Press 2012, pp. 7­42.

   and Romain Ranci` ere, "The Optimal Level of International Reserves for Emerging
  Market Countries: A New Formula and Some Applications," The Economic Journal, 2011,
  121, 905­930.

Kearns, Jonathan and Roberto Rigobon, "Identifying the Efficacy of Central Bank Inter-
 ventions: Evidence from Australia and Japan," Journal of International Economics, 2005, 66
 (1), 31­48.

Kohlscheen, Emanuel and Sandro C. Andrade, "Official FX interventions through Deriva-
 tives," Journal of International Money and Finance, 2014, 47, 202­216.

Korinek, Anton and Luis Serven, "Undervaluation through Foreign Reserve Accumula-
 tion: Static Losses, Dynamic Gains," Journal of International Money and Finance, 2016, 64,
 104­136.

Kouri, Pentti J K, "The Exchange Rate and the Balance of Payments in the Short Run and
 in the Long Run: A Monetary Approach," The Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 1976, 78
 (2), 280­304.

Kuersteiner, Guido M., David C. Phillips, and Mauricio Villamizar-Villegas, "Effective
 Sterilized Foreign Exchange Intervention? Evidence from a Rule-based Policy," Journal
 of International Economics, 2018, 113, 118­138.

Liu, Zheng and Mark M Spiegel, "Optimal Monetary Policy and Capital Account Restric-
  tions in a Small Open Economy," IMF Economic Review, 2015, 63 (2), 298­324.

Lucas, Robert E. Jr. and Nancy L Stokey, "Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy in an
  Economy without Capital," Journal of Monetary Economics, 1983, 12, 55­93.


                                            47
Magud, Nicol´as E, Carmen M Reinhart, and Kenneth S Rogoff, "Capital Controls: Myth
 and Reality.," Annals of Economics & Finance, 2018, 19 (1).

McKay, Alisdair, Emi Nakamura, and Jon´ Steinsson, "The Power of Forward Guidance
 Revisited," American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (10), 3133­3158.

Mirrlees, James A., "An Exploration in the Theory of Optimum Income Taxation," Review
 of Economic Studies, 1971, 38 (2), 175­208.

Mohanty, Madhusudan S and Bat el Berger, "Central Bank Views on Foreign Exchange
 Intervention," BIS Paper, 2013, (73e).

Obstfeld, Maurice, "The International Monetary System: Living with Asymmetry," in
 "Globalization in an Age of Crisis: Multilateral Economic Cooperation in the Twenty-first
 Century," University of Chicago Press, 2013, pp. 301­336.

Ostry, Jonathan D., Atish R. Ghosh, Marcos Chamon, and Mahvash S. Qureshi, "Tools
 for Managing Financial-Stability Risks from Capital Inflows," Journal of International
 Economics, 2012, 88 (2), 407­421.

Werning, Ivan, "Managing a Liquidity Trap: Monetary and Fiscal Policy," 2012.




                                           48
Appendix (for online publication)

A      Calibration details
A.1        Illustrative calibration
We discipline the non-homotheticity in the model using evidence on tradable expenditure
shares across the income distribution from the 2008/09 Brazilian Household Expenditure
Survey (see details in Appendix A.2 below). We assume the poor household corresponds to
the bottom 20% share of the population, µ = 0.2, while the rich household corresponds to
the remainder. We choose  to match the implied expenditure shares, giving  = 0.078. On
average poor households spend 52% of their income on tradables, while rich households
spend 36% of their income on tradables. We adjust these numbers for government spending,
which we for simplicity assume is nontradable and financed by the rich. After making
this adjustment, we obtain that the rich spend 25% on tradables out of their gross income.
These shares directly imply  = 0.051 and c = 0.19. Our results do not depend on the
initial net foreign asset position, so for simplicity, we set it to zero in the steady state. This
implies y T = 0.23. We normalize y NT = 1 without loss of generality.
     We calibrate the remaining parameters as follows. For the discount rate we pick
 = 0.075, corresponding to the average 5yr treasury yield from 2000­2015 plus the average
J.P. Morgan EMBI+Brazil return over the same period. We set  = 2, a standard value. To
get an idea of the relative size of home compared to foreign intermediation, we note that
Brazil's private home banks operate balance sheets roughly three times the size of foreign
banks' subsidiaries in Brazil (Cull et al., 2018). Interpreting balance sheet size as a rough
proxy for portfolio constraints (corresponding to X in our microfoundation), this leads us
to calibrate  H / = 1/3.
     To calibrate the overall degree of capital immobility , we rely on recent evidence from
Kohlscheen and Andrade (2014), a high-frequency study of Brazilian FX interventions.
They find that the announcement of a US$1 billion purchase of FX swaps leads to a
depreciation of somewhere between 0.10 to 0.50%. The more conservative lower end of
the spectrum therefore roughly corresponds to a 2% exchange rate movement after a 1%
of GDP purchase of FX swaps (with a 1-year maturity), which is consistent with  = 9.33
To explore the robustness of our predictions around this value, we also plot the model
responses for values  = 1 and  = 50 below. Finally, we assume that the equilibrium
without intervention, i.e. with bGt   = 0 for all t, does not involve interest rate spreads,
                                                                               
i.e. t = 0 for all t. This requires a sufficiently wide interval [b       H , b H ]. We choose the
                               
smallest such interval, i.e. b H = -b              34
                                       H = 1.7y T . This assumption ensures that households
have sufficient access to international asset markets that they do not need to rely on costly
intermediaries.
  33 SeeAppendix A.3 for details on our calibration of .
  34 Any  sufficiently wide interval works here. The only effect a wider (but still bounded) interval has are
constant offsetting shifts in the paths of reserves and home intermediaries' asset positions. In particular, the
paths of interest rate spreads {t } and the exchange rate are unaffected.


                                                      49
                 Figure 9: Tradable expenditure shares by total expenditure percentile.

                                                     100 %




                     Share of tradable expenditure
                                                     75 %


                                                     50 %


                                                     25 %


                                                      0%
                                                             1   2   3    4   5    6    7    8   9   10
                                                                     Total expenditure deciles




A.2    Tradable expenditure shares in Brazilian household survey
Figure 9 shows tradable expenditure shares by total expenditure percentiles. The data for
this plot comes from the Brazilian Household Expenditure Survey (Pesquisa de Ornamentos
Familiares) in the years 2008/09 (sedlac). We base our classification of nontradable spending
on Cravino and Levchenko (2017) and classify the following expenditure categories as
tradable expenditure (the remainder is nontradable): food and non-alcoholic beverages;
alcoholic beverages and narcotics; clothing and footwear; electricity, gas and other fuels;
household appliances; good and services for routine household maintenance; furnishing
and household equipment.


A.3    Calibration of 
We calibrate the degree of capital immobility in our model, , to match evidence from
Chamon et al. (2017). To do this, we simulate an experiment where the planner increases
its reserve position by 1% of GDP, for one year, for various levels of , corresponding to a
1-year long reserve swap. We then determine the level of  for which the initial exchange
rate adjustment is equal to 2%. In our case, this level is given by  = 9. We plot the time
series of this simple experiment in Figure 10.


B     Proofs for Section 2
B.1    Implementability conditions: Proposition 1
This section proves Proposition 1. It requires two directions. We start by showing that (18a)
                                          R , c R , c P , c P } belong to a competitive equilibrium
and (18b) are necessarily satisfied if {c Tt    Nt Tt Nt
                            
with interest rate shocks {rt }. The paragraph below Definition 1 already showed that the


                                                                           50
                       Figure 10: Effects of a simple one-time reserve swap intervention.

                               Real exchange rate                                       Reserves / GDP
                2%                                                     1.5 %
               1.5 %                                                     1%
                1%
                                                                       0.5 %
               0.5 %
                0%                                                       0%
             -0.5 %                                                   -0.5 %
                       0                                     2                 0                         2
                                        years                                               years
                              No intervention               =1                     =9         = 50


flow version (16) of the present value budget constraint (18b) holds along a competitive
equilibrium. (18a) follows directly from the Euler equation (6) and the definition of t .
   Now, consider the reverse direction: Given paths {zt , t }, {rt           }, and an initial net foreign

asset position nfa0 that satisfy (18a) and (18b), can we always find a competitive equilibrium
                                                                      ), a central bank FX intervention
consisting of initial debt positions (b H0 , b I 0 , b I H0 , bG0 , bG 0
                , t }, and an allocation { ci , ci , b , b , b , b
policy {bGt , bGt  t                            Nt Tt          Ht    Ht It I Ht , t } with prices { pt , rt }
such that (2)­(12) hold?
   We first construct the equilibrium objects and then check optimality conditions. We can
take the initial debt positions to be b H0 = nfa0 . Moreover, we define for any T > 0
                                                t                                 1
                           b HT =       e-      T rs ds      p(zt )y N + c - y T + t2 dt,                    (39)
                                    T                     1-                      
                                                                                                     
and thus construct b It =   1
                              t , b I Ht = 1
                                           H
                                             t , b                                          
                                                  Ht = b H if t > 0, b Ht = b H if t < 0, b Ht = 0
              + b = -b                                                          
if t = 0, bGt      Ht         Gt = b Ht + b It + b I Ht , and t = b I Ht (rt - rt ) for each t  0.
Transfers are defined to be tt = rt bGt + rt  b . We let the nontradable price be defined by
                                                 Gt
pt = p(zt ) using (13), define zt P using (3), and let consumption paths be given by (4) and

(5). This concludes our construction of a candidate equilibrium. We move on to checking
the equilibrium conditions.
    The Euler equation (6) is equivalent to (18a). Equations (2), (3), (4), (5), (7), (8), (9), (10),
and (12) hold by construction. It is straightforward to check that the nontradable market
clears--that is, equation (11) holds--given our definition for the price pt . Finally, reversing
the steps in equations (14)­(16) shows that the differential (flow) version of the (39) (which
is exactly (16)) implies the budget constraint (2).


B.2     The planner's objective function and concavity
In this section we derive the expression (20) for the objective function V (zt ) and prove that
it is strictly increasing and strictly concave, and satisfies Inada conditions. We also show
(z) is positive and bounded from above.


                                                                 51
Derivation of V (z) By substituting consumption choices (4) and (5) into preferences (1),
we see that per period utility of a type-i household is given by

                                               -1              i 1- 
                               V i = u (  zi
                                           t ) ( p t (1 -  ) z t )


Using the fact that poor households are hand-to-mouth zt     P = p(z)y /µ + y /µ - c
                                                                          N         T
                       R = z , per-period utilitarian welfare is then up to a multiplicative
and the notation that zt    t
constant

     V (z) = (1 - µ)u p(z)-(1-) z + µu p(z)-(1-) p(z)µ-1 y N + µ-1 y T - c

Factoring out p(z)-(1-)(1-) from this sum yields (20).

V (z) is strictly increasing   To prove this, rewrite V (z) as an explicit function of z,
                                                                 1- 
                                                                                
                                                                 A0 C1
                                 C0 ( -1)                        B0 B1
             V (z) = (z - C1 )               A0 u(z) + B0                     u (z - B1 )
                                                                1- C B1
                                                                       1



                                                           1                                    1
where A0  1 - µ, B0  µ, C0  1 - , B1                   (1-µ)(1-)
                                                                    (µc - y T ), and C1       (1- µ )
                                                                                                      (µc -
                                                                               A0 C1
                                                                               B0 B1
y T ). In particular, A0 , B0 , C0 , B1 , C1 > 0, C0 < 1, B1 > C1 , and            C     1 (since  < µ).
                                                                               1 - B1
                                                                                    1
These properties alone allow us to prove monotonicity and concavity of V (z). Throughout,
bear in mind that the domain of z is ( B1 , ).
   After some rearranging, we can write the first derivative of V as

            V (z)
                            = A0 ((1 - C0 )z - C1 )
    (z - C1 )C0 (-1)-1 z-
                                      A0 C1      1- 
                                                                   -
                                      B0 B1              z - B1
                            + B0                                       ((1 - C0 )z - C1 + C0 B1 )     (40)
                                     1- C B1
                                            1               z
                                              increasing in 

To show that V > 0, it is without loss to assume  = 0, since the under-braced term is
increasing in  and the second term is necessarily positive,

                            (1 - C0 )z - C1 + C0 B1 > B1 - C1 > 0.

With  = 0, V (z) > 0 is equivalent to (after some algebra)

                                             (1 - C0 ) B1 > 0

which holds in light of C0  (0, 1) and B1 > 0. This completes the proof that V is strictly


                                                    52
increasing.

Inada conditions for V (z) Straight from (40) we see that limz B1 V (z) = . Moreover,
note that for large z
                        V (z)  zC0 (-1)-1 z-+1 = z-(1-C0 )-C0
where the exponent is always strictly negative since   0 and C0  (0, 1). This proves that
limz V (z) = 0.

V (z) is strictly concave    The second derivative of V can be rewritten as

                                                             A0 C1      1- 
                                                                                           -  -1
                        V                                    B0 B1            z - B1
                                        = A0 A + B0                                                B           (41)
             z--1 (z - C1 )C0 (-1)-2                        1- C B1
                                                                   1             z

where
                      A = -zC0 ((1 - C0 )z - 2C1 ) -  (C1 - z(1 - C0 ))2
and

      B = -(z - B1 )C0 ((1 - C0 ) (z - B1 ) + 2 ( B1 - C1 )) -  ((1 - C0 )z + C0 B1 - C1 )2 .

                                                                                  A0 C1      1- 
                                                                                                               -  -1
                                                                                  B0 B1                z- B1
Notice that B < 0 for any   0 and that A, B both decrease in . As                     C                  z
                                                                                  1 - B1
                                                                                       1
is increasing in , it suffices to show that (41) holds for  = 0, that is,
                                           A0 C1                   -1
                                           B0 B1          z - B1
                   A0 A( = 0) + B0                                      B( = 0) < 0.
                                          1- C B1
                                                 1           z

Since z, A0 , C0  0, this simplifies to

                                          C1
              -((1 - C0 )z - 2C1 ) -           ((1 - C0 )(z - B1 ) + 2( B1 - C1 )) < 0
                                       B1 - C1
Notice this expression is decreasing in z, so it suffices to show the result when z = B1 , i.e.

                                       -C0 (1 - C0 ) B1 < 0,

which is true by virtue of C0  (0, 1) and B1 > 0. This completes the proof that V is strictly
concave.




                                                     53
(z) is positive, continuous, and bounded from above                          Using the same notation as
before, (z) can be rewritten as
                                                                           z
                                        (z) =  + (1 - )(1 - )
                                                                        z - C1

(z) is thus continuous and monotone in z. Evaluating this expression at z = B1 and
z   yields lower and upper bounds (depending on   1),

                                                           1-
                                        ( B1 ) =  + (1 - )
                                                       1 -  (1 -  )
                                         () =  + (1 - )(1 - ) > 0.

We assume parameters are such that ( B1 ) > 0 in our baseline model. This is satisfied in
our calibration.


C      Proofs for Section 3
We begin by proving the following lemma.

Lemma 1. Assume   (0, ), V (z) is an increasing and strictly concave function that satisfies
Inada conditions, and (z) is a positive and continuous function bounded from above, i.e. K0 > 0
such that (z) < K0 z. When {rt     } follows the path in (21), any solution { z ,  } to the planning
                                                                               t t
problem with objective (19) and constraints (18a) and (18b) satisfies:

    1. 0 = limt t = 0

    2. t is continuous in t

    3. t is differentiable at r  = 0
            -V ( z ) z
    4. if    V (z)
                         > (z) for all z, then sign(t ) = -sign(r  ) for all t  (0, )

            -V ( z ) z
    5. if    V (z)
                         = (z) for all z, t = 0 for all t  (0, )

            -V ( z ) z
    6. if    V (z)
                         < (z) for all z, then sign(t ) = sign(r  ) for all t  (0, )

Proof. First notice that the inequality in (18b) can be relaxed to be . This is because zt can
always be scaled up by a constant factor, which increases welfare while leaving (18a) intact.

First order conditions. The current value Hamiltonian of the planning problem is given
by

                                  t                            (1 - µ )      1     z
      H ( z,  , , , t ) = e      0 (rs -  ) ds   V (z) -                 z -  2 +      (r  +  -  ).
                                                            1 -  (1 -  )           (z)

                                                              54
This is an optimal control problem with a subsidiary condition, as in Gelfand and Fomin
(1963). The state variable is z and has a free initial value z0 . z has a (continuously dif-
ferentiable) costate .  > 0 is the multiplier on the resource constraint (18b), and  is
the control variable. For convenience, we define    ~   z , which is also continuously
                                                           (z)
                                t   
differentiable, and It  e 0 (rs -)ds .
                                                            ~
    H is concave in  , with optimum at t =                2 t ,   and the costate equation for z is

                                         t = r 
                                        ~       ~        zt
                                              t t+             F (zt , It )
                                                         (zt )
                                           (1- µ )
where we defined F (zt , It )   1-(1-) - It V (zt ). Moreover, since z has a free initial
value, 0 =     ~ 0 = 0. From this, it already follows that 0 = 0 and t is continuously
differentiable in t.
    We can rewrite the optimality conditions directly in terms of t and z,

                                                         zt
                                       t = rt
                                              t +                 F (zt , It )                          (42a)
                                                       2  ( z t )
                                                  t
                                                  z     
                                          (zt )      = rt + t - .                                       (42b)
                                                  zt
Observe that after time t = T when the shock has faded and rt    = , this is a saddle-path

stable system of stationary ODEs. That is, unless it is converging to a steady state, it leads
to a violation of the budget constraint (since either z   or z  B1 and both imply        / is
bounded from below by a positive number greater than ). Thus, the only optimal solution
is the one where zt  z and t  0, with z uniquely defined by F (z , IT ) = 0 (this is
possible since the image of V (z) is (0, ), see Appendix B.2).

                                          -V ( z ) z
Sign of t .    Suppose r  > 0 and         > (z) (the other cases are exactly analogous).35
                                           V (z)
What can we say about the sign of t ? Define the positive mapping X (z) > 0 by36

                                       X (z)z   d log X (z)
                                              =             =  ( z ).
                                        X (z)     d log z

X (z) can be thought of as a measure of inverse marginal utility. In the familiar case where
(z) = , for instance, X (z) = z . Since X (z) is strictly increasing and differentiable in z, it
admits an increasing and differentiable inverse, Z ( x ). By the implicit function theorem,

                                           Z (x)x      1
                                                  =            .
                                            Z(x)    ( Z ( x ))
  35 Note  that this proof applies to any kind of world interest rate shock {rt }, as long as r  =  after t = T
                                                                                                t
                        
and either rt   or rt   for all t < T . Furthermore, note that we have not used any properties of the
foreign interest rate process to prove continuity and t = 0 and limt t = 0 other than rt       =  t > T .
  36 This only pins down X ( z ) up to a multiplicative constant which is irrelevant below.




                                                        55
Using X (z), we do a variable substitution, from zt to xt  X (zt ) It-1 , so that zt = Z ( xt It ).
This is a convenient substitution, since

                                          t
                                          x         t
                                                    z  t
                                                       I
                                             = (zt ) - = t
                                          xt        zt It
which is no longer explicitly time-dependent. We can also recast the first order condition
for t , (42a), in terms of xt ,

                                                   Z ( xt It )
                                    t = rt
                                           t +                    G ( xt , It )
                                                 2 ( Z ( xt It ))

where G ( x, I )  F ( Z ( xt It ), It ). Similarly, to before, there exists a unique steady state x 
defined by G ( x  , IT ) = 0 or equivalently, by x  = X (z ).
    This is a useful rewriting of the FOCs since now only the t equation is non-stationary
before t = T . After t = T , both equations are stationary so the state at t = T , (T , x T ), has
to lie on the stationary system's stable arm. To construct the stable arm correctly, notice
that the x = 0 locus is simply described by  = 0 and the             = 0 locus is described by

                                                  Z ( xIt )
                                      =-                       G ( x, It )                        (43)
                                             rt 2 ( Z ( xIt ))
                                              


at time t. The relationship in (43) only crosses zero once, at x = xt    , where x  = x  for
                                                                                   t
                                            ( x < x  ). Moreover, since I increases over time
t  T , and is negative (positive) for x > xt        t                    t
(due to r  > 0), xt falls over time as


                                                                         V ( Z ( xI ))
            G I ( x, I ) = -V (z) - V (z) Z ( xI ) xI = V (z)                          -1 > 0     (44)
                                                                         ( Z ( xI ))
                 -V ( z ) z
where V (z)       V (z)
                            .   (44) is the case studied in this proof (the other cases are analogous).

    Figure 11 illustrates these relationships in a phase diagram (thick black) and its stable
arm (red line) in that case. The green line depicts the shape of the optimal trajectory that
we are trying to pin down mathematically.
    In a first step, we show that it can never be the case that t  0 and xt > xt     for any t > 0.

In Figure 11, this would be a state (t , xt ) that lies to the top right of the time-t x -locus. In
such a case, for any s > t, both x    s and s are positive and bounded away from zero, and
hence the state (t , xt ) would diverge to . As before, t would diverge at a rate that is
bounded from below by a positive number greater than rt          , violating the budget constraint

(18b).
    Second, consider the possibility that for some t > 0,
                                                                  
                                (t , xt )  {( , x ) |   0 and x  xt }  Xt .



                                                      56
                                                   x
                                                       =0
                                                       x




                                                      
                                                   · xt

                                                                                            = 0 (t < T )
                                                                                           


                                                        
                                                       xT
                                                   ·
                                                                                            = 0 (t  T )
                                                                                           
                                                                                                  
                Figure 11: Describing the optimal policy in the state space for ( , x ).


Given xt  is decreasing in t, if (  , x )  X , then (  , x )  X for any s < t as well. In
                                   t t       t         t t       s
particular (t , xt )  X0 . Given no path satisfying the ODEs can ever enter X0 (that is, X0 ,
is a "source" in the vector field sense), it must hold that (0 , x0 )  intX0 (the interior of
X0 ). This contradicts the fact that 0 = 0. Together, these two steps prove that t  0 is
impossible for any t > 0. Thus, t < 0 for t > 0. This concludes the proof of Lemma 1.

Differentiability with respect to r  . The right hand side of the system (42) is contin-
uously differentiable in r  at r  = 0. By the theorem on differentiable dependence of
ODEs (see, e.g. Theorem 2.16 in Grigorian, 2007), this means that t and zt are differentiable
in r  for any t  0.

Application to baseline model Appendix B.2 establishes that V (z) is increasing and
weakly concave, and (z) is positive, continuous and bounded from above, in the model
of Section 2. Therefore, Lemma 1 applies.


C.1    Leaning against the wind: Proposition 2
Focus on the case r  > 0. Lemma 1 establishes that t < 0. The path for t pins down the
path for the net foreign asset position nfat since
                                         s                                1
                  nfat =           e-   t ru du      p(zs )y N + c - y T + s2 ds
                            t                     1-                      

as well as intermediary positions b It = -1 t and b I Ht = -     1
                                                               H t and home household's
                
position bHt = b H . Using the definition of the net foreign asset position and home bond


                                                        57
market clearing (12) implies reserves must be
                                       
                                      bGt = nfat + b It + b I Ht - bHt                                     (45)
                            
As we assumed that b H is sufficiently large to ensure that an allocation with {t = 0},
                                                                =0 37
which would lead to a strictly larger net foreign position nfat   , can be achieved without
reserve position, that is,
                                                 =0    
                                      max nfa  t     bH
                                               t
Thus,
                                                       
                                    bGt = nfat - b H + b It + b I Ht < 0
                                                   0           <0

The predictions for the exchange rate follow directly from the fact that under the optimal
policy, zt is raised initially relative to the {t = 0} allocation (i.e. from the fact that z
                                                                                           ^t
decreases in t at the optimum in the proof of Lemma 1).


C.2       Smooth interest rate spreads: Proposition 3
This was proved in Lemma 1.


C.3       Forward guidance: Proposition 4
This was also proved in Lemma 1.


C.4       Time inconsistency: Proposition 5
This was derived in the main body of the text.


C.5       Asymmetry: Proposition 6
We proved in Lemma 1 that t is differentiable in r  , from which differentiability of nfat
follows. By virtue of (45), this means:
                                  
                                 bGt   nfat              t
                            lim      =      +  -1 +  - 1
                                                             - b
                               0  r     r                 r 
                                                     H
                           r 
                                  
                                 bGt   nfat    -1    -1  t       
                           lim       =      +     +          + b
                           r  0   r     r                 r
                                                     H      

                            
which, together with b H > |bH | immediately implies the result.
  37 By design, a negative t policy increases zt initially relative to a {t = 0} policy and therefore leads to a
relatively smaller net foreign asset position.




                                                       58
C.6     Non-fundamental shocks: Proposition 7
                                                                                                 t 
Suppose the optimum had a positive present value of costs C  = 0 e- 0 ru du t b It . The
policy t = 0 then clearly has a lower cost, and in addition, does not distort the consumption
choice by home households, implementing the first best conditional on a zero cost term.
Therefore, the optimum cannot be one with a positive present value of costs.


D      Extensions
D.1      Alternative assumptions on intermediaries' demand
Our baseline model assumed a particularly simple, linear demand schedule of foreign
intermediaries. We now extend our model to allow for more general demand schedules.

Nonlinear demand. Assume the demand schedule is nonlinear and increasing, b It =
            ), with g (  ) > 0 and sign g (  ) = sign  . In this case, the cost term in the planning
g (r t - r t
problem (19) is given by
                                            t b It = t g(t ),
which is no longer necessarily convex. Instead, it is globally quasi-convex and locally
strictly convex around  = 0, where the second derivative is 2 g (0) > 0. Thus, to first order,
the analysis in the previous sections goes through unchanged.38

Local infinite elasticity. This description of intermediary demand rules out one im-
portant case, namely that where intermediary demand is locally infinitely elastic when
rt - rt = 0. For example, this can occur in our framework if we allow a nonzero mass of

foreign intermediaries to have zero participation costs (still subject to position limits). In
that case, the cost term has a kink at  = 0, but remains strictly convex. The kink implies
that even very small interventions have a non-negligible cost. This leads the planner to
choose t = 0 whenever it would have chosen a t close to zero without the kink, which in
our experiments above means that t = 0 for t in some interval ( T1 , T2 ). Between T1 and
T2 , the economy behaves exactly as in the baseline model.
   38 We also conjecture that all our results generalize to the case where g (  )  is globally convex. If  g (  ) is

sufficiently non-convex and shocks are large, the planner will start to behave as if the cost term was largely a
fixed cost and therefore intervene more strongly.




                                                        59
D.2     Model with long-term assets
There are three important equations that change with long-term assets. First, the consoli-
dated household budget constraint is now given by

                                                                     
                               Ht + b
              p(zt )y N + c + b       +         t,s t b Ht,s ds +                 
                                      Ht                                t  ,s t b Ht,s ds =                                           (46)
           1-                                t                     t
                                  y T + b Ht,t + bHt,t + r  b
                                                           t Ht + r  
                                                                    t b Ht + tt + t .

Second, the central bank's budget constraint becomes
                                                   
    + b                                                                                            
  bGt  Gt +             t,s t bGt,s ds +              t ,s t bGt,s ds = bGt,t + bGt,t + rt bGt + rt bGt - tt .                        (47)
                 t                             t

Finally, bond market clearing now involves two sets of equations,

                                            b Ht + b It + b I Ht + bGt = 0                                                            (48)

                                        b Ht,s + b It,s + b I Ht,s + bGt,s = 0.                                                       (49)
Defining the net foreign asset position,

                                                                                                    
      nfat  b Ht + b            
                    Ht + bGt + bGt +                         t,s (b Ht,s + bGt,s )ds +                   t
                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                           ,s ( b Ht,s + bGt,s ) ds
                                                      t                                         t

observe that its derivative is just
                                                                           
                  t=b
                nfa        + b
                     Ht + b            + rt
                                Gt + b                                         t,s (b Ht,s + bGt,s )ds                                (50)
                            Ht         Gt
                                                                       t
                                                                               
                                                        
                        + rt           t ,s ( b Ht,s + bGt,s ) ds +               t,s t (b Ht,s + bGt,s )ds
                                t                                          t
                                
                                                                                          
                        +       t ,s t ( b Ht,s + bGt,s ) ds - b Ht,t - b Ht,t - bGt,t - bGt,t
                            t

and can be substituted in when summing (46) and (47),

                                                                                                        
                     t = y T + r  nfat + (rt - r  )(b Ht + bGt +
   p(zt )y N + c + nfa                                                                                     t,s (b Ht,s + bGt,s )ds) + t .
                                 t               t
1-                                                                                                  t

Using the market clearing conditions (48) and (49) this further simplifies to

                                                                                                
                     t = y T + r  nfat - (rt - r  )(b It + b I Ht +
   p(zt )y N + c + nfa                                                                                  t,s (b It,s + b I Ht,s )ds) + t ,
                                 t               t
1-                                                                                          t

                                                 )( b                                  
and using the definition of profits, t = (rt - rt     I Ht +                          t   t,s b I Ht,s ds), we arrive at

                                                                                                               
                                t = y T + r  nfat - (rt - r  )(b It +
              p(zt )y N + c + nfa                                                                                 t,s b It,s ds)
                                            t               t
           1-                                                                                              t


                                                                 60
or, in present value terms,
                                                                                      
                                                                 
                    0, t      p ( z t ) y N + c - y T + (r t - r t )(b It +              t,s b It,s ds)   = nfa0 .
             0             1-                                                     t

Defining the net foreign asset position before the intervention as
                                                              
             nfa0-  b H0 + b             
                            H 0 + bG0 + bG0 +                    0,
                                                                                               
                                                                    s ( b H 0,s + b I H 0,s + bG0,s - b It,s ) ds
                                                          0
                                                  s     (r - r  ) dt =   -  .
we arrive at (28) using the fact that            0    0, t t,s t t     0,s 0,s


D.3       Alternative motive: Aggregate demand externalities
Our baseline model features a specific motive for intervention, namely to avoid extreme
fluctuations in the consumption of poor households relative to that of Ricardian households.
Here, we study a planner that chooses to defend an exchange rate peg in the presence of
sticky prices.
    Consider a version of the model in Section 2 with only Ricardian households (µ = 0,
 = 0), no subsistence needs (c = 0) and log preferences ( = 1) in which the nontradable
good is produced with a linear technology y Nt = nt , and households experience some
disutility of labor given by v(nt ), i.e. utility at date t is

                                        log c Tt + (1 - ) log c Nt - v(nt ).                                             (51)

Assume wages are perfectly rigid and normalized to set the home currency price of the
nontradable good equal to 1, and denote the nominal exchange rate by et .39 This implies
that nontradable output y Nt is determined by
                                                 -1
                                                et  y Nt = (1 - )zt .
                                                                                                                     f
As is clear from (13), y Nt exactly coincides with the "flexible-price output level" y N  y N ,
                                                                         f
where y N satisfies v (y N )y N = 1 - , when et = et  p(zt ) = (1 - )y-    1
                                                                          N zt . Thus, the
µ =  = c = 0 version of our baseline model can be nested by assuming monetary policy
                          f
is implementing et = et at all times,40 capturing the idea that the output gap objective
takes priority over the exchange rate objective in that model.
    In this section, we explore the polar opposite: we assume that--for some unmodeled
reason--the monetary authority has some exchange rate objective et . To make it stark, we
assume a fixed exchange rate regime, et  e = 1, and ask: how can the planner use FX
interventions to regain some monetary independence and mitigate the impact on the home
  39 We  use the convention that lower values of et reflect a more appreciated home currency.
  40 Here,  we take a shortcut and directly describe monetary policy as choosing a path for the nominal
exchange rate. This can be made more formal by assuming that there is a nominal interest rate it such that
rt = it - e
          t /et . This interest rate can then be implemented using a standard interest rate rule.



                                                          61
economy? Examples of interventions of this sort arguably include recent interventions by
Euro neighbors like Denmark, Switzerland, or the Czech Republic, which have tried to
fend off appreciations and at the same time avoid being pushed into the zero, or effective,
lower bound for interest rates.
    In a first step, we ask which allocations can be implemented by central bank policies.41
Fortunately, it is straightforward to show that, in fact, when stated in terms of {zt , rt }, the
same implementability conditions as in Proposition 1 continue to hold in this economy,
just with µ =  = c = 0. The reason is that aggregate (as well as individual) income from
nontradables is still equal to p(zt )y N , even though it is now entirely caused by a larger
output quantity y Nt and no price response due to sticky prices.
    By contrast, the objective function changes. Noting that nt = y Nt and following the
same steps as before, we find the planning problem to be
                                              
                                max              e-t {log zt - v((1 - )zt )} dt                             (52)
                               {zt ,t }   0

subject to (18a) and (18b).
    Do our results carry over to this environment? Defining V (z)  log z - v((1 - )z), the
planning problem fits into the general framework of Section 4.1. Clearly, the intertemporal
elasticity of substitution implied by V is smaller than 1, which is why our results in Section 3
also hold in this model.42


D.4        Alternative Motive: Sectoral heterogeneity
As our next alternative model, we consider an economy that, instead of subsistence needs
in consumption, features heterogeneity in sectoral employment. In particular, while a mass
1 - µ of households are still Ricardian, with the same endowments as before, we now
assume that a fraction µ1 of poor households (type 1) work in the tradable sector, earning
y T , and a fraction µ2 = µ - µ1 of poor households (type 2) work in the nontradable sector,
earning  pt y N . All households share the same utility function (1), where for simplicity we
focus on log preferences,  = 1. The demands of both types of poor households are given
by
                                                       P1
                                                  µ1 c Tt = y T
                                                       P2
                                                  µ2 c Tt =  pt y N

and similarly for nontradable goods. Thus, market clearing for nontradable goods is

                      (1 - µ)(1 - )zt + (1 - )y T + (1 - ) pt y N = pt y N
  41 See Amador et al. (2020) for a formal implementability result with a fixed exchange rate and a binding
zero lower bound.
  42 Strictly speaking, V ( z ) is decreasing for large enough z. It is natural to assume that we are not in this

region, i.e. y T is not that large.




                                                         62
which simplifies to
                                       1     1-
                              pt =                     ((1 - µ)zt + y T ) .
                                      y N 1 - (1 -  ) 
This is the same as (13), setting the subsistence level to zero, c = 0.
   The key distinction to the model in Section 2 emerges in the utility function. In this
model, the planner's utility is given by, up to a constant

                           V (z)  (1 - µ) log z - (1 -  - µ1 ) log p(z).

It is easy to see that the implementability conditions (18) are unchanged, and that V (z) is
                                   V (z)z
increasing, concave and satisfies - V (z) > 1 when there are not too many poor households,
µ1 < 1 -  and µ2 < . Thus, our results in Section 3 continue to hold in this environment.


D.5     Alternative Motive: Terms-of-trade manipulation
In this section we propose a third motive for FX interventions43 based on a dynamic terms-
of-trade manipulation motive, similar to the motive in Costinot et al. (2014) and Farhi and
Werning (2014). As it turns out, the planning problem of this model is again similar to the
one in Section 2.3 which is why our results in Section 3 carry over unchanged.
    In the simplest possible terms-of-trade model, there is a continuum of households
                                                                      
in the home country, maximizing a common utility function 0 e-t log(ct )dt, with ct
                                                   - 
being a consumption bundle defined as ct =  c1    Ht c Ft . Here, c Ht and c Ft denote home's
consumption of home and foreign goods, respectively, and   (1 - )-(1-) - > 0 is
a positive normalization constant. We normalize the foreign good's price to 1 and refer
to that numeraire as "dollars". The relative price of the home good is denoted by pt . The
per-period dollar budget constraint of the household is then given by
                                         Ft = rt b Ht + r  bFt + pt y H + y F + tt + t ,
                                   Ht + b
                 pt c Ht + c Ft + b                                                                      (53)
                                                          t

where y H is home's endowment of the home good and y F is home's endowment of the
                                                                         - (1-  )
foreign good. All other objects are as in Section 2. We denote by qt  pt          the country's
real exchange rate, following the convention that high values correspond to depreciated
exchange rates. In this environment, home households' own a nontrivial share of the home
good and exhibit home bias in their preferences. Together, these two assumptions are
essential in generating the terms of trade management motive in our environment.
    Maximizing utility subject to budget constraint (53) yields the following Euler equation,

                                             ct          qt
                                                = rt -  + .                                              (54)
                                             ct          qt

    Home's total dollar expenditure is given by q- 1
                                                 t ct = pt c Ht + c Ft , which we denote, as
  43 The other two are the distributional motive of the model in Section 2 and the macroeconomic stabilization

motive of the model in Section 4.1.


                                                     63
before, by zt  q- 1
                t ct . The optimal demand for home and foreign goods is then

                                              pt c Ht = (1 - )zt                         (55)
                                                 c Ft = zt .

By symmetry, foreign's demand for home goods is

                                                          c
                                                 cHt = 
                                                           t
                                                                                         (56)
                                                          pt

where we assume foreign's consumption c t to be equal to 1.
   Replacing the household in Section 2 with the one specified here lets us set up the
planning problem analogously. We obtain that the per-period objective function of the
planner now takes the simple form

                            V (z) = log z - (1 - ) log ((1 - )z + )

and the two implementability conditions are given by

                                               zt    
                                                  = rt + t - 
                                               zt
                                     t                        1
                               e-   0 rs ds   (zt - 1) - y F + t2 dt = nfa0
                        0                                     
This is of the same form as the planning problem in Section 4.1: a strictly increasing and
concave objective function, an Euler equation, and a present value budget constraint that is
linear in zt ( is constant and equal to one). Thus, our results in Section 3 continue to hold
in this environment.


D.6    Learning
To investigate the effect of learning among intermediaries about profitable carry-trade
opportunities, we repeat the shock experiment of Section 3, assuming that  declines over
time, that is,
                                       t = 0 t/5
where we set  = 0.25. This corresponds to a fall in  by 75% every 5 years, or in other
words, the number of active intermediaries quadruples during the period of the shock. The
results of the experiment can be seen in Figure 12. The paths with and without learning
are relatively close overall. They are particularly close for the real exchange rate, which,
perhaps surprisingly, is achieved by a more backloaded path of interest rate spreads in the
case with learning. The reason for this apparent paradox is that smoothing spreads over
time becomes more desirable when  is low. Clearly, reserves also rise with a lower .
Overall, the qualitative and quantitative insights are preserved even if there is learning by


                                                     64
                                          Figure 12: The effect of learning.

                            Real exchange rate                                  World interest rate r 
               1%                                                   8%
               0%
              -1 %                                                  7%
              -2 %
              -3 %                                                  6%
              -4 %
              -5 %                                                  5%
                      0    2      4           6   8    10                 0     2      4           6   8   10
                                      years                                                years
                          Interest rate spread t                                    Reserves / GDP
              0.6 %                                               0.6 %

              0.4 %                                               0.4 %

              0.2 %                                               0.2 %

               0%                                                   0%
                      0    2      4           6   8    10                 0     2      4           6   8   10
                                      years                                                years
                      Net foreign assets (NFA) / GDP                          NFA excl. reserves / GDP
               0%                                                   0%
                                                                 -0.2 %
            -0.1 %
                                                                 -0.4 %
            -0.2 %
                                                                 -0.6 %
            -0.3 %                                               -0.8 %
                      0    2      4           6   8    10                 0     2      4           6   8   10
                                      years                                                years
                               No intervention           No learning                 Learning

 Note. This figure illustrates how optimal FX interventions change when intermediaries learn about the
interventions and the associated carry-trade opportunities over time, implying that  falls over time. The
black line shows an equilibrium without interventions. The green line shows optimal interventions with
 = 9. The red line shows the optimum where we assume an exponentially decaying t , falling from by
75% every five years. Intuitively, this corresponds to a scenario where the number of active intermediaries
quadruples during the period of the shock.




                                                            65
intermediaries.


E     Proofs for Section 5
E.1     Proof of Proposition 8
Auxiliary computations. Solving the two constraints of the planning problem (35), we
derive the implied expenditures given  and r 

                                                     1       1                  1    1
                               z0 (  , r  ) =                            0 +        - 2                       (57)
                                                1 +  (1 +  )                   1+r   
                                             (1 +  )(1 + r  ) 1                  1    1
                           z1 (  , r  ) =                                 0 +        - 2 .                    (58)
                                              1 +  (1 +  )                      1+r   
                                                                                                          (1- µ )
where we defined  , 0 such that                      
                                                    1-  p ( z t ) y N   - y Tt + c =  zt - t , i.e.     1-  (1-  )
                                                                                                                   ,
                    (y Tt -µc)
t = y Tt - c -      1-  (1-  )
                               .      This lets us define the indirect utility function as

                                    V ( , r  )  V0 (z0 ( , r  )) + V1 (z1 ( , r  )).

The optimal choice of  has to satisfy the necessary first order condition

                                     V ( , r  ) = V0 (z0 )z0 + V1 (z1 )z1 = 0.

Rearranging, we can express this as

                                                    V1 (z1 )z1 - V0 (z0 )z0 (1 +  )
                              (1 +  ) =                                                                       (59)
                                                2 V1 (z1 ) (1 +  )(1 + r  ) + V0 (z0 )

Strategic complementarity. We prove that sign( ) = sign(1 - (1 + r  ) ). The result for
  follows from the fact that for  > 0,
bG
                                                 
                                                bG = nfa + bH + b It > 0                                      (60)
                                                           0              >0

as in Appendix C.1. Analogously for  < 0, bG    < 0.

    In this part and the next, we focus on the case 0 = 1 . We can thus drop the subindex
"t" on Vt (z) without risk of confusion. Consider the case (1 + r  ) > 1 and suppose   0.
This immediately implies z1 > z0 . Since V (z)z is decreasing in z,44

                                     V ( z1 ) z1 < V ( z0 ) z0  V ( z0 ) z0 (1 +  ).
                          d log(V (z)z)
  44 This   holds since       d log z     = 1 + zV (z)
                                                 V (z)
                                                       < 0 because of the assumption µc > y T .




                                                                66
Equation (59) then implies  < 0, a contradiction. Hence,  < 0. Using analogous
arguments one can establish that (1 + r  ) < 1 and (1 + r  ) = 1 imply  > 0 and  = 0,
respectively, completing the proof.

Negative externality. To see when changes in r  could actually hurt a country, we com-
pute the derivative of the indirect utility V with respect to 1 + r  . After some algebra, we
find45
                  V             dV (z0 )                               
                                                      V ( z1 ) z1 (r )
                          =-                   (1 + r )                   -1 .            (61)
                (1 + r  )      d (1 + r  )              V ( z0 ) z0 (r  )
                                                       V
The first interesting observation is that             (1+r  )
                                                                = 0 if and only if r  = -1 - 1. At that
                                                                        V (z )   z1 (r  )
point, when r  moves slightly, the term B  (1 + r  ) V (z1 )                     z0 (r  )
                                                                                            changes as follows
                                                         0
(after some algebra),
                               d log B
                                         |  -1 = 2 -  V
                           d log(1 + r  ) r =  -1
                -V ( z ) z                                                                                V
where V          V (z)
                           .   This term is negative if and only if V > 2, which implies                 (1+r  )
changes     sign at r  =
                    -1 - 1, from positive to negative. Thus, V has a local maximum at
                                                                                     V
r  = -1 - 1, implying that changes in interest rates decrease welfare. Conversely, (1+ r )
has a local minimum if and only if V < 2. This concludes this proof.

Unique Nash equilibrium. In this section we assume 0  1 (i.e. y T0  y T1 ). A Nash
equilibrium requires two conditions to be satisfied. First,  must be chosen optimality, as
in (59). Second, as all countries are symmetric, none is running a current account deficit or
surplus. Thus,


                                                        1     1
                                         z0 (  , r  ) =    0 -  2                                          (62)
                                                              
                                                        1
                                         z 1 (  , r  ) = 1                                                 (63)
                                                        

From (62) and (63), the world interest rate is pinned down by

                                              1     z1       1       1
                                 1 + r =               =               1 2
                                                                           .                               (64)
                                            (1 +  ) z0    ( 1 +  ) 0 -  

We can substitute out (64) in (59) to obtain

                               V1 (z1 )z1 - V0 (z0 )z0 (1 +  )      12
                                                               z0 =     (1 +  ).                           (65)
                                   V1 (z1 )z1 + V0 (z0 )z0          
  45 We   omit the  dependence as this exercise assumes  = 0 for the home country.



                                                          67
In this equation,  is strictly increasing as a function of z0 ,46 with  = 0 if z0 = z1 .
We thus have a system of two equations, (62) and (65), and two unknowns,  and z0 .
(62) describes a decreasing relationship between z0 and  as long as   0 (which was
assumed). Moreover, reusing the notation from Appendix B.2, an increase in y Tt always
                     A0        B0          C0                                    V1
reduces Vt (z) =     z    +   z- B1   -   z-C1   since up to a positive factor   yT   is equal to

                          - B1 B0 ((z - B1 ) + ( B1 - c1 ))2 + C1 C0 (z - B1 )2

which is strictly negative for any z > B1 because

                                                           C1
                                                 B1 B0 >      > C1 C0 .
                                                           C0

Taken together, there exists a unique solution ( , z0 ) to the system of equations (62) and
(65), and, hence, a unique Nash equilibrium.

Other results. The logic in the preceding paragraph establishes that, when 1 < 0 , the
interest rate spread  is strictly positive in the Nash equilibrium. Applying (60) implies that
  > 0 in equilibrium, but since nfa = 0 due to symmetry, this can only work if there are
bG
private inflows, b H + b It > 0. Finally, all countries' welfare is lower, as is immediate from
(62), the only difference between the Nash equilibrium allocation and a  = 0 allocation is
that z0 is lower, reducing welfare. Since  = 0, intermediaries make profits in the Nash
equilibrium allocation, while they do not when  = 0.


E.2     Proof of Proposition 9
If central banks cooperate, the maximize V0 (z0 ) + V1 (z1 ) subject to (62) and (63). Per our
discussion in the previous paragraph, this must imply optimality of  = 0.




  46 This
        follows from the implicit function theorem as the left hand side strictly increases in z0 and decreases
in  while the right hand side strictly increases in  .


                                                           68
