                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   NUDGING TIMELY WAGE REPORTING:
                     FIELD EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE
     FROM THE UNITED STATES SOCIAL SUPPLEMENTARY INCOME PROGRAM

                                        C. Yiwei Zhang
                                       Jeffrey Hemmeter
                                        Judd B. Kessler
                                       Robert D. Metcalfe
                                        Robert Weathers

                                      Working Paper 27875
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27875


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2020




We thank Maya Shankar and the White House Social and Behavioral Sciences Team and the U.S.
General Services Administration Office of Evaluation Sciences for their support of this project.
The opinions, conclusions, and errors in this paper are the sole responsibility of the authors, and
do not represent the social views of the Social Security Administration, the University of
Pennsylvania, Boston University, the National Bureau of Economic Research, or the University
of Wisconsin-Madison and do not assume endorsement by the Federal Government. The
experiment in this study is registered at the AEA's Social Science Registry (RCT ID
AEARCTR-0005351, available at http://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/5351).

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by C. Yiwei Zhang, Jeffrey Hemmeter, Judd B. Kessler, Robert D. Metcalfe, and Robert
Weathers. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Nudging Timely Wage Reporting: Field Experimental Evidence from the United States Social
Supplementary Income Program
C. Yiwei Zhang, Jeffrey Hemmeter, Judd B. Kessler, Robert D. Metcalfe, and Robert Weathers
NBER Working Paper No. 27875
September 2020
JEL No. D04,H2

                                           ABSTRACT

We study a large-scale (n=50,000) natural field experiment implemented by the U.S. Social
Security Administration that was aimed at increasing the timely and accurate self-reporting of
wages by Supplemental Security Income (SSI) recipients. Sending a letter reminding SSI
recipients of their wage reporting responsibilities significantly increased both the likelihood of
reporting any earnings and the total amount of earnings reported, though this effect decays
slightly over time. However, the specific letter content--providing social information or
highlighting the salience of penalties--had no systematic effect. We develop a conservative
estimate that the letters generated roughly $5.91 in savings on average per dollar spent for the
U.S. government.

C. Yiwei Zhang                                    Robert D. Metcalfe
University of Wisconsin-Madison                   Questrom School of Business
1300 Linden Drive                                 Boston University
Madison, WI 53711                                 595 Commonwealth Avenue
cyzhang@wisc.edu                                  Boston, MA 02215
                                                  and NBER
Jeffrey Hemmeter                                  rdmet@bu.edu
Office of Research, Demonstration,
and Employment                                    Robert Weathers
Social Security Administration                    Social Security Administration
4303 Annex Bldg                                   Robert.Weathers@ssa.gov
6401 Security Blvd
Baltimore, MD 21235
jeffrey.hemmeter@ssa.gov

Judd B. Kessler
The Wharton School University
of Pennsylvania 3620 Locust
Walk Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
judd.kessler@wharton.upenn.edu



A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
http://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/5351
1       Introduction

Federal means-tested programs provide assistance to individuals with relatively low income and few assets,

accounting for over $689 billion in federal spending in 2015 (Congressional Budget Office 2017). In instances

where cash assistance or in-kind transfers are provided on a recurring basis, these programs regularly rely

on the accurate and timely self-reporting of any changes in income or other resources to ensure that benefit

payments are appropriately determined and disbursed. Inaccurate and untimely reporting by beneficiaries

presents a significant and ongoing policy challenge. For the Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program, the

largest means-tested cash assistance program in the United States, improper benefit overpayments totaled

over $3.4 billion in fiscal year 2015 alone (Social Security Administration 2016).1

    In recent years, the U.S. federal government has noted the need to reduce improper payments among

agencies, particularly those that they consider to be of high-priority, such as the SSI program.2 Much

of this need stems from the high costs associated with improper payments. For the SSI program, the

costs of improper payments include not just the societal costs from overpayments and underpayments to

recipients but also the burden placed on agency employees to identify accurate information on wages and

resources for non-reporting recipients and to recover overpayments. Inaccurate reporting can pose serious

consequences for recipients as well. In addition to potential reductions in future benefit payments once an

overpayment has been discovered, SSI recipients may face steep financial penalties if found to have knowingly

withheld information. In the event of a failure to repay the overpayment, an SSI recipient may be referred

to a collections agency or have their tax refund, wages, or other benefits garnished. Additionally, once an

improper payment related to earnings is discovered, the administrative process used for correcting it (e.g.,

paying back an overpayment months later) may dissuade an otherwise-capable individual from continuing

their employment.

    Economic models have typically considered how traditional policy tools such as financial incentives might

motivate compliance (see Slemrod 2019). Yet misreporting persists despite the presence of financial penalties

for non-compliance, with wage misreporting being the second leading cause of SSI overpayments during the

fiscal years 2014 through 2018 period.3 In the face of these challenges, there is a growing interest in leveraging
1 The  Office of Management and Budget (OMB) defines an improper payment as any payment that should not have been made
  or that was made in an incorrect amount under statutory, contractual, administrative, or other legally applicable requirements,
  including payments with insufficient documentation to determine if the payment was proper. Based on guidance from the
  OMB, any program with $750 million in improper payments is considered a high-priority program.
2 The Improper Payments Information Act of 2002, as amended by the Improper Payments Elimination and Recovery Act of

  2010 and the Improper Payments Elimination and Recovery Improvement Act of 2012, requires agencies to periodically review
  all programs and activities and identify those that may be susceptible to significant improper payments. For those programs
  and activities identified as susceptible to significant improper payments, agencies must estimate the amount of improper
  payments and annually report this information along with details on their efforts to monitor and minimize improper payments.
  For reference, see https://paymentaccuracy.gov, a site established by the OMB to provide information on government-wide
  improper payments as well as the efforts undertaken to prevent and recover improper payments.
3 See https://www.ssa.gov/improperpayments/SSI majorCauses.html for information on the leading causes of SSI overpayments.




                                                               1
insights from psychology and behavioral economics to conduct low-cost, quantifiable interventions aimed

at "nudging" individual behavior without restricting choice or significantly changing economic incentives

(Thaler and Sunstein 2008).4

    In this paper, we report findings from a large-scale, randomized field experiment designed and imple-

mented by the U.S. Social Security Administration (SSA) to study how such behavioral nudges might en-

courage the more accurate and timely reporting of changes in wages for the SSI program.5 Specifically, the

SSA mailed SSI recipients wage reporting reminder letters (with a control group that received no letter)

that varied in their inclusion of simple language, providing either 1) simple information about reporting

(included on all letters), 2) social information on reporting behavior, 3) information increasing the saliency

of the penalties for non-compliance, or 4) both social information and information on penalties. The SSI pro-

gram provides a particularly useful setting for studying how such behavioral nudges might improve reporting

compliance among beneficiaries of means-tested programs.6

    We find that nudging SSI recipients with a letter reminding them of their wage reporting responsibility

significantly increased both the likelihood of reporting any countable earned income and the total amount

reported in the three months immediately following the mailing of the letter relative to the reporting behavior

of SSI recipients who did not receive a letter.7 We observe only mild post-intervention persistence, however:

the immediate relative effect of the letter decays somewhat over time. This decay appears to be in part

driven by the control group of SSI recipients (i.e., those who did not receive a letter) eventually having

wages on their records by the end of our observation period, albeit at a delay relative to the recipients who

did receive a letter. One possible motivation for the convergence of the control group that we observe is

that the SSA eventually receives and verifies earnings reports from various sources to identify unreported

wages. SSI recipients who are aware of this reconciliation procedure may be motivated to report earnings.

Looking over the full calendar year, SSI recipients who received a letter were on average 0.34 percentage

points (p < 0.10) more likely to have reported any earnings for the year. This represents an 11.1 percent

increase relative to the control group mean. When we turn to the specific language surrounding the nudge,

we find no differential effect on the likelihood of reporting any earnings from the inclusion of behaviorally-

motivated messaging in the letter. That is, receiving a reminder letter increased wage reporting behavior on
4 See  Benartzi et al. (2017) for an overview of some key empirical studies on "nudge" interventions in policy settings and the
  important cost considerations necessary for evaluating the effectiveness of such interventions.
5 Previous research has shown how the SSI affects people's labor supply decisions (Deshpande 2016; Kaushal 2010; Neumark

  and Powers 2000) and financial wellbeing (Deshpande et al. 2019)
6 Given the complex rules surrounding the SSI program, both eligibility and benefit payment amounts are highly sensitive to

  fluctuations in income or resources, so the potential for even small shifts in behavior from a nudge to be cost-effective is quite
  high.
7 We also provide evidence that this effect reflects a change in wage reporting behavior to the SSA, not a change in actual labor

  supply or earned income. In particular, in Appendix Table A.5, we show that the treatment had no effect on the likelihood
  of being employed, the dollar amount of W2 earnings, or the number of employers as measured by SSA data sourced from
  end-of-year tax returns.



                                                                 2
the extensive margin regardless of the specific behavioral framing that may have also been included in the

letter.

    Taken together, these findings suggest that a letter reminding SSI recipients of their wage reporting

responsibilities can meaningfully influence behavior by either accelerating the timing of wage reporting

relative to when wages would have otherwise been reported or inducing individuals who would have never

reported wages to do so. Our intervention both lowered the incidence of overpayments and also reduced

the significant costs to the SSA associated with reconciling reported and actual earnings information. This

result of accelerating yield from non-pecuniary interventions is related to the experiments encouraging tax

compliance in Hallsworth et al. (2017).

    We assess the effectiveness of the reminder letters by comparing the direct financial costs associated with

sending the reminders with the costs that the SSA would have otherwise incurred for SSI recipients who failed

to report their earnings in an accurate and timely manner. Using this approach, we develop a conservative

estimate that the letters generated roughly $5.91 in savings on average per dollar spent for the SSA. While

not a full social welfare evaluation, this estimate serves as a useful benchmark of the cost effectiveness of the

reminder letters and suggests that not only did the reminder letters meaningfully motivate behavior, but

they did so at a cost savings to the SSA.

    Our paper highlights the importance of measuring experimental outcomes over longer time horizons,

particularly in settings where external factors may influence the persistence of observed effects. While the

appropriate time horizon will vary by context, this need for longer-term observation may be especially relevant

for policy settings where the timing of reviews and other reconciliation activities can often coincide with the

end of the tax or financial year. These results speak to the growing literature examining the long-run effects

of nudges, which is becoming an important part of the overall cost-benefit analysis of such interventions

(Allcott and Rogers 2014; Brandon et al. 2017; Choukhmane 2019; Frey and Rogers 2014; Rogers and Frey

2015).

    Our paper also contributes to the broader literature on the design and use of information and nudges

as new policy tools available to policymakers (e.g., Alm 2019; Bhargava and Manoli 2015; Chetty 2015;

Dwenger et al. 2016; Luttmer and Singhal 2014; Perez-Truglia and Troiano 2018) and in particular, to the

important behavioral literature demonstrating the value of reminders in motivating behavior (Busso et al.

2015; Chirico et al. 2019; Damgaard and Gravert 2018; Hallsworth et al. 2017; Karlan et al. 2016a, 2016b;

Milkman et al. 2011). As policymakers increasingly experiment with nudges, they will need to gather more

evidence about the long-run effects of these interventions on individual behavior as well as their relative

cost-effectiveness (Benartzi et al. 2017).

    The paper proceeds as follows. The next section provides additional background on the institutional


                                                       3
setting. We then describe our data and empirical design and present our main results of how the experiment

influenced wage reporting behavior. Finally, we discuss the implications of our findings, including the relative

cost-effectiveness of our behavioral intervention, and conclude.


2      Institutional Background and Motivation

2.1    Background on the SSI Program

The SSI program was established in 1972 and is the largest means-tested cash assistance program in the

United States, providing income support to needy blind, disabled, or aged individuals. Administered by the

SSA, the program distributed nearly 55 billion dollars to over 9 million eligible recipients in 2015 (Social

Security Administration 2017).

      The SSI program disburses federal benefit payments to eligible recipients on a monthly basis. In addition

to the benefit payments provided under the federal program, most states also offer supplementary payments.8

Both eligibility and monthly benefit amounts take into account a recipient's countable financial resources and

countable income--resources and income minus any applicable exclusions--as well as a set of age, disability

status, and residency requirements.9 To be considered eligible, individuals face an asset limit of $2,000, while

couples face an asset limit of $3,000 (figures reflect 2015 unless otherwise stated).10 Those who are deemed

eligible can then receive up to a maximum federal benefit of $733 per month for an individual and $1,100

per month for a couple. The first $20 of monthly unearned income from nearly any source and the first

$65 of monthly earned income plus one-half remaining earnings are excluded from an individual's countable

income. Any residual amount from the $20 income exclusion applied to unearned income is applied to earned

income instead.11

      Under the SSI program, recipients are required to report to SSA any factors or changes in circumstances

that could affect their eligibility in the program or the amount of their monthly payment. Failure to report

these changes in circumstances as they arise can result in improper payments to recipients who are either

no longer eligible to receive benefits or receive benefits in excess of their eligibility. While the overall rate of
8 From  SSA records in December 2015, approximately 1.53 million SSI recipients received a federally-administered supplementary
  payment from their state, with the average state supplementation being $141.80; SSA does not track state-administered
  supplemental payments (Social Security Administration 2016).
9 Eligibility and payment levels also depend on spousal or parental (for children) earnings and on living arrangements, specifically

  whether the individual or couple lives in their own household, in another's household, or in a Medicaid facility.
10 Countable resources are generally defined as "cash or other liquid assets or any real or personal property that individuals (or

   their spouses) own and could convert to cash to be used for their support and maintenance" (Social Security Administration
   2017). Exclusions to these asset limits include, but are not limited to, the value of a recipient's home, a vehicle used for
   transportation, and any household goods and personal effects. See Social Security Administration (2017) for additional details
   on resource exclusions.
11 For example, an individual with wages of $535 per month and no other sources of income would have $225 in countable

   income (wages minus $85 in income exclusions, reduced by half). The maximum federal benefit of $733 per month is then
   reduced by her countable income, giving her $508 per month in SSI benefits.




                                                                 4
payment errors is low, given the size of the SSI program and the significant dollar amounts associated with

payments, even a small percentage of payment errors can add up to significant program costs.12 SSA's 2016

Agency Financial Report estimates that SSI payment errors resulted in over $3.4 billion in overpayments in

the 2015 fiscal year, which translates to roughly 6 percent of total outlays for the program (Social Security

Administration 2016).


2.2      Wage Reporting

A major cause of improper payments in the SSI program is recipients' failure to report specifically new or

increased wages in an accurate and timely manner. To initially report wages or other earnings information, an

SSI recipient can contact an SSA teleservice center or report directly to an SSA Field office.13 After initially

self-reporting wages, most SSI recipients can then enroll in one of two services--an automated telephone

wage reporting service or a free mobile wage reporting smartphone application--to regularly report monthly

wages that will affect their SSI payment amount.14

      In the absence of self-reporting, an SSI recipient's wages must be determined by the SSA through other

means. For SSI recipients who receive (but do not report) a monthly wage, the SSA uses data matches with

either quarterly earnings data from the Office of Child Support Enforcement (OCSE) or annual earnings

data from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to generate leads on possible wage activity. While the SSA

can identify unreported wages using these two sources of data, it can generally only do so at a considerable

delay from when the overpayment was made. This delay is a result of both the time it takes for earnings data

from the OCSE or IRS data to be transmitted to the SSA (at which point an earnings alert is issued) and

the time it takes for an SSA employee to fully develop and process the case before the wages can be posted

to the SSA's primary administrative data file used for determining payment amounts. This latter task of

identifying accurate wage information is especially time-consuming and places a considerable burden on SSA

employees that are involved. SSA employees must contact the SSI recipient and obtain primary evidence

on monthly earnings paid to them for their work activity--a process that may entail several attempts to

contact the recipient, waiting for the recipient to submit primary evidence, identifying whether the recipient

is eligible for work incentives, and due process notification.
12 The  actual rate of overpayment errors in FY2015 was just 6.06 percent, although this rate did exceed the reduction target
   rate of 5 percent (Social Security Administration 2016).
13 As of 2016, there were over 1300 SSA Field Offices in the United States. SSI recipients are able to report wages to a Field

   Office either in-person, by telephone, by mail, or by fax.
14 Presently, SSI recipients are also able to report wage information through an online wage reporting tool, although that option

   was not yet available at the time of the experiment studied in this paper.




                                                               5
2.3    Motivation from Behavioral Research

Given the potential for even small improvements in timely reporting by SSI recipients to lead to substantial

savings, we study a large natural field experiment implemented and designed by the SSA to evaluate the

effectiveness of several behavioral nudges on wage reporting behavior by SSI recipients. There is a large lit-

erature in economics and psychology demonstrating that behavioral interventions can have significant effects

on human behavior. As a result, both the private and government sectors are exploring low-cost, quantifi-

able interventions that leverage insights from behavioral economics to address various policy challenges by

nudging individual behavior.

      The main intervention that we consider in this paper is a letter reminding SSI recipients of their wage

reporting responsibilities. This intervention draws on a rich behavioral literature demonstrating the value

of reminders in motivating individual behavior in a wide-range of contexts, including but not limited to

medical care (Busso et al. 2015; Milkman et al. 2011); financial behaviors (Karlan et al. 2016a, 2016b); tax

compliance (Chirico et al. 2019; Hallsworth et al. 2017); and charitable giving (Damgaard and Gravert 2018).

      In addition to exploring the effectiveness of reminders in nudging wage reporting, we investigate two

additional behavioral interventions that have been shown in prior research to significantly affect behavior:

a "social information" intervention and a "saliency of information" intervention. Social information inter-

ventions provide individuals with information about the actions or decisions of others. Across a variety of

domains, individuals have been shown to gravitate towards taking the same behavior that they observe oth-

ers take. Among many other applications: people are more likely to reduce environmentally harmful actions

when they learn others are conserving (Allcott 2011; Cialdini 2003; Cialdini et al. 1990; Dolan and Metcalfe

2015; Goldstein et al. 2008); college students are more likely to donate to charity when they observe others

donate (Frey and Meier 2004); recent graduates are more likely to take a teaching job when they observe

others have done the same (Coffman et al. 2017); citizens are more likely to vote when they learn that others

are voting (Gerber et al. 2008); and British residents are more likely to pay their taxes promptly when they

learn they are in the small minority that have not yet paid (Hallsworth et al. 2017).

      Alternatively, saliency of information interventions influence behavior by adjusting the attention paid

to provided information. For example, low-income individuals were more likely to report earnings allowing

them to take advantage of the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) when provided with information about

the program (Chetty and Saez 2013; Chetty et al. 2013; see also Bhargava and Manoli 2015). Similarly,

older Americans are more likely to work when they learn about social security (Liebman and Luttmer

2015), and unenrolled (but likely eligible) individuals are more likely to enroll in the Supplemental Nutrition

Assistance Program (SNAP) when provided information about their eligibility and how to apply (Finkelstein



                                                       6
and Notowidigdo 2019). Prior research has also shown that changes in the saliency of negative information,

such as the costs associated with an action, can influence the likelihood of engaging in that behavior. For

instance, making salient information about sales taxes leads individuals to spend less (Chetty et al. 2009)

whereas individuals drive more when road tolls are paid automatically, making the cost of the tolls less

salient (Finkelstein 2009).

      The combination of social norms with saliency of penalties has not been previously tested. Such a test on

the combination of two nudges relates to some of the earlier work on crowding-out effect of financial incentives

on behavior (see Gneezy et al. 2011). More recently, there is some evidence that financial incentives and

social norm information might separately affect the behavior of different types of people (List et al. 2017),

and the combination of different nudges might not crowd out each other (Brandon et al. 2019)

      With the above research in mind, the SSA designed and implemented an experiment in which they mailed

SSI recipients wage reporting reminder letters that varied in their inclusion of simple language, including

either no additional information (basic reminder) or noting other recipients' wage reporting behavior (social

information), the economic penalties associated with failing to report (saliency of information), or both.

By randomly mailing out these letters to SSI recipients, the experiment allows us to evaluate whether

reminders, and especially reminders that include such behavioral framing, are effective in nudging recipients

toward reporting wages. The two types of behavioral messaging we consider--social information and saliency

of information--are of particular interest in this policy setting because of their demonstrated efficacy in

nudging behavior, especially among low-income individuals, the population most likely to be targeted by

federal means-tested assistance programs like the SSI.


3      Materials and Methods

3.1    Data

The primary source of data used for this field experiment is the Supplemental Security Record (SSR) master

file, a confidential administrative data file containing the universe of SSI recipients. The SSR file provides

demographic information, including age, race, sex, state of residence, primary spoken language, and institu-

tionalization status, as well as program participation information, including time as recipient and whether

the recipient has a representative payee. The file also includes a detailed history of monthly benefit pay-

ments, beginning from the inception of the SSI program. Importantly, the SSR includes detailed information

on our main outcome of interest: the earned income for a recipient, including whether they reported any

countable earnings and the dollar amount of countable earnings reported.15
15 This   measure reflects only the recipient's earnings and does not include spousal or parental earnings.



                                                                 7
      Two important features of the data are worth noting. First, the extracts of the SSR we accessed were

updated on a monthly basis: an extract from a particular month provides a snapshot of the SSR data as

it exists near the end of that month. As a result, we are able to observe any changes in reported earnings

information, our main outcome of interest, on a monthly basis. Second, SSI recipients are generally able

to report changes in their earnings information not only for the current month but both prospectively and

retroactively as well. For instance, an SSI recipient could revise their earnings information for the two months

prior, even if they've already received SSI payments for those past two months. Thus, any observed response

to the interventions in this experiment could be driven by changes in reported past or future earnings. We

discuss the implications of these features of the data in greater detail in our discussion of the results.


3.2     Sample Selection

For the experiment, the SSA selected a sample of 50,000 individuals from a target population of a little

over 240,000 SSI recipients who met the following conditions in 2015. First, all individuals in the sample

were between 18 and 50 years of age (to increase the likelihood of earnings) with English as their primary

language. To ensure that mailings would be sent directly to the SSI recipient, SSA excluded individuals

who were either institutionalized or had a representative payee acting on their behalf. SSA further selected

individuals who were SSI recipients for less than 6 years as research indicates new recipients are more likely

to work than long-term recipients (Ben-Shalom and Stapleton 2015), who were currently receiving payments,

who were living in the 50 states or Washington, DC, and who had no countable earned income posted on

the SSR in the month the sample was selected.16 Since the proposed interventions were aimed at increasing

compliance in wage reporting, these restrictions allowed for a focus on a target population currently without

earnings but who were likely to experience changes in their earnings.

      After selecting the target population, the final sample of 50,000 recipients was selected based on an

internal scoring model developed by the SSA to prioritize recipients for annual "redetermination" of benefit

eligibility based on their likelihood of having had a change in circumstances that would affect their monthly

payment amount.17 To avoid the possibility of confounding effects from a scheduled redetermination, the

SSA excluded from the sample any individual whose predicted score led to being selected for redetermination

(about 2.8 million SSI recipients). The final sample consists of the 50,000 highest scoring individuals (i.e.,

those most likely to have had a change of circumstances affecting payment amount) of those not scheduled

for redetermination who met the target population selection requirements.

      Table 1 presents summary statistics and compares the characteristics of the universe of SSI recipients in
16 Most SSI recipients have zero earnings.
17 Aspart of a redetermination, the SSA reviews the income, resources, and living arrangements of a recipient to determine if
  they are still eligible for SSI and to confirm that they are receiving the correct payment amount.



                                                             8
current pay status as of March 2015 (the month prior to when the letters were mailed) to the characteristics

of the target population and experimental sample that we study. The differences between the two groups

are largely as would be expected given the selection criteria. The experimental sample is younger, has

received SSI benefits for fewer years on average, and is more likely to be classified by the SSA as a case

where a medical improvement is eventually expected in comparison to the full universe of SSI recipients.

The experimental sample also did not have any reported earnings in the past year, as expected from the

sample selection criteria, although generally only a small fraction of SSI recipients (only 2.54 percent of the

full universe of recipients in current payment status at the time of selection) ever have any earnings in the

past year posted in the SSR. Additional detail on the state or territory of residence and disability type for

recipients can be found in Appendix Table A.1. In general, the experimental sample is more similar to the

target population than the universe of working age SSI recipients, although there are differences (comparison

available upon request).


3.3   Experimental Design

From the experimental sample of 50,000 SSI recipients, individuals were randomly assigned to one of five

groups:


  1. Basic Intervention --a group that was sent a form letter reminding them of the need to report any

      information about earnings that might affect SSI payment amounts without our behavioral framing;

  2. Social Information Intervention --­a group that was sent a form letter identical to that of the "Ba-

      sic Intervention" group but included additional information on the overall reporting behavior of SSI

      recipients ("Over 200,000 persons who receive SSI report new wages to us each month.");

  3. Salience of Penalties Intervention --­a group that was sent a form letter identical to that of the "Basic

      Intervention" group but included additional information on the possible financial penalties that could

      be incurred if wages are unreported ("If you do not report your wages to us on purpose, we can stop

      your SSI payments.");

  4. Both Interventions ­--a group that was sent a form letter identical to that of the "Basic Intervention"

      group but both contained peer information and made salient the potential financial penalties from

      failure to report ("Over 200,000 persons who receive SSI report new wages to us each month. If you

      do not report your wages to us on purpose, we can stop your SSI payments."); and

  5. Control --­a group that was not sent a letter and therefore served as a control condition.



                                                      9
     Recipients in the first four groups received a direct mailing that reminded them to report any information

about earnings that might affect SSI payment amounts. As Figure 1 shows, the four experimental mailings

were identical to one another except that the latter three included additional language that provided either

social information, information increasing the salience of the penalties, or both. All letters were mailed out

on April 15, 2015 to the recipients within the experimental sample. Balance tests were implemented to

ensure that the five randomized groups were similar across observable characteristics, including age, years

on SSI, gender, reported disability type, race or ethnicity, and state or territory of residence. Table 2 shows

that there is no significant effect of being assigned to receive a letter on wage reporting as observed prior to

the intervention.18

     As an additional test of randomization, we use extracts of the SSR data from prior to the intervention

and examine whether being assigned to receive a letter has any effect on either the likelihood of reporting

earnings or the amount of earnings reported for the months before the intervention. This serves as a useful

check of our randomization procedure, since being randomly assigned to receive a letter in April 2015 should

have no effect on whether--as of March 2015--you have reported earning any income during the three months

before the intervention (January 2015 to March 2015).


4       Results

We are primarily interested in the effect of receiving a reminder letter from the SSA on wage reporting

behavior as well as any differential effect by the type of behavioral framing used. In particular, we examine

the likelihood that the recipient reported any (countable) earned income and the total amount reported over

varying time horizons.

     As previously mentioned, there are two features of the data that have important implications for our

discussion of the results. First, extracts of the data are created on a monthly basis so that an extract from a

particular month provides a snapshot of the SSR data as it exists near the end of that month. Second, SSI

recipients are able to report changes in their earnings information both prospectively and retroactively. In

other words, every month represents a new opportunity for recipients to update their past or future earnings

information in the data. For this reason, whenever we present the effect of the letters on reporting behavior,

we must report the results: 1) for a particular extract of the SSR data from a given point in time (e.g., from

the July 2015 extract) and 2) for income earned within a particular time horizon (e.g., income earned during

the three months post-intervention). Reporting the results in this way will allow us to observe all potential
18 Of   the 96 pre-treatment characteristics that we observe, only 9 were determined to be significantly different across treatment
    and control groups. None of these differences were economically meaningful. Please see Table A.2 in the Appendix for the
    full balance table.




                                                                 10
changes in reported income induced by the letter.


4.1      Effects on the likelihood of reporting any countable earned income

Table 3 reports estimates of the effect of receiving the letter on the likelihood of reporting any countable

earnings. Each panel represents estimates using a snapshot of the SSR data from a different point in time.

Each column is a separate OLS regression, with each pair of columns reporting the estimated effect (without

and with controls) of the reminder letters on the likelihood of reporting having earned any income during

the time horizon given in the heading of those two columns. The estimate reported for "Constant " gives the

baseline likelihood of reporting for the control group of SSI recipients who did not receive any letter, and

the estimate reported for the indicator "Received Letter " represents the relative effect of having received any

of the four versions of the letter on the likelihood of reporting. Columns 1 and 2 of Panel A show that by

the end of April 2015 (approximately two weeks post-mailing), having received a letter is associated with a

moderately significant increase in the likelihood of reporting any countable earned income during the months

prior to and including the month of intervention. This result implies that receiving the letter induced treated

individuals to contact SSA to report earnings from those four months (January 2015 to April 2015). By the

end of July 2015 (Panel B), three months post-intervention, the estimated effect increases in both magnitude

and significance. Finally, by the end of the calendar year (Panel D), the effect has decayed somewhat and is

no longer significant.

      Columns 3 and 4 show a similar pattern for the likelihood of reporting earning any countable earned in-

come during the three months post-intervention (May 2015 to July 2015). By three months post-intervention

(Panel B), having received a letter is associated with a 0.34 percentage point increase (p < 0.01) in the like-

lihood of reporting earning any countable income during those three months (May 2015 to July 2015). This

represents a 35.1 percent increase in the likelihood of reporting over the mean likelihood of 0.97 percentage

points by SSI recipients in the control group.19 This effect also decreases in both magnitude and significance

by the calendar year end. Looking at how the baseline likelihood of reporting for the control group evolves

over time, it appears that the decay in the estimated treatment effect may be in part driven by the control

group eventually reporting countable earned income by the end of the calendar year--catching up to the

treatment groups--albeit at a delay relative to the SSI recipients who received a letter.

      Looking over the full calendar year, Columns 9 and 10 of Panel D report the estimated effect of receiving

a letter on the likelihood of reporting earning any income during 2015 by the end of that year. We find that

SSI recipients who received a letter were on average 0.33 percentage points (p < 0.10) more likely to have

reported any earnings for the year. This represents an 11.1 percent increase in the likelihood of reporting
19 The   control group mean is the constant from the regression without controls (Column 3 of Panel B in Table 3).



                                                              11
over the mean likelihood of 3.06 percent by recipients who did not receive a letter. Taken together, these

findings suggest that the reminder letters did meaningfully nudge SSI recipients to report changes in their

countable earned income. Much of the treatment effect came in the form of reporting countable earnings

earlier than they would have otherwise, although some of the effect appears to persist through the year end.

      Turning to the specific language of the letters, the bottom row of each panel in Table 3 reports results

from F-tests of whether there was a statistically significant effect of which behavioral framing recipients

received. The F-tests all have p > 0.1, demonstrating that we cannot reject the null that the content of the

letters had no effect on whether any countable earnings were reported. While there is clearly an effect of

receiving the reminder letter, the specific behavioral framing in the letter does not appear to have mattered.

It may be that any notification from SSA is taken very seriously by this population, given their reliance on

these benefits, or that the basic information included in all versions of the letter addressed behavioral biases;

however, it is not possible to disentangle the reason for no observed differential impacts with the current

data. Please see Table A.3 in the Appendix which presents the full results.


4.2     Effects on the total dollar amount of reported countable earnings

Table 4 reports estimates for the effect of receiving a letter on the dollar amount of reported countable

earnings. Each panel once again uses a snapshot of the SSR data from a different point in time. Each

column is a separate OLS regression, with each pair of columns reporting the estimated effect (without and

with controls) of the reminder letters on the total amount of income reported during the time horizon given

in the heading of the two columns. Reports of no earnings are included in the regressions as zeros. The

estimate reported for "Constant " gives the baseline amount of reported earnings for the control group of

SSI recipients who did not receive any letter, and the estimate reported for the indicator "Received Letter "

represents the estimated relative effect of having received any of the four versions of the letter on the amount

of reported earnings.

      We find similar patterns of behavior in Table 4 as were reported in Table 3. There is an initial significant

effect of the reminder letters. By July 2015, SSI recipients who received a letter have reported countable

income earned during the three months post-intervention (May 2015 to July 2015) that is $4.89 higher on

average (p < 0.01) than the average reported countable earnings of the control group (which were $8.88

during the same time horizon), representing a 55.1 percent increase in the amount of reported earnings.

As we observed with the extensive margin results, this immediate effect decreases in both magnitude and

significance by the calendar year end. Looking over the full calendar year (Columns 9 and 10 of Panel D), we

see no significant difference in the amount of countable earnings reported by whether SSI recipients received

a reminder letter.


                                                         12
      However, we do observe statistically significant differences in the total amount of reported countable

earnings for the full calendar year as a function of the behaviorally motivated language included in letter. As

with Table 3, the bottom row of each panel in Table 4 report results from F-tests of whether we can reject

that the content of the letters had no effect on how much countable earnings were reported. In contrast with

the findings on the likelihood of reporting any countable earnings, we find somewhat differential effects on

the amount of reported countable earnings depending on the behavioral framing in the letter, with F-test

p-values that range from 0.04 to 0.5 in Panel D of Table 4. Specifically, as Appendix Table A.4 shows,

receiving a letter with both social information and information increasing the salience of the penalties is

associated with approximately $21.27 higher reported countable earnings over the entire year relative the

baseline amount of reported countable earnings for the group that did not receive a letter.20


4.3      Labor supply effects

Our discussion thus far has interpreted the results as evidence of treatment effects on wage reporting behavior

rather than evidence of changes in the true earnings of SSI recipients. While this assumption is likely

reasonable given the nature of the behavioral nudges we study, we are also able to directly validate it by

examining whether the reminder letters had any effect on labor supply. To do so, we use administrative

data on annual (calendar year) earnings from the SSA Master Earnings File (MEF) after the conclusion of

2015. The MEF provides summary and detailed earnings data as reported on individuals' Form W-2 or 1040

Schedule SE forms (if the recipient is self-employed). Because these data are originally sourced from IRS

earnings records that are independent of self-reported earnings by SSI recipients, they allow us to distinguish

changes in reporting behavior from changes in actual earnings. Using this data, we find no significant effect

of receiving any of the letters on the likelihood of having been employed, the dollar amount of W2 earnings

reported, or the number of employers in the 2015 calendar year (see Appendix Table A.5). These findings

confirm that the results described above reflect changes in reporting behavior and not increases in overall

earnings or employment.


4.4      Cost-effectiveness analysis

We assess the effectiveness of these reminder letters by comparing the costs associated with the letters with

the costs that the SSA would have otherwise incurred for SSI recipients who failed to report their earnings

in an accurate and timely manner. That is, the counterfactual we consider when evaluating the effectiveness

of the reminder letters is the absence of any intervention (i.e., the way the SSA traditionally identifies and
20 This   estimate is constructed by adding the four individual coefficients reported in Column 10 of Panel D of Appendix Table
  A.4.




                                                               13
recovers overpayments; see Benartzi et al. 2017). Given that we find no differential effects by behavioral

framing on the extensive margin, we focus our assessment on the effectiveness of the reminder letters in

aggregate.

   The cost per recipient for each mailing includes $0.135 in printing costs and $0.435 in postage costs for

a total cost of $0.57 per recipient, or $22,800 for the costs of developing and mailing the letters for the

40,000 individuals (i.e., the implementation cost). We evaluate the cost-effectiveness of this intervention

by calculating our most conservative estimate of the benefits. To do this, we focus only on statistically

significant increases in aggregate income reported as of July 2015 for the months prior to and including

the month intervention as well as the three months post-intervention. By focusing only on this period, we

make the conservative assumption that the intervention had no positive differential effect on reported income

beyond the first three months.

   As of July 2015, our estimates imply that the intervention led SSI recipients who received a letter to

report an additional $10.76 in countable earned income. Of this increase, an estimated $5.87 (p < 0.01;

Column 2 of Panel B in Table 4) was for income earned during the three months leading up to and including

the month of the intervention and $4.89 (p < 0.01; Column 4 of Panel B in Table 4) was for income earned

during the 3 months after. The $5.87 increase in income earned during the three months prior to the

intervention represents a retrospective increase in reported earnings that were not likely reported in time to

avoid overpayment of SSI benefits. If we conservatively assume that all unreported earnings are eventually

discovered by the SSA, then our intervention merely accelerated the discovery of the overpayments and so

may not have generated meaningful savings. However, the additional $4.89 in income reported during the

three months post-intervention led to a contemporaneous reduction in payments. Even if the earnings were

later discovered by the SSA, the SSA would likely have recovered only part of these funds. A recent report by

the SSA estimates that about 69 percent of overpayments are never recovered (Social Security Administration

2019). Thus, by shifting the reporting of this income to occur as it was earned, our intervention saved the

SSA roughly $3.37 ($4.89 times 0.69) per recipient. Given the total cost of $0.57 per recipient to print and

mail the letters, our highly conservative estimate suggests that the letters generated approximately $5.91 in

savings on average per $1 spent by the SSA ($3.37/$0.57).

   This estimate is quite conservative and almost certainly underestimates the actual savings associated with

the reminder letters. For one, it assumes that any increase in reported earnings induced by the intervention

would have eventually been discovered by the SSA; if any of these reported earnings would not have been

discovered, then the letters would have saved the SSA even more in overpayments. It also assumes that the

differential treatment effect for individuals who were nudged into reporting their earnings disappeared fully

after July 2015--three months after the intervention--even though the effects of receiving a letter clearly


                                                     14
persist beyond this three-month window. Furthermore, the estimates above conservatively assume that, once

an overpayment has been made, when earnings are discovered does not matter. However, the SSA has a

higher recovery rate when earnings are discovered earlier, suggesting benefits from the $5.87 in countable

earnings reported in the months before the intervention. These calculations also do not account for the costs

associated with a scheduled redetermination that might be avoided due to these reports (approximately $200

on average; see Social Security Administration 2015). Taken together, our rough calculations suggest that

in addition to having a meaningful impact on wage reporting behavior among SSI recipients, the reminder

letters were also cost-effective as a behaviorally informed policy tool.

    One caveat to our assessment is that it is not a full social welfare evaluation of the reminder letters.

We do not consider any positive or negative utility associated with being nudged to report earnings or

directly imposed by the nudge itself (see Allcott and Kessler 2019; Butera et al. 2019). For instance, an SSI

recipient reminded of their responsibility to report may feel relieved to have avoided or minimized potential

overpayment or may feel anxious from realizing a failure to report past earnings. We also do not account for

any potential indirect costs that may have resulted from increases in the use of or reliance on other sources of

support, including other welfare programs, or from any increased burden on the agency. Rather, we focus our

attention on a comparison of the direct pecuniary costs and benefits associated with sending the reminder

letters and the direct pecuniary costs associated with the standard process for recovering overpayments.


5    Conclusion

There is a growing interest among policymakers and academics in leveraging insights from psychology and

behavioral economics to design nudges to encourage positive behavior, particularly in settings where tradi-

tional policy tools have not been fully effective. We examine the results of a large-scale, randomized field

experiment designed and implemented by the SSA. The experiment was aimed at encouraging the more ac-

curate and timely reporting of changes in wages for the SSI program, the largest means-tested cash assistance

program in the United States. The experimental sample included 50,000 individuals from a group of over

240,000 SSI recipients who met the inclusion criteria for the study, which targeted recipients without earnings

who were likely to have a change in earnings. Within this sample, recipients were randomly assigned to a

control group (n=10,000) and four separate treatment groups (n=10,000 per group), each of which received

a different reminder letter. The results of our study add to an important empirical literature highlighting

the potential of such interventions to improve outcomes in policy settings (Hallsworth et al. 2015; 2017).

    We find that receiving a letter, regardless of whether behaviorally-motivated language was included,

significantly increased the likelihood of reporting any countable earnings and the amount of earnings reported



                                                      15
in the three months immediately following the intervention. This effect decays slightly over time, decreasing

in both significance and magnitude by the year end, though it remains significant on the extensive margin.

    Our research design does not allow us to develop rigorous evidence on several important operational

considerations. For example, our research design does not allow us to estimate whether the notice might

have a larger impact if it is delivered at a different time during the calendar year. In addition, our research

design does not allow us to estimate whether sending out the notice on a frequent basis might also improve

wage reporting and, if so, the timing of the additional notice relative to the previous notice to maximize

the return on investment. Finally, while our research design provides rigorous results for our defined target

population, our estimate of the return on investment indicates that it might be worthwhile to test an

informational notice to a much broader group of SSI recipients.

    More generally, our approach of using a field experiment with granular individual data to test behavioral

interventions in policy making is in concordance with the recommendations of the recent U.S. Foundations

for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 2018 (Hahn 2019).21 We hope that more behaviorally-informed

interventions and policies at both the federal and state levels are tested and optimized using natural field

experiments.
21 See   http://www.congress.gov/bill/115th-congress/house-bill/4174 for details on the bill.




                                                                16
References

Allcott, Hunt, "Social Norms and Energy Conservation," Journal of Public Economics, 2011, 95 (9-10),

  1082­1095.

   and Judd B. Kessler, "The Welfare Effects of Nudges: A Case Study of Energy Use Social Compar-

  isons," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2019, 11 (1), 236­276.

   and Todd Rogers, "The Short-run And Long-run Effects Of Behavioral Interventions: Experimental

  Evidence From Energy Conservation," American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (10), 3003­3037.

Alm, James, "What Motivates Tax Compliance," Journal of Economic Surveys, 2019, 33 (2), 351­726.

Ben-Shalom, Yonatan and David C. Stapleton, "Long-term Work Activity And Use Of Employment

  Supports Among New Supplemental Security Income Recipients," Social Security Bulletin, 2015, 75 (1),

  73­95.

Benartzi, Shlomo, John Beshears, Katherine L. Milkman, Cass R. Sunstein, Richard H. Thaler,

  Maya Shankar, Will Tucker-Ray, William J. Congdon, and Steven Galing, "Should Governments

  Invest More In Nudging?," Psychological Science, 2017, 28 (8), 1041­1055.

Bhargava, Saurabh and Dayanand Manoli, "Psychological Frictions And The Incomplete Take-up Of

  Social Benefits: Evidence From An IRS Field Experiment," American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (11),

  3489­3529.

Brandon, Alec, John A. List, Robert D. Metcalfe, Michael K. Price, and Florian Rundhammer,

  "Testing For Crowd Out In Social Nudges: Evidence From A Natural Field Experiment In The Market

  For Electricity," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2019, 116 (12), 5293­5298.

  , Paul J. Ferraro, John A. List, Robert D. Metcalfe, Michael K. Price, and Florian Rundham-

  mer, "Do The Effects of Social Nudges Persist? Theory and Evidence from 38 Natural Field Experiments,"

  2017. NBER Working Paper, No. 23277.

Busso, Matias, Julian Cristia, and Sarah Humpage, "Did You Get Your Shots? Experimental Evi-

  dence On The Role Of Reminders," Journal of Health Economics, 2015, 44, 226­237.

Butera, Luigi, Robert D. Metcalfe, William Morrison, and Dmitry Taubinsky, "The Deadweight

  Loss Of Social Recognition," 2019. NBER Working Paper, No. 25637.




                                                   17
Chetty, Raj, "Behavioral Economics And Public Policy: A Pragmatic Perspective," American Economic

  Review: Papers & Proceedings, 2015, 105 (5), 1­33.

  , Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft, "Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence," American Economic

  Review, 2009, 99 (4), 1145­1177.

   and Emmanuel Saez, "Teaching The Tax Code: Earnings Responses To An Experiment With EITC

  Recipients," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2013, 5 (1), 1­31.

  , John Friedman, and Emmanuel Saez, "Using Differences In Knowledge Across Neighborhoods To

  Uncover The Impacts Of The EITC On Earnings," American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (7), 2683­2721.

Chirico, Michael, Robert Inman, Charles Loeffler, John MacDonald, and Holger Sieg, "Deter-

  ring Tax Delinquency In Philadelphia: An Experimental Evaluation Of Nudge Strategies," National Tax

  Journal, 2019, 72 (3), 479­506.

Choukhmane, Taha, "Default Options And Retirement Saving Dynamics," 2019. Working Paper.

Cialdini, Robert B., "Crafting Normative Messages To Protect The Environment," Current Directions in

  Psychological Science, 2003, 12 (4), 105­109.

  , Raymond R. Reno, and Carl A. Kallgren, "A Focus Theory Of Normative Conduct: Recycling The

  Concept Of Norms To Reduce Littering In Public Places," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,

  1990, 58 (6), 1015­1026.

Coffman, Lucas C., Clayton R. Featherstone, and Judd B. Kessler, "Can Social Information Affect

  What Job You Choose And Keep?," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2017, 9 (1), 96­117.

Congressional Budget Office, "Federal Spending For Means-tested Programs, 2007 to 2027," 2017. CBO

  Publication No. 52405, Washington, D.C. Retrieved from https://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/ files/115th-

  congress-2017-2018/reports/52405-means-tested-programs.pdf .

Damgaard, Mette T. and Christina Gravert, "The Hidden Costs Of Nudging: Experimental Evidence

  From Reminders In Fundraising," Journal of Public Economics, 2018, 157, 15­26.

Deshpande, Manasi, "Does Welfare Inhibit Success? The Long-term Effects Of Removing Low-income

  Youth From The Disability Rolls," American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (11), 3300­3330.

  , Tal Gross, and Yalun Su, "Disability And Distress: The Effect Of Disability Programs On Financial

  Outcomes," 2019. NBER Working Paper, No. 25642.


                                                  18
Dolan, Paul and Robert D. Metcalfe, "Neighbors, Knowledge And Nuggets: Two Natural Field Experi-

  ments On The Role Of Incentives On Energy Conservation," 2015. Becker Friedman Institute for Research

  in Economics Working Paper, No. 2589269.

Dwenger, Nadja, Henrik Kleven, Imran Rasul, and Johannes Rincke, "Extrinsic And Intrinsic

  Motivations For Tax Compliance: Evidence From A Field Experiment In Germany," American Economic

  Journal: Applied Economics, 2016, 8 (3), 203­232.

Finkelstein, Amy, "E-Z TAX: Tax Salience and Tax Rates," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124

  (3), 969­1010.

  and Matthew J. Notowidigdo, "Take-up And Targeting: Experimental Evidence From SNAP," Quar-

  terly Journal of Economics, 2019, 134 (3), 1505­1556.

Frey, Bruno S. and Stephan Meier, "Social Comparisons And Pro-social Behavior: Testing "Conditional

  Cooperation" In A Field Experiment," American Economic Review, 2004, 94 (5), 1717­1722.

Frey, Erin and Todd Rogers, "Persistence: How Treatment Effects Persist After Interventions Stop,"

  Policy Insights from the Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 2014, 1 (1), 172­179.

Gerber, Alan S., Donald P. Green, and Christopher W. Larimer, "Social Pressure And Voter

  Turnout: Evidence From A Large-scale Field Experiment," American Political Science Review, 2008, 102

  (1), 33­48.

Gneezy, Uri, Stephan Meier, and Pedro Rey-Biel, "When And Why Incentives (Don't) Work To

  Modify Behavior," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2011, 25 (4), 191­210.

Goldstein, Noah J., Robert B. Cialdini, and Vladas Griskevicius, "A Room With A Viewpoint:

  Using Social Norms To Motivate Environmental Conservation In Hotels," Journal of Consumer Research,

  2008, 35 (3), 472­482.

Hahn, Robert, "Building Upon Foundations For Evidence-based Policy," Science, 2019, 364 (6440), 534­

  535.

Hallsworth, Michael, John A. List, Robert D. Metcalfe, and Ivo Vlaev, "The Making Of Homo

  Honoratus: From Omission To Commission," 2015. NBER Working Paper, No. 21210.

  ,      ,   , and   , "The Behavioralist As Tax Collector: Using Natural Field Experiments To Enhance

  Tax Compliance," Journal of Public Economics, 2017, 148, 14­31.



                                                   19
Karlan, Dean, Margaret McConnell, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Jonathan Zinman, "Getting To

  The Top Of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving," Management Science, 2016, 62 (12), 3393­3411.

  , Melanie Morten, and Jonathan Zinman, "A Personal Touch In Text Messaging Can Improve

  Microloan Repayment," Behavioral Science and Policy, 2016, 1 (2), 25­31.

Kaushal, Neeraj, "Elderly Immigrants' Labor Supply Response to Supplemental Security Income," Journal

  of Policy Analysis and Management, 2010, 29 (1), 137­162.

Liebman, Jeffrey B. and Erzo F. P. Luttmer, "Would People Behave Differently If They Better

  Understood Social Security? Evidence From A Field Experiment," American Economic Journal: Applied

  Economics, 2015, 7 (1), 275­299.

List, John A., Robert D. Metcalfe, Michael K. Price, and Florian Rundhammer, "Harnessing

  Policy Complementarities To Conserve Energy: Evidence From A Natural Field Experiment," 2017. NBER

  Working Paper, No. 23355.

Luttmer, Erzo F. P. and Monica Singhal, "Tax Morale," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2014, 28

  (4), 149­168.

Milkman, Katherine L., John Beshears, James J. Choice, David Laibson, and Brigitte C.

  Madrian, "Using Implementation Intentions Prompts To Enhance Influenza Vaccination Rates," Pro-

  ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2011, 108 (26), 10415­10420.

Neumark, David and Elizabeth Powers, "Welfare for the Elderly: the Effects of SSI on Preretirement

  Labor Supply," Journal of Public Economics, 2000, 78 (1-2), 51­80.

Perez-Truglia, Ricardo and Ugo Troiano, "Shaming Tax Delinquents," Journal of Public Economics,

  2018, 167, 120­137.

Rogers, Todd and Erin Frey, "Changing Behavior Beyond The Here And Now," in Gideon Keren and

  George Wu, eds., Blackwell Handbook of Judgement and Decision Making, Chichester, UK: John Wiley &

  Sons, 2015, pp. 725­748.

Slemrod, Joel, "Tax Compliance and Enforcement," Journal of Economic Literature, 2019, 57 (4), 904­954.

Social Security Administration, "Report On Supplemental Security Income Non-medical Redeter-

  minations, Fiscal Year 2011," 2015. Washington, D.C. Retrieved from https://www.ssa.gov/ legisla-

  tion/ACOSS Signed Senate Biden FY2011%20Redetermination%20Report%20-%20121715.pdf .



                                                   20
 ,   "Agency Financial Report,     Fiscal Year 2016,"    2016.     Washington,   D.C. Retrieved from

 https://www.ssa.gov/finance/2016/Full%20FY%202016%20AFR.pdf.

 , "SSI Annual Statistical Report, 2015," 2017. SSA Publication No. 13-11827, Washington, D.C. Retrieved

 from https://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/statcomps/ssi asr/2015/ssi asr15.pdf.

 , "Agency Annual Overpayment Waivers Report, Fiscal Year 2019," 2019.                  Retrieved from

 https://www.ssa.gov/legislation/Agency%20Annual%20Overpayment%20Waivers%20Report%202019.pdf.

Thaler, Richard H. and Cass R. Sunstein, Nudge: Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth And

 Happiness, Yale University Press, 2008.




                                                  21
Note.-- This figure shows the basic intervention mailing with no behavioral framing (top left), the social informa-
tion intervention mailing (top right), the salience of penalties intervention mailing (bottom left) and the mailing
with both social information and salience of penalties language (bottom right) used in the experiment. Additional
information on reporting responsibilities appeared on the back of the mailing and was identical across the four
mailings.

                                    Fig. 1.--Sample Form Letter Mailings




                                                        22
                                              TABLE 1
                                          Summary Statistics

                                                                         (1)                     (2)
                                                                     Universe of
                                                                                           Experimental
                                                                     Working Age
                                                                                             Sample
                                                                    SSI Recipients
                                             Panel A. Overall
 Reported Any Countable Earnings in the Past Year                          2.54                   0.00
 Amount of Countable Earnings Reported ($)                                 4.67                   0.00
 Time on SSI Program (Years)                                              12.53                   2.97
                                  Panel B. Demographic Information
 Age                                                                      51.58                  35.91
 Race
  Asian                                                                    2.63                  0.64
  Black                                                                   22.86                 17.62
  Hispanic                                                                 9.01                  4.38
  Native American or Alaskan Native                                        0.87                  0.62
  Other/Unknown                                                           25.62                 43.89
  White                                                                   39.01                 32.86
 Female                                                                   56.62                 52.13
 Has English As A Primary Language                                        82.58                100.00
                                    Panel C. Disability Information
 Has a Permanent Disability                                               33.18                  10.62
 Medical Diary Type
  Medical Improvement Expected (MIE)                                       2.46                   6.62
  Medical Improvement Possible (MIP)                                      64.36                  82.77
  Medical Improvement Not Expected (MINE)                                 33.18                  10.62
 Observations                                                          5,056,608               50,000
Note.--This table provides summary statistics for the universe of SSI adult (age 18-64) recipients receiving
benefits for a disability or blindness who were in current pay status in March 2015 (column 1) and the sub-
set of recipients in our experimental sample (column 2) based on data from the SSA Supplemental Security
Record. Panel A reports overview statistics, Panel B reports basic demographic information, and Panel C re-
ports details on disability status and medical diary type across each sample. All table entries represent group
means. The count of individuals in each group is listed in the final row.




                                                    23
                                                 TABLE 2
                                            Randomization Check
                               Reported Any Earnings                      Amount of Earnings Reported
                               (1)                    (2)                     (3)                    (4)
 Received Letter             0.0008                0.0008                   0.3112                 0.2921
                            (0.0006)              (0.0006)                 (0.2960)               (0.2958)
 Constant                    0.0020***            -0.0013                   0.7895***            -1.1022
                            (0.0005)              (0.0022)                 (0.2648)               (1.1406)
 R-squared                   0.000                  0.005                   0.000                  0.005
 Prob > F                    0.363                  0.368                   0.107                  0.106
 Controls                                            Yes                                            Yes
 Observations                50,000                 50,000                  50,000                 50,000
Note.--This table reports estimates of the aggregate effect of receiving a letter reminding SSI recipients of their
wage reporting responsibilities on the likelihood of reporting any countable earnings and the dollar amount of
countable earnings reported. Each column presents a separate regression. Columns 1 and 2 report estimates
where the dependent variable is an indicator for whether the recipient reported any countable earnings. Columns
3 and 4 report estimates where the dependent variable is the amount of countable earnings reported by the re-
cipient. The time horizon for the dependent variable in each column is the three months prior to the treatment
letters being mailed (January 2015 ­ March 2015). Each dependent variable is based on a three-month measure
of countable earnings created using monthly extracts of the SSR data for January, February, and March 2015.
Controls include age, gender, dummies for race/ethnicity, state or territory of residence, years on the SSI pro-
gram, an indicator for whether the recipient is permanently disabled, and indicators for the primary disability
diagnosis. Coefficients are reported for a "Received Letter" indicator denoting whether the recipient received a
letter (experimental mailing) from the SSA. The table also reports p-values from an F-test of whether there is
no differential effect of the behavioral framing. Significance levels 10%, 5%, and 1% are denoted by *, **, and
***, respectively




                                                        24
                                                                                       TABLE 3
                                                                            Reported Any Countable Earnings
                                  Jan to Apr 2015                     May to Jul 2015                    May to Oct 2015                     May to Dec 2015                     Jan to Dec 2015
                                 (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)              (7)               (8)               (9)              (10)
                                                                             Panel A. SSR Monthly Extract from April 2015
      Received Letter          0.0016**          0.0016*
                              (0.0008)          (0.0008)
      Constant                 0.0041***       -0.0073**
                              (0.0007)          (0.0032)
      R-squared                0.000             0.006
      Prob > F                 0.615             0.592
                                                                             Panel B. SSR Monthly Extract from July 2015
      Received Letter          0.0035***         0.0036***         0.0033***        0.0034***
                              (0.0012)          (0.0012)          (0.0012)         (0.0012)
      Constant                 0.0087***       -0.0110**           0.0097***       -0.0079*
                              (0.0011)          (0.0046)          (0.0011)         (0.0048)
      R-squared                0.000             0.009             0.000             0.009
      Prob > F                 0.930             0.904             0.916             0.905
                                                                            Panel C. SSR Monthly Extract from October 2015
      Received Letter          0.0017            0.0018            0.0027*          0.0028*            0.0029*         0.0030*
25




                              (0.0014)          (0.0013)          (0.0014)         (0.0014)           (0.0016)        (0.0016)
      Constant                 0.0135***       -0.0091*            0.0146***       -0.0054             0.0185***      -0.0076
                              (0.0012)          (0.0052)          (0.0013)         (0.0055)           (0.0014)        (0.0061)
      R-squared                0.000             0.011             0.000             0.012             0.000             0.014
      Prob > F                 0.322             0.257             0.518             0.456             0.484             0.420
                                                                           Panel D. SSR Monthly Extract from December 2015
      Received Letter          0.0014            0.0015            0.0022           0.0023             0.0023          0.0025             0.0025            0.0027            0.0032           0.0034*
                              (0.0015)          (0.0015)          (0.0016)         (0.0016)           (0.0018)        (0.0018)           (0.0018)          (0.0018)          (0.0020)         (0.0020)
      Constant                 0.0173***       -0.0116**           0.0183***       -0.0065             0.0245***      -0.0120*            0.0259***       -0.0102             0.0306***       -0.0160**
                              (0.0013)          (0.0058)          (0.0014)         (0.0060)           (0.0016)        (0.0069)           (0.0016)          (0.0071)          (0.0018)         (0.0077)
      R-squared                0.000             0.012             0.000             0.012             0.000             0.017            0.000             0.017             0.000             0.019
      Prob > F                 0.230             0.178             0.513             0.442             0.297             0.245            0.498             0.435             0.275             0.216
      Controls                                    Yes                                 Yes                                 Yes                                Yes                                 Yes
      Observations             50,000            50,000            50,000            50,000            50,000            50,000           50,000            50,000            50,000            50,000
     Note.--This table reports estimates of the aggregate effect of receiving a letter reminding SSI recipients of their wage reporting responsibilities on the likelihood of reporting any countable earn-
     ings. Each column presents a separate regression where the dependent variable is an indicator for whether the recipient reported any countable earnings. Controls include age, gender, dummies for
     race/ethnicity, state or territory of residence, years on the SSI program, an indicator for whether the recipient is permanently disabled, and indicators for the primary disability diagnosis. The time
     horizon for the dependent variable varies by column. Columns 1 and 2 report estimates where the time horizon for the dependent variable is the three months prior to and including the month when
     the treatment letters were mailed (i.e., whether any countable earnings were reported for January 2015 ­ April 2015); Columns 3 and 4 report estimates where the time horizon is the three months post
     treatment (May 2015 - July 2015); Columns 5 and 6 report estimates where the time horizon is the six months post treatment (May 2015 ­ Oct 2015); Columns 7 and 8 report estimates where the time
     horizon is post treatment through the year end (May 2015 ­ Dec 2015); and Columns 9 and 10 report estimates where the time horizon is the full calendar year for 2015. Each panel presents estimates
     using a different extract of the SSR as it existed at the end of the indicated month. For example, Panel A reports estimates using an extract of the SSR data as it existed at the end of April 2015.
     Coefficients are reported for a "Received Letter" indicator denoting whether the recipient received a letter (experimental mailing) from the SSA. The second row at the bottom of each panel reports
     p-values from an F-test of whether there is no differential effect of the behavioral framing. Significance levels 10%, 5%, and 1% are denoted by *, **, and ***, respectively.
                                                                                    TABLE 4
                                                                      Amount Of Countable Earnings Reported
                                   Jan to Apr 2015                     May to Jul 2015                     May to Oct 2015                      May to Dec 2015                      Jan to Dec 2015
                                  (1)               (2)               (3)                (4)               (5)               (6)               (7)               (8)               (9)               (10)
                                                                              Panel A. SSR Monthly Extract from April 2015
      Received Letter           1.9736*           1.9550*
                               (1.0792)          (1.0797)
      Constant                  2.6654***       -7.2321*
                               (0.9652)          (4.1633)
      R-squared                 0.000             0.003
      Prob > F                  0.278             0.285
                                                                              Panel B. SSR Monthly Extract from July 2015
      Received Letter           5.7075***        5.8674***          4.6924***        4.8852***
                               (1.6645)         (1.6644)           (1.7515)         (1.7500)
      Constant                  5.4218***      -11.0482*            8.8803***       -3.4242
                               (1.4887)         (6.4177)           (1.5666)         (6.7476)
      R-squared                 0.000             0.004             0.000             0.006
      Prob > F                  0.826             0.826             0.219             0.237
                                                                             Panel C. SSR Monthly Extract from October 2015
      Received Letter           4.2045**          4.3783**          2.5463            2.7410            3.3219            3.6771
26




                               (2.0730)          (2.0722)          (2.2868)          (2.2844)          (4.4857)          (4.4789)
      Constant                 10.8549***         2.1347           15.2602***         7.0529           34.3017***        16.4133
                               (1.8541)          (7.9901)          (2.0454)          (8.8083)          (4.0121)         (17.2701)
      R-squared                 0.000             0.004             0.000             0.006              0.000             0.0074
      Prob > F                  0.631             0.610             0.048             0.053              0.030             0.032
                                                                            Panel D. SSR Monthly Extract from December 2015
      Received Letter           4.0612*           4.2021*           2.7821            2.9653            3.2694            3.6181             2.7396            3.2123            6.8007            7.4144
                               (2.2235)          (2.2221)          (2.3815)          (2.3785)          (4.6433)          (4.6349)           (6.1286)          (6.1160)          (7.6379)          (7.6220)
      Constant                 13.8605***       -1.4013            17.3455***         5.3151           39.3275***        12.0838            55.0110***        16.1305           68.8715***        14.7291
                               (1.9888)          (8.5682)          (2.1300)          (9.1711)          (4.1531)         (17.8715)           (5.4816)         (23.5822)          (6.8315)         (29.3894)
      R-squared                 0.000             0.005             0.000             0.006              0.000             0.007             0.000             0.008             0.000              0.008
      Prob > F                  0.509             0.491             0.089             0.096              0.041             0.042             0.054             0.055             0.086              0.084
      Controls                                     Yes                                 Yes                                  Yes                                 Yes                                  Yes
      Observations              50,000            50,000            50,000            50,000             50,000            50,000            50,000            50,000            50,000             50,000
     Note.--This table reports estimates of the aggregate effect of receiving a letter reminding SSI recipients of their wage reporting responsibilities on the dollar amount of countable earnings reported.
     Each column presents a separate regression where the dependent variable is the amount of countable earnings reported by the recipient. Controls include age, gender, dummies for race/ethnicity, state
     or territory of residence, years on the SSI program, an indicator for whether the recipient is permanently disabled, and indicators for the primary disability diagnosis. The time horizon for the dependent
     variable varies by column. Columns 1 and 2 report estimates where the time horizon for the dependent variable is the three months prior to and including the month when the treatment letters were
     mailed (i.e., whether any countable earnings were reported for January 2015 ­ April 2015); Columns 3 and 4 report estimates where the time horizon is the three months post treatment (May 2015
     - July 2015); Columns 5 and 6 report estimates where the time horizon is the six months post treatment (May 2015 ­ Oct 2015); Columns 7 and 8 report estimates where the time horizon is post
     treatment through the year end (May 2015 ­ Dec 2015); and Columns 9 and 10 report estimates where the time horizon is the full calendar year for 2015. Each panel presents estimates using a different
     extract of the SSR data as it existed at the end of the indicated month. For example, Panel A reports estimates using an extract of the SSR data as it existed at the end of April 2015. Coefficients are
     reported for a "Received Letter" indicator denoting whether the recipient received a letter (experimental mailing) from the SSA. The second row at the bottom of each panel reports p-values from an
     F-test of whether there is no differential effect of the behavioral framing. Significance levels 10%, 5%, and 1% are denoted by *, **, and ***, respectively.
                      Nudging Timely Wage Reporting:
             Field Experimental Evidence from the United States
                    Social Supplementary Income Program

                                              Online Appendix

                     C. Yiwei Zhang               Jeffrey Hemmeter               Judd B. Kessler§
                               Robert D. Metcalfe¶                   Robert Weathers




 Corresponding    Author. University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1300 Linden Drive, Madison, WI 53706, USA, cyzhang@wisc.edu
 Office  of Research, Demonstration, and Employment Support, Social Security Administration, 6401 Security Boulevard,
  Baltimore, MD 21235, USA, jeffrey.hemmeter@ssa.gov
§ Business Economics and Public Policy Department, The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, 3733 Spruce Street,

  Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA, and NBER, judd.kessler@wharton.upenn.edu
¶ Markets, Public Policy & Law Department, Questrom School of Business, Boston University, 595 Commonwealth Avenue,

  Boston, MA, 02215, USA, and NBER, rdmet@bu.edu
  Office of Retirement and Disability Policy, Social Security Administration, 6401 Security Boulevard, Baltimore, MD 21235,
  USA, robert.weathers@ssa.gov
                                                                                APPENDIX TABLE A.1
                                                                             Additional Summary Statistics
                                                                              Panel A. State or Territory of Residence
                Universe of      Experimental                   Universe of       Experimental                Universe of      Experimental                 Universe of       Experimental
                Recipients         Sample                       Recipients          Sample                    Recipients         Sample                     Recipients          Sample
       AK           2.31               3.15           ID            3.44               3.55          MT           0.25               0.25           RI           0.44               0.41
       AL           0.17               0.11           IL            1.67               2.55          NC           0.37               0.55          SC            1.52               1.80
       AR           1.40               0.37           IN            0.66               0.80          ND           0.49               0.11          SD            0.18               0.19
       AZ           1.27               1.99           KS            0.62               0.93          NE           0.28               0.64          TN            2.51               3.10
       CA          14.08               1.47           KY            2.51               2.72          NH           2.10               1.69          TX            6.86               9.25
       CO           0.94               1.06           LA            2.22               3.07          NJ           0.79               0.89          UT            0.39               0.42
       CT           0.84               0.78           MA            0.55               0.69          NM           7.70               5.19          VA            0.23               0.26
       DC           0.20               0.23           MD            1.46               1.67          NV           2.91               3.77          VT            1.92               2.36
       DE           0.36               0.40           ME            2.48               2.76          NY           0.11               0.11          WA            2.02               2.51
       FL           5.52               5.99           MI            3.70               4.60          OH           4.26               5.54          WI            1.14               1.15
       GA           3.14               3.92           MN            1.20               1.32          OK           1.25               1.77          WV            1.48               1.83
       HI           0.32               0.05           MO            1.56               1.90          OR           1.12               1.31          WY            0.09               0.13
       IA           0.39               0.47           MS            1.92               3.03          PA           4.69               5.15          NMI           0.01
A-1




                                                                               Panel B. Primary Disability Diagnosis
                                                                Universe of       Experimental                                                              Universe of       Experimental
                                                                Recipients          Sample                                                                  Recipients          Sample
       Infectious and Parasitic                                     1.32               1.77          Circulatory System                                         5.66               4.29
       Neoplasms                                                    1.39               2.50          Respiratory System                                         2.41               2.07
       Endocrine                                                    3.08               2.95          Digestive System                                           1.06               1.89
       Blood                                                        0.28               0.77          Genitourinary System                                       1.03               2.83
       Autistic Disorders                                           1.19               1.18          Skin                                                       0.18               0.50
       Developmental disorders                                      0.29               0.43          Musculoskeletal                                           16.57              12.71
       Childhood and adolescent disorders N.E.C.                    0.22               0.48          Congenital Anomalies                                       0.53               0.52
       Intellectual disability                                     13.26               6.19          Injuries                                                   2.73               3.66
       Mood disorders                                              16.32              21.64          Other                                                      0.17               0.21
       Organic Mental Disorders                                     3.57               2.94          Unknown                                                    7.85               2.26
       Schizophrenia                                                5.35               8.88          Deaf                                                       0.68               0.66
       Other Mental disorders                                       8.74               9.10          Blind                                                      1.08               1.23
       Nervous System                                               5.05               8.35
      Note.--This table provides summary statistics on the state or territory of residence (Panel A) and the primary disability diagnosis (Panel B) for the universe of SSI recipients receiving
      benefits for a disability who were in current pay status in March 2015 (N=5,056,608) and the subset of recipients in our experimental sample (N=50,000).
       N.E.C.= Not Elsewhere Classified.
                                              APPENDIX TABLE A.2
                                                Balance Checks
                                                (1)           (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)          (7)
                                                Full         Social    Penalty       Both        No          Control     F-test
                                               Sample       Framing    Framing     Framings    Framing     (No Letter)   p-value
                                                        Panel A. Overall
Redetermination Score Rank                     335,250      336,717     335,043     334,291     334,837     335,362       0.93
                                              (198,947)    (199,839)   (199,008)   (197,854)   (199,619)   (198,439)
In the 6 months pre-mailing:
  Any countable earnings                        0.01         0.01        0.01        0.01        0.01         0.00        0.07
  Amount of countable earnings reported ($)     3.28         3.00        4.76        2.49        3.30         2.86        0.06
                                              (58.59)      (48.51)     (75.36)     (50.99)     (50.62)      (62.98)
In the 3 months pre-mailing:
  Any countable earnings                        0.00         0.00        0.00        0.00        0.00         0.00        0.26
  Amount of countable earnings reported ($)     1.04         0.95        1.67        0.90        0.89         0.79        0.13
                                              (26.48)      (26.35)     (36.50)     (25.30)     (20.55)      (20.40)
Time on SSI program (years):
 Less than 2 years                              0.46         0.47          0.46      0.46        0.47         0.47        0.71
 Between 2 to 4 years                           0.38         0.38          0.38      0.38        0.37         0.38        0.42
 Between 4 to 6 years                           0.16         0.16          0.16      0.16        0.16         0.16        0.87
                                              Panel B. Demographic Information
Age Range:
 18 to 29                                       0.31         0.30          0.30      0.30        0.31         0.31        0.69
 30 to 39                                       0.27         0.28          0.27      0.27        0.27         0.27        0.13
 40 to 49                                       0.42         0.41          0.42      0.42        0.42         0.42        0.69
Race:
 Asian                                          0.01         0.00          0.01      0.01        0.01         0.01        0.08
 Black                                          0.18         0.18          0.18      0.17        0.17         0.18        0.72
 Hispanic                                       0.04         0.04          0.04      0.05        0.04         0.04        0.49
 Native American or Alaskan Native              0.01         0.01          0.01      0.01        0.01         0.01        0.15
 Other/Unknown                                  0.44         0.44          0.44      0.44        0.45         0.43        0.07
 White                                          0.33         0.32          0.33      0.33        0.32         0.34        0.49
Female                                          0.52         0.52          0.53      0.52        0.51         0.52        0.59
                                               Panel C. Disability Information
Primary Diagnosis:
 Infectious and Parasitic                       0.02         0.03          0.03      0.02        0.03         0.03        0.34
 Neoplasms                                      0.03         0.03          0.03      0.03        0.03         0.03        0.87
 Endocrine                                      0.01         0.01          0.01      0.01        0.01         0.01        0.76
 Blood                                          0.01         0.01          0.01      0.01        0.01         0.01        0.87
 Autistic Disorders                             0.00         0.00          0.01      0.00        0.00         0.00        0.13
 Developmental disorders                        0.00         0.00          0.00      0.00        0.01         0.00        0.81
 Childhood and adolescent disorders N.E.C.*     0.06         0.07          0.06      0.06        0.06         0.06        0.24
 Intellectual disability                        0.22         0.21          0.21      0.22        0.21         0.22        0.31
 Mood disorders                                 0.03         0.03          0.03      0.03        0.03         0.03        0.40
 Organic Mental Disorders                       0.09         0.09          0.09      0.09        0.10         0.09        0.18
 Schizophrenia                                  0.09         0.09          0.10      0.09        0.08         0.09        0.02
 Other Mental disorders                         0.08         0.08          0.08      0.08        0.08         0.09        0.48
 Nervous System                                 0.04         0.04          0.04      0.04        0.05         0.04        0.34
 Circulatory System                             0.02         0.02          0.02      0.02        0.02         0.02        0.47
 Respiratory System                             0.02         0.02          0.02      0.02        0.02         0.02        0.87
 Digestive System                               0.03         0.03          0.03      0.03        0.03         0.03        0.84
 Genitourinary System                           0.00         0.00          0.00      0.01        0.01         0.00        0.32
 Skin                                           0.13         0.13          0.13      0.13        0.13         0.13        0.86
 Musculoskeletal                                0.01         0.01          0.00      0.01        0.00         0.01        0.57
 Congenital Anomalies                           0.04         0.04          0.04      0.04        0.03         0.04        0.84
 Injuries                                       0.00         0.00          0.00      0.00        0.00         0.00        0.02
 Other                                          0.02         0.02          0.02      0.02        0.02         0.02        0.21
 Unknown                                        0.01         0.01          0.01      0.01        0.01         0.01        0.31
 Deaf                                           0.01         0.01          0.01      0.01        0.01         0.01        0.56
 Blind                                          0.02         0.02          0.02      0.02        0.02         0.02        0.22
Medical diary type:
 Medical Improvement Expected (MIE)             0.07         0.06          0.06      0.07        0.07         0.07        0.54
 Medical Improvement Possible (MIP)             0.83         0.83          0.83      0.83        0.82         0.83        0.50
 Medical Improvement Not Expected (MINE)        0.11         0.11          0.10      0.10        0.11         0.10        0.71




                                                            A-2
                                         APPENDIX TABLE A.2
                                       Balance Checks (Continued)
                             (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)              (7)
                             Full        Social       Penalty         Both           No            Control         F-test
                            Sample      Framing       Framing       Framings       Framing       (No Letter)       p-value
                                      Panel D. State or Territory of Residence
 State or Territory:
   AK                        0.03         0.03          0.03           0.03           0.03           0.03            0.91
   AL                        0.02         0.02          0.02           0.02           0.02           0.02            0.43
   AR                        0.00         0.00          0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00            0.51
   AZ                        0.01         0.01          0.01           0.01           0.02           0.02            0.25
   CA                        0.01         0.01          0.01           0.01           0.01           0.01            0.89
   CO                        0.01         0.01          0.01           0.01           0.01           0.01            0.39
   CT                        0.00         0.00          0.00           0.01           0.00           0.00            0.09
   DC                        0.00         0.00          0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00            0.05
   DE                        0.06         0.06          0.06           0.06           0.06           0.06            0.71
   FL                        0.04         0.04          0.04           0.04           0.04           0.04            0.97
   GA                        0.00         0.00          0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00            0.84
   HI                        0.01         0.01          0.01           0.01           0.01           0.01            0.50
   IA                        0.00         0.00          0.00           0.01           0.01           0.00            0.73
   ID                        0.04         0.03          0.04           0.04           0.03           0.04            0.51
   IL                        0.03         0.03          0.03           0.02           0.03           0.02            0.76
   IN                        0.01         0.01          0.01           0.01           0.01           0.01            0.95
   KS                        0.03         0.03          0.03           0.03           0.03           0.03            0.53
   KY                        0.03         0.03          0.03           0.03           0.03           0.03            0.22
   LA                        0.03         0.03          0.03           0.03           0.03           0.03            0.88
   MA                        0.02         0.02          0.02           0.02           0.02           0.02            0.08
   MD                        0.01         0.01          0.01           0.01           0.01           0.01            0.96
   ME                        0.05         0.04          0.05           0.04           0.05           0.05            0.46
   MI                        0.01         0.01          0.01           0.01           0.01           0.01            0.90
   MN                        0.03         0.03          0.03           0.03           0.03           0.03            0.23
   MO                        0.02         0.02          0.02           0.02           0.02           0.02            0.53
   MS                        0.00         0.00          0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00            0.30
   MT                        0.00         0.00          0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00            0.48
   NC                        0.00         0.00          0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00            0.80
   ND                        0.01         0.01          0.01           0.01           0.01           0.01            0.93
   NE                        0.01         0.01          0.01           0.01           0.01           0.01            0.27
   NH                        0.02         0.01          0.02           0.02           0.02           0.02            0.18
   NJ                        0.01         0.01          0.01           0.01           0.01           0.01            0.22
   NM                        0.00         0.00          0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00            0.66
   NV                        0.05         0.05          0.05           0.05           0.05           0.05            0.62
   NY                        0.06         0.06          0.06           0.05           0.06           0.05            0.03
   OH                        0.02         0.02          0.02           0.02           0.02           0.02            0.49
   OK                        0.01         0.01          0.01           0.01           0.01           0.01            0.84
   OR                        0.05         0.05          0.05           0.05           0.05           0.05            0.97
   PA                        0.00         0.00          0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00            0.13
   RI                        0.02         0.02          0.02           0.02           0.02           0.02            0.08
   SC                        0.00         0.00          0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00            0.90
   SD                        0.03         0.03          0.03           0.03           0.03           0.03            0.61
   TN                        0.09         0.09          0.09           0.09           0.09           0.09            0.46
   TX                        0.00         0.00          0.00           0.00           0.01           0.00            0.27
   UT                        0.02         0.02          0.02           0.02           0.03           0.03            0.39
   VA                        0.00         0.00          0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00            0.86
   VT                        0.03         0.02          0.02           0.03           0.02           0.03            0.27
   WA                        0.02         0.02          0.02           0.02           0.02           0.02            0.93
   WI                        0.01         0.01          0.01           0.01           0.01           0.01            0.73
   WV                        0.00         0.00          0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00            0.74
   WY                        0.04         0.04          0.04           0.04           0.04           0.04            0.67
Note.--Each row reports mean values for the corresponding variable for the full sample of SSI recipients in the experiment
(column 1) and by experimental condition (columns 2-6). Panel A includes key overview variables of interest, Panel B includes
basic demographic information, Panel C includes details on disability status and medical diary type, and Panel D includes
details on the state or territory of residence. For each variable, the p-value of an F-test that the mean of the corresponding
variable is the same across treatment groups is presented in column 7. Standard errors are reported in parentheses.
 N.E.C.= Not Elsewhere Classified.




                                                           A-3
                                                                 APPENDIX TABLE A.3
                                                            Reported Any Countable Earnings
                           Jan to Apr 2015           May to Jul 2015               May to Oct 2015          May to Dec 2015   Jan to Dec 2015
                           (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)         (7)         (8)   (9)         (10)
                                                            Panel A. SSR Monthly Extract from April 2015
      Received Letter    0.0018*       0.0018*
                        (0.0010)      (0.0010)
      Social Framing    -0.0010      -0.0010
                        (0.0010)      (0.0010)
      Penalty Framing    0.0003        0.0003
                        (0.0010)      (0.0010)
      Both Framings      0.0007        0.0008
                        (0.0015)      (0.0015)
      Constant           0.0041***   -0.0073**
                        (0.0007)      (0.0032)
      R-squared          0.000        0.006
      Prob > F           0.615        0.592
                                                            Panel B. SSR Monthly Extract from July 2015
      Received Letter    0.0032**      0.0033**    0.0034**       0.0034**
                        (0.0015)      (0.0015)    (0.0016)       (0.0016)
      Social Framing     0.0000      -0.0001      -0.0006        -0.0005
A-4




                        (0.0015)      (0.0015)    (0.0016)       (0.0016)
      Penalty Framing    0.0006        0.0005     -0.0002        -0.0001
                        (0.0015)      (0.0015)    (0.0016)       (0.0016)
      Both Framings      0.0002        0.0005      0.0013         0.0013
                        (0.0021)      (0.0021)    (0.0022)       (0.0022)
      Constant           0.0087***   -0.0110**     0.0097***     -0.0079*
                        (0.0011)      (0.0046)    (0.0011)       (0.0048)
      R-squared          0.000        0.009        0.000           0.009
      Prob > F           0.930        0.904        0.916           0.905
                                                           Panel C. SSR Monthly Extract from October 2015
      Received Letter    0.0008        0.0009      0.0021         0.0021         0.0022       0.0022
                        (0.0017)      (0.0017)    (0.0018)       (0.0018)       (0.0020)     (0.0020)
      Social Framing    -0.0004      -0.0005      -0.0003        -0.0002         0.0004       0.0006
                        (0.0017)      (0.0017)    (0.0018)       (0.0018)       (0.0020)     (0.0020)
      Penalty Framing    0.0015        0.0015      0.0005         0.0007       -0.0002       -0.0001
                        (0.0017)      (0.0017)    (0.0018)       (0.0018)       (0.0020)     (0.0020)
      Both Framings      0.0013        0.0015      0.0020         0.0019         0.0024       0.0024
                        (0.0024)      (0.0024)    (0.0026)       (0.0026)       (0.0029)     (0.0028)
      Constant           0.0135***   -0.0091*      0.0146***     -0.0054         0.0185***   -0.0077
                        (0.0012)      (0.0052)    (0.0013)       (0.0055)       (0.0014)     (0.0061)
      R-squared          0.000        0.011        0.000           0.012         0.000         0.014
      Prob > F           0.322        0.257        0.518           0.456         0.484         0.420
                                                                                  APPENDIX TABLE A.3
                                                                        Reported Any Countable Earnings (Continued)
                                     Jan to Apr 2015                      May to Jul 2015                     May to Oct 2015                      May to Dec 2015                      Jan to Dec 2015
                                    (1)                (2)               (3)               (4)                (5)               (6)                (7)               (8)               (9)               (10)
                                                                               Panel C. SSR Monthly Extract from December 2015
       Received Letter          -0.0002            -0.0001             0.0013           0.0013              0.0009           0.0010             0.0015             0.0016            0.0011           0.0012
                                (0.0019)            (0.0019)          (0.0020)         (0.0020)            (0.0023)         (0.0023)           (0.0023)           (0.0023)          (0.0025)         (0.0025)
       Social Framing            0.0006              0.0005            0.0000           0.0001              0.0007           0.0008             0.0004             0.0005            0.0013           0.0013
                                (0.0019)            (0.0019)          (0.0020)         (0.0020)            (0.0023)         (0.0022)           (0.0023)           (0.0023)          (0.0025)         (0.0025)
       Penalty Framing           0.0024              0.0024            0.0009           0.0010              0.0009           0.0010             0.0005             0.0006            0.0024           0.0024
                                (0.0019)            (0.0019)          (0.0020)         (0.0020)            (0.0023)         (0.0022)           (0.0023)           (0.0023)          (0.0025)         (0.0025)
       Both Framings             0.0005              0.0008            0.0017           0.0017              0.0024           0.0025             0.0023             0.0023            0.0011           0.0014
                                (0.0027)            (0.0027)          (0.0028)         (0.0028)            (0.0032)         (0.0032)           (0.0033)           (0.0033)          (0.0036)         (0.0036)
       Constant                  0.0173***         -0.0116**           0.0183***       -0.0065              0.0245***       -0.0120*            0.0259***        -0.0102             0.0306***       -0.0160**
                                (0.0013)            (0.0058)          (0.0014)         (0.0060)            (0.0016)         (0.0069)           (0.0016)           (0.0071)          (0.0018)         (0.0077)
       R-squared                  0.000              0.012             0.000             0.012              0.000             0.017             0.000              0.017             0.000             0.019
       Prob > F                   0.230              0.178             0.513             0.442              0.297             0.245             0.498              0.435             0.275             0.216
       Controls                                       Yes                                 Yes                                  Yes                                  Yes                                 Yes
       Observations               50,000             50,000            50,000            50,000             50,000            50,000            50,000             50,000            50,000            50,000
      Note.--This table reports estimates of the aggregate effect of receiving a letter reminding SSI recipients of their wage reporting responsibilities on the likelihood of reporting any countable earnings. Each
A-5




      column presents a separate regression where the dependent variable is an indicator for whether the recipient reported any countable earnings. Controls include age, gender, dummies for race/ethnicity,
      state or territory of residence, years on the SSI program, an indicator for whether the recipient is permanently disabled, and indicators for the primary disability diagnosis. The time horizon for the
      dependent variable varies by column. Columns 1 and 2 report estimates where the time horizon for the dependent variable is the three months prior to and including the month when the treatment
      letters were mailed (i.e., whether any countable earnings were reported for January 2015 ­ April 2015); Columns 3 and 4 report estimates where the time horizon is the three months post treatment
      (May 2015 - July 2015); Columns 5 and 6 report estimates where the time horizon is the six months post treatment (May 2015 ­ Oct 2015); Columns 7 and 8 report estimates where the time horizon
      is post treatment through the year end (May 2015 ­ Dec 2015); and Columns 9 and 10 report estimates where the time horizon is the full calendar year for 2015. Each panel presents estimates using a
      different extract of the SSR as it existed at the end of the indicated month. For example, Panel A reports estimates using an extract of the SSR data as it existed at the end of April 2015. Coefficients
      are reported for a "Received Letter" indicator denoting whether the recipient received a letter (experimental mailing) from the SSA; a "Social Framing" indicator denoting whether the letter contained
      social framing; a "Penalty Framing" indicator for whether the letter contained the penalty framing; and a "Both Framings" indicator for whether the letter contained both the social framing and the
      penalty framing. The second row at the bottom of each panel reports p-values from an F-test of whether there is no differential effect of the behavioral framing. Significance levels 10%, 5%, and 1% are
      denoted by *, **, and ***, respectively.
                                                               APPENDIX TABLE A.4
                                                       Amount Of Countable Earnings Reported
                           Jan to Apr 2015             May to Jul 2015               May to Oct 2015          May to Dec 2015   Jan to Dec 2015
                           (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)         (7)         (8)   (9)         (10)
                                                              Panel A. SSR Monthly Extract from April 2015
      Received Letter    2.6990**       2.6577*
                        (1.3650)       (1.3659)
      Social Framing     0.4075         0.4401
                        (1.3650)       (1.3658)
      Penalty Framing   -1.4978       -1.5008
                        (1.3650)       (1.3658)
      Both Framings     -0.7209       -0.6891
                        (1.9305)       (1.9314)
      Constant           2.6654***    -7.2477*
                        (0.9652)       (4.1635)
      R-squared          0.000         0.003
      Prob > F           0.278         0.285
                                                              Panel B. SSR Monthly Extract from July 2015
      Received Letter    6.4944***      6.6912***    6.8129***      6.9151***
                        (2.1054)       (2.1056)     (2.2154)       (2.2137)
      Social Framing    -0.1852       -0.2594       -2.9976        -2.8936
A-6




                        (2.1054)       (2.1054)     (2.2154)       (2.2135)
      Penalty Framing   -1.3384       -1.4030       -4.2972*       -4.1673*
                        (2.1054)       (2.1054)     (2.2154)       (2.2135)
      Both Framings     -0.1005         0.0301       6.1075*        6.0007*
                        (2.9775)       (2.9773)     (3.1331)       (3.1302)
      Constant           5.4218***   -11.0722*       8.8803***     -3.5737
                        (1.4888)       (6.4182)     (1.5665)       (6.7479)
      R-squared          0.000         0.004         0.000           0.006
      Prob > F           0.826         0.826         0.219           0.237
                                                             Panel C. SSR Monthly Extract from October 2015
      Received Letter    3.7914         3.9276       4.1966         4.2363         6.6238        6.7063
                        (2.6222)       (2.6214)     (2.8925)       (2.8897)       (5.6736)      (5.6656)
      Social Framing    -1.0275       -1.0049       -4.7418        -4.5826       -8.6331       -8.3116
                        (2.6222)       (2.6212)     (2.8925)       (2.8895)       (5.6736)      (5.6652)
      Penalty Framing    0.3456         0.3717      -4.0708        -3.7852       -9.4664*      -9.0571
                        (2.6222)       (2.6212)     (2.8925)       (2.8894)       (5.6736)      (5.6651)
      Both Framings      3.0164         3.0680      11.0238***     10.7503***    22.9915***     22.6125***
                        (3.7083)       (3.7067)     (4.0906)       (4.0861)       (8.0237)      (8.0113)
      Constant          10.8549***      2.1002      15.2602***      6.8466       34.3017***     15.9622
                        (1.8541)       (7.9907)     (2.0453)       (8.8084)       (4.0119)     (17.2701)
      R-squared          0.000         0.004         0.000           0.006         0.000         0.0074
      Prob > F           0.631         0.610         0.048           0.053         0.030         0.032
                                                                              APPENDIX TABLE A.4
                                                                 Amount Of Countable Earnings Reported (Continued)
                                     Jan to Apr 2015                     May to Jul 2015                     May to Oct 2015                     May to Dec 2015                      Jan to Dec 2015
                                    (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)               (7)                (8)               (9)              (10)
                                                                              Panel D. SSR Monthly Extract from December 2015
       Received Letter            2.8108            2.9288           3.7809            3.8344             5.2208            5.3192           5.3906             5.5147           8.2014            8.4435
                                 (2.8126)          (2.8111)         (3.0122)          (3.0088)           (5.8731)          (5.8630)         (7.7518)           (7.7365)         (9.6609)          (9.6417)
       Social Framing             0.1440            0.1310          -3.5718           -3.4551           -8.1275           -7.8468          -10.6647          -10.2531          -10.5207          -10.1221
                                 (2.8126)          (2.8108)         (3.0122)          (3.0085)           (5.8731)          (5.8625)         (7.7518)           (7.7358)         (9.6609)          (9.6409)
       Penalty Framing            1.0860            1.1221          -3.4299           -3.1588           -6.6226           -6.2240           -8.4554           -7.9549           -7.3694           -6.8328
                                 (2.8126)          (2.8108)         (3.0122)          (3.0085)           (5.8731)          (5.8624)         (7.7518)           (7.7358)         (9.6609)          (9.6408)
       Both Framings              2.5415            2.5849          10.0080**          9.7476**         21.6947***         21.3292**        27.6361**          27.1961**        30.1776**         29.7810**
                                 (3.9776)          (3.9749)         (4.2599)          (4.2544)           (8.3058)          (8.2903)        (10.9627)          (10.9395)        (13.6625)         (13.6335)
       Constant                  13.8605***       -1.4161           17.3455***         5.1331           39.3275***         11.6969          55.0110***         15.6366          68.8715***        14.2205
                                 (1.9888)          (8.5687)         (2.1300)          (9.1713)           (4.1529)         (17.8716)         (5.4814)          (23.5825)         (6.8313)         (29.3900)
       R-squared                  0.000             0.005             0.000             0.006             0.000             0.007             0.000             0.008              0.000             0.008
       Prob > F                   0.509             0.491             0.089             0.096             0.041             0.042             0.054             0.055              0.086             0.084
       Controls                                      Yes                                 Yes                                 Yes                                 Yes                                  Yes
       Observations               50,000            50,000            50,000            50,000            50,000            50,000            50,000            50,000             50,000            50,000
      Note.--This table reports estimates of the aggregate effect of receiving a letter reminding SSI recipients of their wage reporting responsibilities on the dollar amount of countable earnings reported.
A-7




      Each column presents a separate regression where the dependent variable is the amount of countable earnings reported by the recipient. Controls include age, gender, dummies for race/ethnicity, state
      or territory of residence, years on the SSI program, an indicator for whether the recipient is permanently disabled, and indicators for the primary disability diagnosis. The time horizon for the dependent
      variable varies by column. Columns 1 and 2 report estimates where the time horizon for the dependent variable is the three months prior to and including the month when the treatment letters were
      mailed (i.e., whether any countable earnings were reported for January 2015 ­ April 2015); Columns 3 and 4 report estimates where the time horizon is the three months post treatment (May 2015 - July
      2015); Columns 5 and 6 report estimates where the time horizon is the six months post treatment (May 2015 ­ Oct 2015); Columns 7 and 8 report estimates where the time horizon is post treatment
      through the year end (May 2015 ­ Dec 2015); and Columns 9 and 10 report estimates where the time horizon is the full calendar year for 2015. Each panel presents estimates using a different extract of
      the SSR data as it existed at the end of the indicated month. For example, Panel A reports estimates using an extract of the SSR data as it existed at the end of April 2015. Coefficients are reported for
      a "Received Letter" indicator denoting whether the recipient received a letter (experimental mailing) from the SSA; a "Social Framing" indicator denoting whether the letter contained social framing;
      a "Penalty Framing" indicator for whether the letter contained the penalty framing; and a "Both Framings" indicator for whether the letter contained both the social framing and the penalty framing.
      The second row at the bottom of each panel reports p-values from an F-test of whether there is no differential effect of the behavioral framing. Significance levels 10%, 5%, and 1% are denoted by *, **,
      and ***, respectively.
                                                APPENDIX TABLE A.5
                                                Labor Supply Effects
                                   Employed                  Amount of W2 Earnings                 Number of Employers
                             (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)                (5)               (6)
 Received Letter           0.0017            0.0019          18.3238      22.0459                  0.0015           0.0020
                          (0.0036)          (0.0036)        (31.3254)    (31.1291)                (0.0067)         (0.0065)
 Constant                  0.1194***       -0.0359***       569.7559*** -59.4671                   0.1823***       -0.0894***
                          (0.0033)          (0.0137)        (28.0183)   (120.0292)                (0.0060)         (0.0252)
 R-squared                 0.000             0.047             0.000             0.016             0.000              0.041
 Prob > F                  0.629             0.613             0.840             0.790             0.268              0.239
 Controls                                     Yes                                 Yes                                  Yes
 Observations              50,000            50,000            50,000            50,000            50,000             50,000
Note.--This table reports estimates of the aggregate effect of receiving a letter reminding SSI recipients of their wage reporting
responsibilities on the likelihood of being employed (Columns 1 and 2), the amount of reported W2 earnings (Columns 3 and 4),
and the number of employers (Columns 5 and 6). Each column presents a separate regression where the dependent variable is
given by the header of the column. Controls include age, gender, dummies for race/ethnicity, state or territory of residence, years
on the SSI program, an indicator for whether the recipient is permanently disabled, and indicators for the primary disability di-
agnosis. All regressions use annual earnings information as reported on an individual's W2 Form for 2015 from the MEF data.
Coefficients are reported for a "Received Letter" indicator denoting whether the recipient received a letter (experimental mailing)
from the SSA. The table also reports p-values from an F-test of whether there is no differential effect of the behavioral framing.
Significance levels 10%, 5%, and 1% are denoted by *, **, and ***, respectively.




                                                             A-8
