                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         THE INTERNATIONAL PROPAGATION OF ECONOMIC DOWNTURNS
                   THROUGH MULTINATIONAL COMPANIES:
                       THE REAL ECONOMY CHANNEL

                                            Jan Bena
                                           Serdar Dinc
                                             Isil Erel

                                       Working Paper 27873
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27873


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2020

Bena is with University of British Columbia, Dinc (i.serdar.dinc@gmail.com) is with Rutgers
University, and Erel is with Ohio State University, NBER, and ECGI. We would like to thank
Sergey Chernenko, Shan Ge, Iftekhar Hasan, Jose Liberti, Robert McDonald, Rene Stulz, Mike
Weisbach, as well as seminar participants at the 12th International Conference in Chile,
Australian National University, Carnegie Mellon University, Emory University, Erasmus
University, European Finance Association Meetings, Koc University, Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology, Northwestern University, Ohio State University, Texas A & M, Tilburg
University, University of Amsterdam, University of Hong Kong, University of Rochester, Triple
Crown Conference, University of Washington, Villanova University, and York University for
their helpful comments. Authors were Fellows of the National Center for the Middle Market at
the Fisher College of Business, Ohio State University, and acknowledge the Center's financial
support for this research. Bena acknowledges financial support from the Social Sciences and
Humanities Research Council (SSHRC) of Canada. Ivan Alfaro and Greg Allen provided
excellent research assistance. The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Jan Bena, Serdar Dinc, and Isil Erel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The International Propagation of Economic Downturns Through Multinational Companies:
The Real Economy Channel
Jan Bena, Serdar Dinc, and Isil Erel
NBER Working Paper No. 27873
September 2020
JEL No. F23,G01,G31

                                         ABSTRACT

We study how non-financial multinational companies propagate economic declines from their
subsidiaries located in countries experiencing an economic downturn to subsidiaries in countries
not experiencing one. We find that investment is 18% lower in subsidiaries of these parents
relative to the same-industry, same-country subsidiaries of parents that are headquartered in the
same parent country but do not have a subsidiary in a country experiencing an economic
downturn. The employment growth rate in the affected subsidiaries is zero or negative while it is
1.4% in the subsidiaries of unaffected parents. The aggregate industry-level sales and
employment are also negatively impacted in the countries of the affected subsidiaries.


Jan Bena                                        Isil Erel
University of British Columbia                  Fisher College of Business
Sauder School of Business                       Ohio State University
2053 Main Mall                                  2100 Neil Avenue
Vancouver, BC                                   Columbus, OH 43210
V6T 1Z2                                         and NBER
Canada                                          erel@fisher.osu.edu
jan.bena@sauder.ubc.ca

Serdar Dinc
Department of Finance
Rutgers Business School
1 Washington Park
Newark, NJ 07102
i.serdar.dinc@gmail.com
1. Introduction

        The financial sector plays an important role in the propagation of economic

downturns across national borders.1 While financial firms clearly have a significant global

reach, a key role in the overall interconnectedness of the world economy belongs to

networks of subsidiaries created by non-financial multinational companies (MNCs).2 This

paper examines the international propagation of economic downturns by conducting a

subsidiary-level analysis of MNCs. Subsidiaries of MNCs are often exposed to economic

contractions in the countries of their location. Such local contractions may impact policies

and outcomes of the same MNCs' subsidiaries in other countries even when there are no

changes in their respective economic conditions. We isolate this propagation channel and

estimate the effect of a large local economic downturn that is propagated to destination

subsidiaries in terms of real quantities--investment and employment.

        The following example illustrates the international propagation of a local economic

downturn by the MNCs we study. Consider a hypothetical MNC headquartered in

Germany, with subsidiaries located in Spain and Finland. When Spain is experiencing an

economic downturn, how are the investment and employment at that German firm's

Finnish subsidiary affected? In particular, how do they differ from those of the same-

industry Finnish subsidiary of another German parent firm that does not have a subsidiary

in Spain or in another country experiencing an economic downturn that year? This question

isolates the common factors at the levels of parent firm's country (Germany in the

example), subsidiary country (Finland), and industry in the same year, and therefore



1
  See, e.g., Peek and Rosengren (1997, 2000), Khwaja and Mian (2008), Cetorelli and Goldberg (2012),
Schnabl (2012), Kalemli-Özcan et al. (2013), Acemoglu, Ozdaglar, and Tahbaz-Salehi (2015).
2
  See Yeaple (2013) and Antràs and Yeaple (2014) for surveys of the literature on MNCs.


                                                 1
focuses on the propagation of downturns from the subsidiary located in a country

experiencing an economic downturn to subsidiaries in other countries, as illustrated in

Figure 1. In this paper, we study this question using more than thousand MNCs from 16

countries and their more than ten thousand subsidiaries in 23 countries.

       A priori, there are reasons that support both higher as well as lower investment and

employment growth in the Finnish subsidiary of the German firm that also has a Spanish

subsidiary. For example, if the parent firm shifts production from where the economic

downturn occurs to a country not experiencing a downturn, the investment and employment

growth may be higher in the subsidiary located in the latter country. On the other hand, if

the Finnish subsidiary is a supplier to the Spanish subsidiary, and if the latter decreases its

investment and employment due to the economic downturn, then the investment and

employment in the Finnish subsidiary may also decrease. Furthermore, due to the downturn

in the country of one of its subsidiaries, the parent firm may have fewer resources to

allocate among its other subsidiaries. Therefore, the parent firm may choose to shrink the

investment and employment in other countries. To summarize, whether investment and

employment of subsidiaries in countries not experiencing an economic downturn increases

or decreases is an empirical question that cannot be answered a priori by theoretical

arguments alone.

       We show that if a MNC has a foreign subsidiary in a country experiencing a large

economic downturn, the investment and employment growth in its foreign subsidiaries

located in other countries are lower relative to similar subsidiaries of another MNC that is

headquartered in the same country but does not have a subsidiary in a country experiencing

an economic downturn. Continuing the example of the hypothetical German parent




                                              2
companies above, we show that the Finnish subsidiary of the MNC headquartered in

Germany with a subsidiary in Spain during the Spanish economic downturn has lower

investment and employment growth that year, relative to the same-industry Finnish

subsidiary of another German MNC that does not have any subsidiary in a country with an

economic downturn. We do not find any such differences the year before Spain

experienced a severe economic downturn. We emphasize that the decreases in investment

and employment we document are measured only using the subsidiaries and parent firms

in countries not experiencing economic downturns, because we exclude subsidiaries and

parent firms in countries with economic downturns from our sample to focus on the

propagation effect. In simple terms, our evidence suggests that MNCs transmit economic

downturns from source countries to other countries where they operate even when they are

headquartered in countries not experiencing an economic downturn.

       The economic magnitude of the international propagation of downturns by MNCs

we estimate is large. In our sample, annual investment of a subsidiary whose parent firm

does not have any subsidiary in a country with an economic downturn is about 3.8% of its

lagged assets on average. Compared to this benchmark, the same country-industry

subsidiary of another parent firm headquartered in the same country, but with a subsidiary

in a country that experiences an economic downturn, invests about 0.7-0.9 percentage

points less on average. In other words, the investment rate is about 18%-24% lower due to

the international propagation channel. Similarly, the average employment growth rate in

the subsidiaries of unaffected parents is 1.4%. The employment growth rate of the same

country-industry subsidiaries of affected parents, however, is lower by about 1.5-2.2




                                            3
percentage points. Due to the international propagation channel, the employment thus

stagnates or shrinks.

       Next we assess whether the international propagation channel by MNCs we

document is able to spread local economic problems in a way that the entire destination

economies are affected. Specifically, we study aggregate industry-level sales and

employment of countries with the presence of subsidiaries of affected parent firms. In the

hypothetical example above, if other Finnish firms in the same industry increase their

investment and employment to compensate for the declines experienced by the subsidiaries

of a parent propagating the Spanish economic downturn, the overall impact of the

propagation effect on the aggregate economy will be small. We find, however, that the

aggregate country-industry-level sales and employment are both significantly smaller

when the subsidiaries that are affected by the international propagation channel account for

a larger fraction of the destination country-industry sales or employment. This result

suggests that the negative effects of the propagated downturns through MNCs to third

countries are not neutralized by other firms. Hence, propagated downturns lead to

aggregate level declines of real quantities in these destination countries. More broadly, our

results highlight that even if the spread of economic downturns does not occur through the

financial system, for example, due to a robust regulatory framework of this sector, such

propagation can still occur through ownership networks of MNCs. These findings may be

used in designing public policies aimed at preventing local economic crises from escalating

to regional or global levels.

       The two most likely reasons for why the propagation effect occurs are the presence

of supply chain links and internal capital markets within MNCs. We provide an exploratory




                                             4
analysis supporting both channels. First, we find that if the subsidiary in a country

experiencing an economic downturn operates in a country-industry that is upstream to the

other subsidiaries of the same MNC, the magnitude of the propagation effect to the

destination subsidiary is reduced. In contrast, the propagation effect is larger if the

subsidiary in the country with an economic downturn operates in a downstream industry.

Second, we show that economic downturns are transmitted even to subsidiaries in non-

tradable industries, so the presence of supply chain links is unlikely to be the only reason

for the propagation effect to occur. In fact, we confirm that the propagation is stronger for

MNCs that are financially constrained. These results together suggest that both key features

of MNCs--supply chain relationships and internal capital markets that are centrally

coordinated using ownership links--contribute to the propagation effect we identify.

       A strand of literature in international economics documents correlation in growth

rates between countries, sectors, or firms, see, e.g., Kose and Yin (2001), Forbes (2004),

Burstein, Kurz, and Tesar (2008), Johnson (2014), Menno (2014), Zlate (2016), Cravino

and Levchenko (2017), and Tweedle (2018). We complement this work by providing

microeconomic evidence that one mechanism underlying such international co-movement

is the propagation of local downturns across borders via ownership networks of MNCs.

This mechanism is distinct from, for example, the international co-movement being driven

by global economic downturns hitting multiple economies at the same time or local

downturns being transmitted through credit contractions of global banks. Desai, Foley, and

Hines (2009) show that U.S. manufacturing companies increase their investment in the

U.S. when their foreign investment increases. We, instead, examine the propagation of an

economic downturn from one foreign subsidiary of an MNC to another, controlling for the




                                             5
economic conditions of the country of the parent company. Our approach is similar to that

of Giroud and Mueller (2017), who examine the propagation of housing downturns through

employment decisions across localities by firms that operate in multiple regions in the U.S.

We differ by studying firms' investment in an international setting focusing on ownership

networks of MNCs.

           Our paper is also related to the literature on internal capital markets in

conglomerates and business groups; recent work includes Gopalan, Nanda, and Seru

(2007), Gopalan and Xie (2012), Matvos and Seru (2014), Duchin, Goldberg, and Sosyura

(2016), Faccio and O'Brien (2017), and Santioni, Schiantarelli, and Strahan (2017). Our

emphasis is to understand the consequences of international geographic dispersion, not

business diversification across industries.

           Although we study the propagation of economic downturns through ownership

linkages within firms but across national borders, another related literature examines the

propagation between firms, see, e.g., Hertzel, Li, Officer, and Rodgers (2008), Acemoglu,

Carvalho, Ozdaglar, and Tahbaz-Salehi (2012), Kelly, Lustig, and van Nieuwerburgh

(2013), Acemoglu, Akcigit, and Kerr (2016), Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016), Wu (2016),

Bosker et al. (2018), di Giovanni, Levchenko, and Mejean (2018), Kashiwagi et al. (2018),

and Bertrand, Moxnes, and Saito (2019).3 Our paper also complements the recent literature

on the production linkages within firms, see, e.g., Budd, Konings, and Slaughter (2005) or

Boehm, Flaaen, and Pandalai-Nayar (2019).

           This paper is organized as follows. The next section describes our identification

strategy and data. The third section presents our main results on subsidiary investment,



3
    See Carvalho (2014) and Carvalho and Tahbaz-Salehi (2019) for surveys.


                                                     6
followed by a section presenting our results on subsidiary employment growth. In the fifth

section, we analyze the robustness of our findings. We present aggregate industry-level

results in the sixth section. We provide analyses of possible channels in the seventh section.

The conclusion follows.


2. Identification Strategy, Data Sources, and Sample Description

2.1 Test Design

          We examine corporate policies of MNCs' subsidiaries located in countries not

experiencing an economic downturn. In our analyses, we control for subsidiary country,

industry, year, and parent firm country. The propagation effect we study is identified from

the parent firm having another subsidiary in a country experiencing an economic downturn

in the same year. A key consideration impacting the efficiency of the estimation in a cross-

country, cross-industry, multi-year, firm-level study like in this paper is the presence of a

large heterogeneity in the sample. For example, our sample contains German automotive

companies as well as trading companies in Luxembourg. To make our estimates free from

functional form assumptions and to avoid the extrapolation of the effects of continuous

covariates across different parts of our sample, we adopt matching as our main method of

analysis. Our main matching approach directly excludes comparisons where there is lack

of common support, that is, it excludes country-industry-year stratas where subsidiaries of

affected and non-affected parent firms are not simultaneously present. We also provide

various regression analyses and a number of alternative matching techniques as robustness

checks.

          To explain our main matching approach in detail, consider two multinational parent

firms pT and pC, both located in the same country m (subscripts T and C are mnemonics for

                                              7
`treated' and `control' while p is a mnemonic for `parent'). Firm pT has a foreign subsidiary

in a country with an economic downturn that year, as defined below, while firm pC does

not. We match a subsidiary of pT in industry i and country n to a subsidiary of pC in the

same industry i and the same country n. Crucially, we allow neither m, the country of the

parent firms, nor n, the country of the subsidiaries that are subject to the comparison, to

have an economic downturn that year. In other words, pT's subsidiary located in a country

experiencing an economic downturn that year only leads to pT being designated as `treated',

and this subsidiary itself is not part of the comparison of subsidiaries to measure the

propagation effect. As a result, any economic downturn in the parent firms' location, or in

the location of their subsidiaries we analyze, is not driving our results.

        We use Mahalanobis-metric matching to prepare our comparison sample. In

matching estimators terminology, we use exact matching on subsidiary country, subsidiary

industry, parent firm country, and year, together with the nearest neighbor matching on

selected additional continuous covariates. This is a very stringent matching requirement

that allows us to control for many confounding factors. For example, if we did not require

the subsidiary country n to be the same for both the treated and control subsidiary, it would

be possible that parent pT's subsidiary is located in a country whose business cycle is

relatively more correlated with the country experiencing an economic downturn that has

lead pT to be designated as treated in the first place. Additionally, by calling for both treated

and control parent firms pT and pC to be in the same country, we control for the possible

differential impact of an economic downturn on countries in which the parent firms are

located. Similarly, requiring the subsidiary industry and year to be the same for subsidiaries

of both treated and control parent firms controls for the possibility of the differential impact




                                               8
of an economic downturn on different industries over time. Finally, to increase the

precision of sample variance estimates used in the calculation of the Mahalanobis distance

measure and to ensure a common support between treatment and control observations, we

first eliminate stratas of subsidiary country, subsidiary industry, year, and parent firm

country that do not have at least three treatment and three control observations. We then

use subsidiary country, subsidiary industry, year, and parent firm country as variables for

exact matching, and subsidiary size and parent firm size as continuous variables in the

nearest neighbor matching based on the Mahalanobis metric.

       Notice that we do not claim that MNCs choose the location of their subsidiaries

randomly even though such location decisions were likely made well before our sample

period starts. In particular, MNCs may have chosen to locate their subsidiaries in countries

less prone to economic downturns, and the MNCs that are particularly vulnerable to

economic downturns may have done so to a greater extent. In other words, our treated

sample of MNCs that have a subsidiary in a country experiencing an economic downturn

may be composed of MNCs that are less vulnerable to economic downturns than other

MNCs. However, this potential self-selection biases our analysis against finding any

propagation effect of economic downturns in the treated companies. Therefore, to the

extent that this self-selection is important, the propagation effect of economic downturns

we document may be under-estimated.

       To construct our treatment, we use the deviation of a country's real GDP growth

rate that year from that country's long-run average. In our baseline specification, we define

a country to have an economic downturn if its real GDP growth rate that year is 2 standard

deviations or more lower than its own long-run average, where the long-run average and




                                             9
standard deviation are both country-specific and calculated over a period that does not

overlap with our sample period as described below. Of course, an economic downturn may

not exactly take place within a calendar year and may start in the previous year. Since our

identification is based on comparison with the previous year, our construction of treatment

is conservative and may underestimate the propagation effect. Note also that, based on our

definition, whether a country has an economic downturn or not depends only on its own

performance and we do not use any potentially subjective list of economic crisis countries.

       For a parent firm to be in the treatment group, it has to a) have at least one foreign

subsidiary located in a country with an economic downturn; and b) be itself located in a

country not experiencing an economic downturn that year. Conversely, for a parent firm to

be in the control group, it has to a) have no foreign subsidiary located in a country

experiencing an economic downturn; and b) be itself located in a country not experiencing

an economic downturn that year. In robustness checks, we vary the threshold used in the

economic downturn definition from 2 standard deviations to 1.75 and 2.25 standard

deviations below respective country's long-run average real GDP growth. In some tests,

we also vary the threshold for control groups to one standard deviation below the country

mean or better so that observations that barely miss to be classified as treatment in the main

analysis are not considered as control. Finally, in deciding whether a parent firm has a

subsidiary in a country experiencing an economic downturn, we use all the subsidiaries

and their locations available to us. Specifically, to identify subsidiaries in a country with

an economic downturn, we do not restrict on the subsidiaries for which we have accounting

data; instead, we consider the full geographical presence available for each parent firm.




                                             10
2.2 Data Sources

      Our parent and subsidiary level data come from the Amadeus/Orbis databases

compiled by the Bureau van Dijk (BvD). Amadeus/Orbis contain detailed ownership and

financial information on public and private firms worldwide. To construct a panel dataset

of multinational companies and their subsidiaries, we use two updates of Orbis that provide

cross-sectional data on firms' ownership structures as verified by BvD in November 2008

and July 2012.

      We define subsidiaries to be incorporated firms that file their own financial

statements and have, in a given year, a single ultimate owner. The ultimate owner is a

subsidiary's shareholder that satisfies three criteria. First, the shareholder has to have at

least 25.01% total stake in the subsidiary. The total stake is the sum of the direct and

indirect (i.e., via other firms) voting rights the shareholder has in the subsidiary. La Porta

et al. (1999) argue that 20% ownership is sufficient to give control to the largest

shareholder, but the data provider uses a 25.01% threshold and the data do not allow the

use of a lower threshold. Most of the subsidiaries in our sample are majority-owned and

we also do a robustness check by restricting the sample to those subsidiaries. Second, the

subsidiary has no other (identified or unidentified) shareholder with the total stake higher

than 25.00%. Third, the ultimate owner is an incorporated firm that is widely held (i.e., it

is not controlled by any other ultimate owner) or an individual/family. We define parent

MNCs to be ultimate owners that have at least two cross-border subsidiaries, that is, the

subsidiary's country of incorporation is different from that of the ultimate owner.

      To construct an annual panel of financial data for subsidiaries and their parent

multinational firms, we cumulatively combine multiple updates of Amadeus/Orbis in order



                                             11
to add back firm-years deleted from more recent updates. This procedure eliminates

survivorship bias inherent in BvD databases.4 The resulting panel of financial and

ownership information gives a unique breadth of coverage in 2008-2012.

       We build our sample starting from the overlap of the ownership and financial panels

described above and apply the following screens. First, we exclude subsidiaries and parent

firms in financial intermediation, as well as in public administration and defense,

education, health and social work, and other community, social, and personal service

activities (primary two-digit NACE Rev 1.1 codes 65-67, 75, 80, 85, and 90-99). Second,

a subsidiary's and parent firm's legal forms need to entail a limited liability structure.

Third, we remove very small and young firms, which tend to be noisy, as well as firms that

are likely "shell" firms. Specifically, we drop subsidiary-years and parent-years with total

assets less than 1 million Euros and subsidiary-years that are within 3 years of the

subsidiary's incorporation date. Throughout the paper, we use unconsolidated financial

statements for subsidiaries and consolidated financial statements for parent firms. Finally,

we require that all financial variables used in our analysis are non-missing.

         We obtain country-level annual real GDP data from the World Bank DataBank and

calculate the yearly logarithmic growth of real GDP for each country. We first use the data

for 1971-2000 to calculate long-term average growth rates and standard deviations for each

country separately. We then normalize each country's annual real GDP growth rate for

2008-2012 using the long-term mean and standard deviation calculated for that country

from the 1971-2000 period. As mentioned above, in our baseline specification, we define



4
  A firm appears in Amadeus/Orbis as long as it files its financial statements, but is typically kept in the
database for only four years after its last filing. Also, each update of Amadeus/Orbis contains only the most
recent ten years of financial data for each firm (if available).


                                                     12
a country to have an economic downturn in a given year during 2008-2012 if its normalized

GDP growth is lower than -2. We vary this threshold in our robustness checks. Table 1

Panel A presents the countries with economic downturns and the year of their downturn.

As the source of treatment, our analysis uses economic downturns from 2008 to 2012

except 2009. Many countries had an economic downturn in 2009 as defined above;

therefore, neither the subsidiaries nor the parent firms (and their subsidiaries elsewhere)

located in those countries were eligible to be treatment or control in 2009 according to our

empirical design.


2.3 Sample and Summary Statistics

       Table 1 Panel B presents the distribution of the subsidiaries across 23 countries and

years in our matched sample. With the exception of Japan, Korea, and Singapore, all of our

subsidiaries are from European countries. This is largely because these countries have

public disclosure requirements for subsidiaries of foreign parent firms. For example, we

have many subsidiaries owned by U.S.-based parents, but do not have any subsidiary

located in the U.S. because there is no public disclosure requirement for foreign

subsidiaries in the U.S. The number of observations in each country differs, largely based

on the country's economic size. Subsidiaries located in France, Germany, Italy, Spain, and

UK are well represented. We have observations in every year from 2008 to 2012 except

2009 as explained above. Table 1 Panel C presents the distribution of parent firms across

16 countries and years in the matched sample. These countries tend to be larger, more

economically developed, and more geographically widespread, with the U.S., France,

Germany, Japan, and Sweden being well represented.




                                            13
       Table 1 Panel D provides sample statistics on the investment rate and employment

growth in the subsidiaries located in countries with economic downturns during the

downturn year and, for comparison, the year before the downturn. These are the

subsidiaries in crises of only the parents that end up being in our matched sample. The

investment as a fraction of lagged assets is 3.2% in the year before downturn and it drops

to 2.8% in the downturn year, a drop of more than 0.4 percentage points or about 12%. The

drop in the employment growth of these subsidiaries is even more substantial: The

employment growth that is 1.6% in the year before the downturn drops to 0.0%. The

subsidiaries in downturn countries are excluded from the main analysis below during the

downturn years to focus on the international propagation effect of downturns these

subsidiaries experience.

       Table 2 presents summary statistics for our first outcome--subsidiary investment--

and control variables in the matched sample. Panel A contains simple summary statistics

that depend on the number of observations, while panel B presents statistics that are

independent of the sample size (computed as in Imbens and Rubin (2015)). Panel A reports

the sample statistics separately for both treatment and control subsamples, as well as for

the full matched sample. The panel also reports the comparison of means and medians

across the two subsamples. The results of the comparison of means are based on standard

errors robust to clustering at the parent firm level, while the comparison of medians is based

on the Wilcoxon test where the cluster robust inference is not available.

       Both the average and median size of parent firms and their subsidiaries are slightly

larger for the treatment group than for the control group. The mean parent firm cash flow,

as measured by the operating profit/loss normalized by the parent firm's lagged total assets,




                                             14
is not statistically different between the two groups. These control variables are winsorized

at the upper and lower 1% levels. Finally, subsidiary investment one year before the onset

of treatment, normalized by its lagged total assets, has subsample means that are not

statistically different across the treatment and control groups.

        The statistics reported in Panel A are functions of sample size. Imbens and Rubin

(2015) caution against using such statistics in judging covariate balance across the

subsamples. Instead, to examine covariate balance, they suggest using mean differences

normalized by the standard deviations and variance ratios even though distributions of

these statistics are not known and, therefore, exact cutoff points for statistical tests cannot

be obtained. In Panel B, we provide these statistics for the `raw' and matched sample. The

raw sample is the sample of treated and non-treated observations before the matching is

performed, but already with the constraint that there are at least three possible treated and

control observations within each parent firm country by subsidiary country by subsidiary

industry by year strata.

        The first two columns in Panel B provide differences of means that are standardized

by the subsample standard deviations. A well-balanced sample would have these values

close to zero. Statistics for the raw sample suggest that there is little balance, especially in

the parent firm size with the mean difference over 1.3 times the subsample standard

deviation. After matching, the balance improves with the difference of means in parent

firm size halved, and all other differences of means being within about 0.2 times their

respective standard deviations.

        The last two columns in Panel B provide variance ratios for the two subsamples. A

well-balanced sample would have these values close to one. Statistics for the raw sample




                                              15
suggest that there is little balance for any of the continuous variables except for the lagged

subsidiary investment. The matched sample, however, is much better balanced with the

subsample variances within 15% of each other with the exception of subsidiary size, where

the matched sample variance ratio is about 1.38. These statistics suggest that the matched

sample is better balanced than the raw sample and is well balanced in most, if not all,

dimensions.

       Panel C focuses on the initial comparison of the outcome variable across treatment

and control subsamples. We first study the subsidiary investment in the treatment year, that

is, the year when the parent firm has another subsidiary in a country experiencing an

economic downturn. As the dataset does not provide subsidiary investment explicitly, we

construct it as the change in a subsidiary's fixed assets plus depreciation and normalize it

with the lagged book value of the subsidiary's assets. To eliminate large acquisitions and

divestments, as well as other outliers, we trim the investment rate observations at the 5%

upper and lower tails. The average investment rate in the control subsample is about 3.8%.

However, in the treatment subsample, the average investment rate is only 2.9%. This

difference is significant at the 5% level with standard errors robust to clustering at the

parent firm level. In other words, investment in the treated subsample is more than 23%

lower than that in the control subsample.

       When we study the difference in investment rate from the pre-treatment to the first

treatment year, we find this difference to be positive for the control subsample, which

indicates an increase in investment from one year to the next. In the treated subsample,

however, this difference is negative, which indicates a decrease in investment from the pre-

treatment to the first treatment year. The mean change in the investment rate for the full




                                             16
matched sample is only 0.1 percentage points. The next section provides more precise

estimations of the differences in investment rates across the two subsamples.


3. International Propagation of Economic Downturns by MNCs ­
    Subsidiary Investment

       As we describe above, we construct a matched sample of subsidiaries using the

exact matching on the subsidiary country, parent firm country, subsidiary industry (2-digit

NACE), and year together with the nearest neighbor matching that we compute using the

Mahalanobis metric with the logarithm of subsidiary and parent firm total book assets as

covariates. A parent firm is `treated' if it has a subsidiary in a country experiencing an

economic downturn that year with the economic downturn being defined as the real GDP

growth of at least two standard deviations less than the country's pre-sample long-term

average. Parent firms and subsidiaries located in countries experiencing an economic

downturn are excluded from both treatment and control groups that year.

       Our first outcome variable is the subsidiary investment, normalized by lagged

subsidiary total assets, in the treatment year--the year in which the subsidiary's parent firm

has another subsidiary in a country experiencing a large economic downturn. The previous

section presented sample statistics that showed a lower investment in the treatment group

compared to the control group with the difference being statistically and economically

significant. Table 3 Panel A presents the Average Treatment Effect on the Treated (ATET)

obtained using the matching estimator with robust standard errors. We adjust the ATET

estimate for bias from matching on continuous variables, first, using only the logarithm of

lagged subsidiary and parent sizes (first column), and then adding the lagged parent firm

profitability and lagged subsidiary investment (second and third column, respectively). The



                                             17
estimated ATET ranges from -1.3 to -0.9 percentage points and is always statistically

significant at the 1% level.

         The economic magnitude of this difference in the investment rate of treated

subsidiaries is also significant. To put the estimated effects into context, recall that the

average investment rate is 3.8% in the control subsample. This means that the investment

rate in the treatment subsample, when adjusted for the bias using all four continuous

variables, is more than 23% lower than the average investment rate for the control

subsample. We note that more than 56% of subsidiaries in our sample are in the top 5% of

the size distribution in their respective country-industry pairs. In other words, these

subsidiaries are typically the biggest firms. In Section 6, we further confirm that the

propagation effects we estimate are economically meaningful because they persist in the

aggregate industry-level data.

         Matching estimates reported above have standard errors that are robust to

heteroscedasticity. Since there may be several subsidiaries of the same parent in our

sample, ideally, one would like to have standard errors robust to clustering at the parent

firm level to account for any correlation between different subsidiaries of the same parent.5

However, treatment and control observations belong to different parent firms and,

therefore, by construction, a matched pair of observations is not part of the same such

cluster. To obtain cluster-robust standard errors, we estimate the treatment effect using

regressions on the matched sample with match pair fixed effects. Put differently, we use




5
  It may also be desirable to cluster the standard errors at the parent firm' country by year level, but since we
have only 41 or fewer such clusters, we opted for clustering at the parent firm-level in the main analyses. We
repeat the main analyses with double clustering at the levels of parent firm and parent firm's country by year
and present the results in the Online Appendix as discussed in the Robustness section. The results remain
robust to this double clustering.


                                                       18
matching to balance covariates and obtain matched pairs, but we rely on regressions for the

estimation of and the inference on the treatment effect.

       The results of these regressions are presented in Table 3 Panel B. The variable of

interest is the Propagation Treatment Dummy variable, which is equal to one for the treated

observation in each match pair, that is, it is equal to one for the subsidiary whose parent

firm has another subsidiary in a country experiencing an economic downturn and zero

otherwise (we still exclude from the sample subsidiaries and parent firms in countries that

have an economic downturn). The coefficient on this dummy variable provides an estimate

for ATET. All regressions in Panel B are estimated with match pair fixed effects, and,

crucially, the standard errors are robust to clustering at the parent firm level.

       The regression in Column 1 estimates ATET using the outcome variable of the

matching estimation from Panel A as the dependent variable, and contains no control

variables. The estimated coefficient on the treatment dummy variable is negative and

statistically significant at the 1% level. Regressions in Columns 2 and 3 include, as control

variables, the continuous variables used in the bias adjustment of the matching estimates

in Panel A. With match pair fixed effects, these regressions are comparable to, but not the

same as, the bias-adjusted matching estimates. Across the different specifications, the

estimated ATET is -0.7 percentage points or lower and it is always statistically significant

at the 1% level. Although slightly smaller than the matching estimates in absolute value,

the difference in the investment rate due to treatment is still more than 18% of the annual

average investment rate in the control subsample. With these statistically and economically

significant decreases in the subsidiary investment due to the propagation of economic




                                              19
downturns by MNCs estimated in different ways, we now move to studying the

propagation in terms of employment.


4. International Propagation of Economic Downturns by MNCs ­
    Subsidiary Employment

       We use the same identification strategy, data sources, and matching procedure to

study the effect of having a subsidiary in a country experiencing an economic downturn on

employment growth at parent firms' other subsidiaries. Since the availability of subsidiary

employment data, on which our employment growth measure is based, is different from

that of the investment data, the same matching procedure leads to a slightly different

sample than the one described in Table 2. Therefore, we will first briefly discuss the

summary statistics and covariate balance in the new matched sample and then present the

estimates of the treatment effect on the subsidiary employment growth.

       Table 4 Panel A presents summary statistics of our control variables for the

treatment and control subsamples. While the matched sample for the employment analysis

is about 11% smaller than that for the investment analysis, the statistics are similar to those

reported in Table 2. Table 4 Panel B checks the covariate balance. Covariate balance is

also comparable to that in Table 2, perhaps with the exception of the lagged employment

growth, which has a higher variance ratio compared to the lagged investment rate variable.

       Table 4 Panel C provides the initial comparison of the employment outcome

variables across the treatment and control subsamples. The focus in the previous section

was investment, which is a flow variable. Similarly, our focus in this section is a flow

variable--employment growth. The dataset provides only the total number of employees

in a subsidiary. Using these data, we construct the employment growth rate as ln(total



                                              20
employeest) ­ ln(total employeest-1). The average subsidiary employment growth rate in the

control subsample in the event year is about 1.4%, while it is -0.2% in the treatment

subsample. Although the magnitude of this difference is large, it is not statistically

significant at the conventional levels (p=0.105).

       Table 5 Panel A presents the matching estimates of ATET with the employment

growth being the outcome variable. The estimate reported in the first column is bias-

adjusted for the logarithm of the subsidiary and parent firm total assets. The estimated

ATET is -1.4 percentage points and it is statistically significant at the 5% level. When we

also use the lagged parent firm profitability and lagged subsidiary employment growth in

adjusting for bias due to matching with continuous variables, the ATET estimate becomes

-1.5 percentage points and it is again statistically significant at the 5% level. Given that the

average employment growth rate in the control subsample is 1.4%, this is a large difference

we estimate for the treated subsidiaries.

       Analogous to the subsidiary investment analysis, we also estimate regressions with

match pair fixed effects on the matched sample to obtain standard errors robust to

clustering at the parent firm level. We present the results in Table 5 Panel B. Estimated

coefficients for the Propagation Treatment Dummy variable range between -1.7 and -2.2

percentage points and are always statistically significant at the 1% level.

       Given that the subsidiaries in the control group have an average annual employment

growth of 1.4%, as indicated in Table 4 Panel C, 1.3 to 2.2 percentage points lower

employment growth at the treatment subsidiaries is a very economically important

difference. In fact, employment in the subsidiaries of a parent firm that has a subsidiary in

a country experiencing an economic downturn that year does not grow on average; if




                                              21
anything, the employment in those subsidiaries shrinks. Notice that any possible decrease

in employment we document need not involve massive layoffs. In particular, employment

decrease can be achieved by not replacing natural attrition that occurs in employment due

to retirement and other reasons. Overall, our evidence suggests that there is a statistically

significant and economically meaningful propagation of local economic downturns across

national borders through the network of subsidiaries of MNCs that impacts real

quantities--investment and employment.


5. Robustness

Natural Disasters. We repeat our analysis replacing severe economic downturns with large

natural disasters.6 We consider a natural disaster as `large' if the damage it causes as a

fraction of the country's GDP is in the top decile of all the natural disasters during our

sample period. We obtained data on natural disasters and the damage they cause from EM-

DAT, the International Disaster Database maintained by Universite Catholique de Louvain.

Similar to the main analysis, a parent is treated if it has a subsidiary in a country

experiencing a large natural disaster that year. The control sample is also similarly

constructed by using Mahalanobis matching with exact matching for subsidiary country,

subsidiary 2-digit industry classification, parent country, and year in addition to (nearest

neighbor) matching on parent and subsidiary sizes. Following the main analysis, parents

and subsidiaries located in a country experiencing a large natural disaster are excluded

from both treatment and control groups in the disaster year.




6
  Work that studies the propagation effect of natural disasters includes Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016), Boehm
et al. (2019), Carvalho et al. (2020), and Kashiwagi (2018).


                                                    22
       We present the results in Table 6. International subsidiaries of parents that have a

subsidiary in a disaster country have a 0.5 percentage points lower investment rate that year

than the international subsidiaries of the control group. Similarly, the former subsidiaries

have a 1.5 to 2.3 percentage points lower employment growth that year. These results show

that multinational companies propagate negative effects of natural disasters to their

subsidiaries in other countries, confirming our results on the propagation of economic

downturns.

Before and After a Downturn. Although our short sample does not allow us to study long

dynamics, we still check the propagation in the year before and after a downturn by

repeating the regression (2) in Tables 3 and 5 with the outcome variable as of year t-1 and

t+1. We exclude subsidiaries (directly or indirectly) exposed to the crisis as of year t-1

when we analyze the outcome variable as of year t-1. This analysis helps us to check for

any pre-trends in the data. We report the results in Table 7. We do not find any propagation

effect in the year before the downturn, which suggests the absence of pre-trends. For

investment, we find propagation in year t+1. The magnitude of the propagation effect is

about half of the propagation in the downturn year but it is statistically significant at the

10% level. We do not find any propagation effect for the employment growth after the

downturn year.

       For comparison, we repeat the same before-and-after analysis for the subsidiaries

that are located in the country of downturn and report the results in Table OA-8 in the

Online Appendix. Unlike the subsidiaries in our main analysis, which are indirectly

affected by economic downturns, the subsidiaries in this sample are directly affected by

economic downturns and are not part of our propagation analysis. The sample is




                                             23
constructed by matching the subsidiaries in downturn countries by exact match of industry,

parent country, and year in addition to the Mahalanobis nearest neighbor match based on

subsidiary and parent size. Subsidiaries whose parents are themselves located in a country

experiencing an economic downturn are excluded from the sample. We present the impact

of the economic downturn on both sets of subsidiaries around the economic downturn year

in Figure 2. For investment, we observe a `V' shaped effect for both sets of subsidiaries.

The effect is more pronounced for directly affected subsidiaries. For employment growth,

we still observe a `V' shaped impact for indirectly affected subsidiaries. For directly

affected subsidiaries, the impact of the downturn becomes deeper in year t+1 and

statistically significant at the 10% level.

The Definition of Economic Downturn. In the main analyses, we define a country to have

an economic downturn if its annual real GDP growth rate is at least 2 standard deviations

below that country's long-term average. Our treated parent firms have at least one

subsidiary in a country experiencing an economic downturn while our control parent firms

have none. In Table 8, we present robustness checks with different thresholds for economic

downturns, as well as with more stringent requirements for the control sample.

        We first change the economic downturn threshold to 1.75 standard deviations

below the country's long-term average. We find that our results are similar in magnitude

and statistically significant at the 1% level in all specifications we consider. We then repeat

the analyses with the threshold set at 2.25 standard deviations below, and we again find

that our results are unchanged.

        We also present analyses where we set the threshold for the treated parent firms to

be two standard deviations below the countries' long-term averages (as in our main tests),



                                              24
but the control parent firms are required to have all their subsidiaries in countries with

growth rates higher than one standard deviation below their respective long-term averages.

A more stringent requirement for a parent firm to be a control observation may provide a

better counterfactual of not experiencing an economic downturn. This definition leads

some parent firms to be classified as neither treated nor control and we thus exclude such

parent firms from the sample. We again find a lower investment and employment growth

in treated subsidiaries that are statistically significant at the 5% level or better and have

comparable magnitudes to our main estimates.

       Finally, the effect of an economic downturn may last longer than a year. We repeat

the analysis with the restriction that neither treatment, nor control parents have a subsidiary

in a country that experienced an economic downturn in the previous year. More

specifically, a parent in year t cannot be a treated parent in year t-1. We again find our

results to be robust at comparable magnitudes and statistical significance levels.

Regression Analysis using the Unbalanced Sample. In our main tests, following Imbens

and Rubin (2015), we use matching techniques to construct the sample for the regression

analysis, and we use regression specifications with match pair fixed effects to achieve a

better balance between the treatment and control groups. In Table 9 Panel A, we present

the results of a regression analysis conducted on the full unbalanced sample. This sample

has no restrictions on the number of treatment and control observations in any parent firm

country-subsidiary country-subsidiary industry-year strata. That is, the sample may not

include a treated subsidiary in the same parent firm country, subsidiary country, subsidiary

industry, and year combination for every control observation in the sample, and vice versa.

Allowing for this heterogeneity increases the sample size more than four times. Instead of



                                              25
using match pair fixed effects, regression specifications control for the heterogeneity along

these many dimensions by including parent firm country, subsidiary country, subsidiary

industry, and year fixed effects, as well as their interactions together with a set of

continuous explanatory variables.

       The first three regressions reported in Panel A of the Table 9 use subsidiary

investment as the dependent variable. The first regression includes fixed effects for parent

firm country, subsidiary country, subsidiary industry, and year. The second regression

substitutes parent firm country and year interaction fixed effects for parent firm country

and year. These interaction fixed effects control for time-varying macroeconomic

conditions in parent firm countries and other factors that vary at the country-level. The

third regression adds subsidiary country and year interaction effects to control also for the

time varying macroeconomic factors in the subsidiary countries. In all three specifications

we consider, the estimated propagation effect is negative and statistically significant at

the 1% level. Regressions (4) through (6) in Panel A of Table 9 repeat the same analyses

with the employment growth as the dependent variable. We again find a negative and

statistically significant propagation effect. We conclude that the international propagation

of local economic downturns by MNCs we document in the main analysis is not an artifact

of the screens we use to balance the treatment and control subsamples or due to using

matching as an estimation technique.

Regression Analysis with Parent Firm Fixed Effects. To control for the parent-firm level

time-independent but unobservable factors, we repeat the regressions with parent firm

fixed effects. A typical parent has multiple subsidiaries but, since the treatment is still at

the parent-year level, the identification is from year-to-year differences. Although we have



                                             26
a short panel for this identification strategy to have much statistical power, this analysis

may still be informative. In our main analysis, the sample is balanced through matching in

a way that a parent treated in a given year is not guaranteed to be included in the control

group in another year. For this reason, we again use the unbalanced sample and repeat the

regressions in Table 9 Panel B by adding parent firm fixed effects.

        We report the results in Table 9 Panel B. The dependent variable in the first three

regressions is the investment rate. We find that the coefficient of the propagation indicator

is negative and statistically significant in all three specifications we consider. When we

repeat the analysis for employment growth, we find that all coefficients are negative but

not statistically significant. The international propagation of economic downturns through

MNCs is robust to the unobservable, time-independent factors at the parent level for

subsidiary investment but not for employment. We do not know the reasons for this

asymmetry, but it might be due to the greater stickiness in employment practices in our

sample countries; such stickiness may reduce the statistical power in identifying

propagation in employment out of yearly changes.

Common Borders. The country experiencing a downturn may share a border with the

country where the treated and control subsidiaries are located. There may be concerns that

the common borders may lead to unobservable co-movement between the subsidiary

located in the country of economic downturn and the treated subsidiary for geographic

reasons. Our matching strategy, of course, compares subsidiaries in the same country and

industry but it will be helpful to show the robustness of our results to the exclusion of such

subsidiaries. We report the results in Table OA-1 Panel A of the Online Appendix. We lose




                                             27
about 12-16% of observations depending on the outcome studied. Yet, the propagation

results remain robust at 1% statistical significance.

Other Geographic Restrictions. Parent firms located in the U.S. account for a large part of

the sample. We repeat the main analyses after excluding subsidiaries whose parent firms

are located in the U.S. and report the results in Table OA-1 Panel B of the Online Appendix.

The sample shrinks substantially, but our results remain statistically significant at similar

magnitudes for investment and stronger magnitudes for employment growth. In Panel C,

we restrict both subsidiaries and parent firms to be located in the EU. EU firms are subject

to a similar regulatory environment, so this subsample may be more homogeneous

compared to our main sample. In this subsample, the results become stronger in terms of

economic magnitudes and, although the sample size is considerably smaller, the statistical

significance weakens only slightly, if at all. In Panel D, we consider only subsidiaries and

parent firms located in the Eurozone. These firms not only have a similar regulatory

environment but also use the same currency. Since our sample shrinks by more than 80%,

we no longer obtain statistically significant results for employment growth. However, the

negative effect on investment is more than double compared to that obtained using the main

sample and it is statistically significant at the 1% level. Finally, in Panel E, we restrict the

analysis to U.S. parent firms only. We again obtain statistically significant results for

subsidiary investment in this smaller sample, but the employment results are significant

only in the regression analysis and at the 10% level. The fact that employment results

become statistically weaker in smaller samples may be due to the fact that most of the

subsidiaries in our data are located in Europe where the labor markets tend to be more rigid.




                                              28
Majority-Owned Subsidiaries. In the main analyses, we require the parent firm to be the

largest owner of the subsidiary with at least 25.01% stake. This definition captures the

ability to control a firm by owning less than the majority of shares in many countries. We

now repeat the analyses by restricting the subsidiaries to be majority-owned by their parent

firms and present these results in Table OA-2 Panel A of the Online Appendix. Although

we do not find a lower employment growth in this subsample at the conventional levels of

statistical significance, we find a lower investment rate in treated subsidiaries at stronger

magnitudes and the 1% level of statistical significance.

Controlling for Growth Opportunities. It is customary to control for a firm's growth

opportunities in an analysis of firm investment or employment growth, typically using a

measure of Tobin's q. Very few subsidiaries in our sample are publicly listed so this is not

a viable choice at the subsidiary level. Many of the parent firms located outside of U.S. are

also private so we do not include Tobin's q as a control variable in our main analyses in

order to work with a larger sample. In this subsection, we repeat our main analyses while

controlling for the parent firms' growth opportunities using (parent firms') Tobin's q. The

results presented in Table OA-2 Panel B of the Online Appendix are of comparable

magnitude to those in the main specifications and are statistically significant.

Size-Weighted Estimates. Our sample may include small subsidiaries, so it is important to

check that our results are not driven by the behavior of small subsidiaries even though we

use a matched sample. In Table OA-2 Panel C of the Online Appendix, we repeat the main

regression tests while weighting the observations by their size. Our results remain robust

at the 1% significance level and at comparable magnitudes.




                                             29
Randomized Inference. Our sample has multi-level non-nested structure. That is, the

original source of the treatment, the economic downturn, varies at the country-year level

of affected subsidiaries but our outcomes are measured using information on subsidiaries

of the same parent firm located in different countries. This possibly leads to a complex

structure of the error term in the matching and regression models we estimate, and might

thereby affect our inference. To address this concern, we conduct a randomized inference

test.

        The randomized inference test we use proceeds in three steps. First, for subsidiaries

in our original sample, we randomly reassign GDP growth rates from one country-year to

another country-year, that is, we scramble the key part of the data that is used to define our

independent variable of interest Propagation Treatment Dummy ­ we create "fake shocks".

Second, with this reshuffled data, we rerun our matching estimations and regressions that

are used to produce the baseline results in Tables 3 and 5. We repeat this randomization

1,000 times; each time estimating the ATET (matching) and the coefficient of the

Propagation Treatment Dummy (regression). Third, we compute the empirical standard

error as the standard deviation of the 1,000 estimated coefficients and empirical p-value

as the percentile that the coefficient obtained using our original sample has in the empirical

distribution of the 1,000 estimated coefficients.

        The results of this analysis are presented in Table OA-2 Panel D of the Online

Appendix. Column (1) reports results for subsidiary investment that correspond to

specification in column (3) of Table 3 Panel A, and column (2) reports results that

corresponds to specification in column (3) of Table 3 Panel B. We show that, in both cases,

matching and regression estimation, the empirical standard errors are practically the same



                                             30
as those we used to conduct the inference in Table 3. The empirical p-value is 0.006 in case

of matching and 0.031 in case of regression estimation. Column (3) reports results for

subsidiary employment growth that corresponds to specification in column (3) of Table 5

Panel A, and column (4) reports results that correspond to specification in column (3) of

Table 5 Panel B. In this case, the empirical standard errors are larger compared to those in

Table 5, leading to the empirical p-value 0.092 in case of matching and 0.024 in case of

regression estimation. To summarize, Table OA-2 Panel D shows that our baseline results

continue to be statistically significant at the conventional levels when we account for the

subsidiary-country-year nature of the shocks that are affecting simultaneously multiple

parent firms.

Alternative Clustering of Standard Errors. Our main regression tests reported in Tables 3

and 5 provide standard errors robust to clustering at the parent firm level. There may be a

concern that there is further correlation across the firms operating in the same country as

they are subject to the same macroeconomic shocks. Our matching procedure assures that

the treated and control subsidiaries are from the same year and both have parents in the

same country. Yet, it may still be desirable to check the robustness of our results with

standard errors robust to double clustering at the level of parent country-year in addition to

parent level despite the fact that there are only 41 or fewer parent firm country-year

clusters. The results with this double clustering are presented in the Online Appendix Table

OA-2 Panel E. Our results remain robust at the 1% level of statistical significance.

Difference-in-Differences Estimates. We repeat the main regression analysis using the

Difference-in-Differences framework at the subsidiary level around the treatment year. We

report the results in the Online Appendix Table OA-3. This analysis helps with controlling



                                             31
for the unobservable, time-independent factors at the subsidiary level. As the first

regression indicates, our results about the international propagation for the subsidiary

investment remain robust at the 1% level of statistical significance. The international

propagation for employment growth in regression (2) is statistically significant with p-

value 0.061. We also check for pre-trends in regressions (3) and (4) by restricting the

sample to those subsidiaries that were eligible to be control observations in our analysis.

Specifically, the parents of these subsidiaries were not treated in the previous year and

neither the parent, nor the subsidiary is located in a county that experienced a downturn

during the two pre-event years. Our sample drops by about a half, but this filter provides a

clean sample to check for pre-event trends. We do not find any statistically significant pre-

trend. These regressions confirm that our main results are robust to controlling for time-

independent unobservable factors at the subsidiary level.

Alternative Outcome Measures. The outcome variables we study in the main analyses are

the investment rate and employment growth rate. As a robustness check, we also use the

change in the investment rate and change in the employment growth rate and report the

results in the Online Appendix Table OA-4. The results remain robust at the 5% level of

statistical significance or better.

Alternative Matching Techniques. We also check the robustness of our results to using

alternative matching techniques. In the Online Appendix Table OA-5 Panel A, we

construct the matched sample using not only subsidiary and parent firm size measures in

computing the Mahalanobis metric, but also the parent firm profitability and lagged

investment (lagged employment growth in the employment analysis). We continue to use

the exact matching on parent firm country, subsidiary country, subsidiary industry, and



                                             32
year. Our results remain robust at the 1% statistical significance level. In Panel B, we

estimate propensity scores and use linearized propensity scores to match treated

observations to control observations. Although the propensity scores are estimated using

the full sample, we restrict the matches to be in the same parent firm country, subsidiary

country, subsidiary industry, and year, as in the main analyses. In other words, we use a

linearized propensity score instead of continuous variables in Mahalanobis matching. Our

results are robust for both investment and employment growth, usually at the 1% statistical

significance level. Finally, in Panel C, we use Coarsened Exact Matching to study

investment. This matching technique only provides a matched sample; the estimates are

obtained using a regression analysis on the matched sample. The sample size drops

drastically but, with the exception of the most restrictive specification that leads to the

smallest sample size, the results remain robust at the 5% statistical significance level or

better.


6. Impact of the International Propagation on Destination Economies

          We established the existence of the international propagation of large local

economic downturns via the network of subsidiaries of MNCs. Specifically, in the prior

sections, we showed that if an MNC has a foreign subsidiary in a country with a large

economic downturn, the investment and employment growth in its foreign subsidiaries

located in other countries are lower relative to similar subsidiaries of another MNC that is

headquartered in the same country but does not have a subsidiary in a country with an

economic downturn. Although the propagation effects we estimate are large for the

recipient subsidiaries of the affected MNCs and these subsidiaries are typically very large

firms, the overall impact of the international propagation on the recipient subsidiaries'



                                            33
countries can still be small. This may be because other firms, for example, local standalone

firms operating in the same country and industry as the recipient subsidiaries, increase their

investment and employment to compensate for the declines due to the propagation.

           To assess whether the international propagation channel by MNCs we document is

able to spread a local economic downturn so that the entire destination economies are

affected, we study aggregate industry-level sales and employment of countries with the

presence of recipient subsidiaries. Specifically, we ask whether the aggregate country-

industry-level sales and employment vary with the exposure to the international

propagation effect. To measure this exposure, we construct the Propagation Share variable

as follows. For each country c that does not have an economic downturn in year t and

industry i, we identify subsidiaries of treated parent firms. Similar to our main analyses, a

parent firm is treated in year t if it is headquartered in a country without an economic

downturn but has a subsidiary in a country that has an economic downturn that year. We

then find the share of these subsidiaries in total sales (or employment) in country c and

industry i as of year t-1. This gives the value of Propagation Share for country c, industry

i, and year t.

           To construct the sample for these analyses, we use census-based industry-level

annual data for sales and employment from Eurostat's Structural Business Statistics in the

2008-2012 period.7 The sales and employment data for subsidiaries are from BvD's

Amadeus/Orbis datasets. We define industry at the NACE 3-digit level throughout these

analyses. Table 10 Panel A presents the sample statistics. The mean of Propagation Share

is 4.6% and 3.0% when computed using sales and employment, respectively. On average



7
    We use sales because Eurostat does not provide information that allows constructing investment rates.


                                                      34
in any given year, a country-industry cell in our sample has sales of 1,389 million Euros

and 8,095 employees. Using this country-industry panel sample, we estimate regression

    !"#,% = '  )*+,-./--/0,2+*4"#,% + 67"#,%89 + :#,% + ;",% + <"#,% ,                                   (1)

where yic,t is the logarithm of total sales or employment in country c, industry i, and year t,

Propagation Share is as defined above, Xic,t-1 are control variables, qc,t denote country-year

interaction fixed effects, and li,t denote industry-year interaction fixed effects.

         Table 10 Panel B presents the estimates of regression (1). The dependent variable

in Columns (1)-(4) is the logarithm of the country-industry level sales. Column (1) has

Propagation Share variable together with country, industry, and year fixed effects, while

Columns (2)-(4) use country-year and industry-year interaction fixed effects to control for

country- and industry-specific macroeconomic factors and business cycle fluctuations.

Column (3) adds the logarithm of the sum of lagged sales of all foreign subsidiaries located

in each country-industry pair to control for possible effects due to the differential presence

of MNCs. To control for the direct spillover of economic downturns from countries of

subsidiaries' parent firms, Column (4) further adds the sum of lagged sales of foreign

subsidiaries whose parent firms are headquartered in countries with an economic downturn

in a given year as a fraction of the country-industry level sales. We cluster standard errors

at the country-industry level.8

         In all specifications we consider, Propagation Share has a negative coefficient that

is statistically significant at the 5% level or better. This result shows that the aggregate

country-industry-level sales are significantly smaller when the subsidiaries that are


8
 It may also be desirable to cluster the standard errors both at the country and industry level, but since we
have only 25 country clusters, we opted for clustering at the country-industry level. We repeat the Table 9
Panel B analyses with double clustering at the levels of countries and industries and present the results in the
Online Appendix Table OA-6. The results remain robust to this double clustering.


                                                      35
adversely affected through the international propagation channel account for a larger

fraction of the destination country-industry sales. This finding suggests that other firms

operating in the same country-industry do not replace, at least not within the same year,

the adverse effects of large economic downturns propagated to the destination countries

via the network of MNCs' subsidiaries.

       Columns (5)-(8) repeat the first four regressions with employment replacing sales

in the definitions of the dependent variable, Propagation Share, and control variables.

Propagation Share again has a negative coefficient that is statistically significant at the 1%

level in all specifications. This result suggests that hiring by other firms does not replace

the employment reduction occurring in MNCs' subsidiaries that are adversely affected

through the international propagation channel from other countries.

       In terms of economic magnitude, the estimate in Column (2) implies that a one-

percentage-point increase in Propagation Share, a plausible comparative static exercise

given that the mean (median) of Propagation Share is 4.6% (0%) and its standard deviation

is 12.9% in our sample, leads to 0.37% decrease of total industry sales. Analogously, the

estimate in Column (6) implies an employment reduction of 0.46%. Since the average

growth of total industry sales and employment of country-industries in our sample is,

respectively, 5.1% and -1.0%, our findings suggest that the international propagation has a

large negative impact on industries in destination countries.

       Finally, in Table 10 Panel C, we do a placebo analysis by including the leads and

lags of Propagation Share variable. Specifically, we keep the set of subsidiaries used in

the construction of Propagation Share unchanged, and we use the sum of the leads and

lags of sales (employment) of these same subsidiaries divided by the total country-industry




                                             36
sales (employment) measured as of t-1 to avoid simultaneity. Since parent firms of these

subsidiaries typically do not have other subsidiaries in countries with economic downturns

in years other than t, we should estimate insignificant coefficients on the leads and lags of

Propagation Share if this variable is capturing the international propagation effect by

MNCs. Results in Panel C show that leads and lags of Propagation Share do not have

significant coefficients which supports the interpretation that Propagation Share is

capturing the international propagation effect.

           Our country-industry level analyses show that the international propagation of

economic downturns by MNCs we document adversely affects industry sales and

employment in destination countries. These findings suggest that this international

propagation channel is able to spread a local economic downturn so that the entire

destination economies are affected with material aggregate consequences for the real

economy.


7. Channels of the International Propagation

       Our analyses so far show the propagation of economic downturns from one country to

another that are occurring via subsidiary networks of MNCs, but they do not provide

insights about reasons for why the propagation effect occurs. Prior literature highlights the

presence of supply chain links between subsidiaries and internal capital markets that are

centrally coordinated from headquarters to be key features of MNCs. In this section, we

provide evidence that is consistent with both these features contributing to the international

propagation by MNCs we document.9




9
    These reasons for the propagation to occur are not mutually exclusive and there may also be other channels.


                                                       37
7.1 Supply Chain Links

       The most relevant supply chain links contributing to the international propagation

effect would presumably be those between the subsidiary located in the country

experiencing an economic downturn, henceforth a `affected subsidiary', and the same

MNC's other subsidiaries. If, for example, the affected subsidiary is downstream from

another subsidiary, the reduced demand by the former may force the latter to reduce its

investment and employment. Similarly, if the affected subsidiary is in the upstream, the

disruptions in the former due to the downturn may be reflected in the latter's investment

and employment. In these cases, the supply chain relationships make the propagation effect

stronger. Conversely, the customer subsidiaries in countries without an economic downturn

may shield the affected subsidiary from any negative effects, and, as a result, the

propagation effect may be weaker.

       One would ideally use data on bilateral shipments for this type of analysis.

Unfortunately, we do not have these data, so we use input-output tables at the country-

industry level to construct a proxy for the supply chain relationship between the affected

subsidiary and the other subsidiaries of the same parent firm. These data report the input

of say, German steel industry in French auto industry. In other words, unlike a typical

within-country input-output table that reports the share of steel input in auto industry, we

can condition the input-output relationship to the origin and destination countries.

Naturally, these are only proxies for supply chain relationships within a multinational

company. However, the variation in the input-output relationships at the aggregate level is

likely to reflect the underlying relative comparative advantages of industry-country pairs.

The aggregate input-output data can thus still be used to capture the importance of supply



                                            38
chain links for the propagation effect and such data can also be considered more likely to

be exogenous.

         We use the international input-output table for 2007 published by OECD to

construct our supply chain measures. The dataset provides the dollar amount of inputs from

a country-industry pair used in the output by another country-industry pair. That is, the

advantage of this dataset is that it provides input-output relationship from industry i located

in country c to industry j located in country d. For each treated parent firm, we use these

data to construct measures for the propensity to have upstream and downstream supply

chain relationship between the affected subsidiary and the firm's other subsidiaries.10                       11



The measures are zero for subsidiaries of control parent firms, which do not have any

affected subsidiary by definition.

         We present the results in Table 11. The estimation approach is the same as in

Table 3 Panel B. The dependent variable is subsidiary investment normalized by lagged

subsidiary assets and each regression includes match pair fixed effects. The standard errors


10
   More specifically, we first calculate the direct requirement matrix for one dollar of output for all country-
industry pairs. We then calculate the total requirement matrix by obtaining the `Leontief inverse' that
incorporates indirect supply chain effects. The elements of this matrix give the total requirement for the dollar
amount of products by supplier industry i located in country c to produce a dollar's worth of production by
the customer industry j located in country d, see Miller and Blair (2009, ch. 2). For our upstream measure,
we use the entry in this matrix with the country-industry of the affected subsidiary as the supplier country-
industry and the country-industry pairs of the same parent firm's other subsidiaries as customer country-
industry pairs, and vice versa for our downstream measure. Both measures are very skewed with most of the
values being close to zero. We therefore use the indicator for those subsidiaries in the top decile of our sample
distributions instead of a continuous measure as a proxy for the affected subsidiary to be in the upstream or
downstream. The top decile cutoffs in the investment sample are 0.7% for the upstream measure and 3.0%
for the downstream measure.
11
   Note that these measures cannot be constructed through the interaction of simple indicator variables for
subsidiary i in the regression sample. To see this, it might be worthwhile to revisit the example of German
MNC with subsidiaries in Spain and Finland as discussed in the Introduction. Consider an indicator variable
for the Finnish subsidiary to have a supply chain relationship with another subsidiary of the same parent and
another indicator variable for that German parent to have a subsidiary affected by an economic downturn.
Both of those indicators would be one for the Finnish subsidiary even if the Finnish subsidiary had a supply
chain relationship with a subsidiary, say, in France, which is not experiencing a downturn. Instead, our supply
chain measures require the Finnish subsidiary to have a supply chain relationship with the Spanish subsidiary,
which is located in the country experiencing an economic downturn.


                                                       39
are clustered at the parent firm level. The first regression includes Propagation Treatment

indicator variable and variable Affected Sub in Up Stream, which is a binary indicator that

takes the value of one if the strength of the supply chain relationship between the affected

subsidiary as a supplier and the same parent firm's other subsidiary as a customer is in the

top decile in our sample. Propagation Treatment continues to have a negative and

statistically significant coefficient at the 1% level but Affected Sub in Up Stream has a

positive coefficient that is statistically significant at the 10% level. The combined effect

reported in row `(a) + (b)' is still negative but no longer significant. This suggests that the

propagation effect we find may be weaker or non-existent when the subsidiaries in

countries without an economic downturn are customers to the subsidiary in a country

experiencing an economic downturn. The marginal effect of Affected Sub in Up Stream is

no longer statistically significantly different from zero when controls are added in

Column (2) and the combined effect remains insignificant.

       Regressions in Columns (3) and (4) focus on variable Affected Sub in Down Stream,

which is constructed using the same procedure except that the affected subsidiary is a

customer and the same parent firm's other subsidiary is a supplier. In Column (3), Affected

Sub in Down Stream has a negative but insignificant coefficient (p=0.116), which becomes

statistically significant (p=0.062) when the controls are added in Column (4). Propagation

Share continues to have a negative and statistically significant coefficient at the 1% level.

The combined effect is also negative and statistically significant at the 1% level. We obtain

similar results using the last two regressions in Table 10, which include both supply chain

indicators together.




                                              40
       The results with subsidiary investment suggest that the international propagation

effect via MNCs we find may be stronger when the subsidiary in a country experiencing

an economic downturn is a customer to other subsidiaries of the same parent firm and

weaker when it is a supplier. These findings suggest that the effect may depend on the

supply chain linkages between the subsidiaries.12


7.2 Internal Capital Markets

       If parent firms cannot obtain external financing due to financial constraints to

sustain the optimal level of investment and employment at each subsidiary, an economic

downturn to one subsidiary may be transmitted to another through working of internal

capital markets. To investigate whether internal capital markets can be a channel through

which the propagation of an economic downturn takes place in MNCs, one would ideally

use data on financial transfers from parent firms to subsidiaries (and vice versa), as well as

transfers occurring directly among subsidiaries. Unfortunately, we do not have such data.

Instead, we use two different approaches. First, we check whether the propagation effect

we find is stronger in a sample of parent firms that can be considered as financially

constrained according to the measures in the corporate finance literature. Then, we study

whether there is still the international propagation of economic downturns to subsidiaries

in non-tradable industries. For these subsidiaries, an important potential reason for

propagation, namely, trade along within-firm supply chain links, is likely to be absent.

       The firms in our sample are unlikely to be financially constrained according to the

traditional measures. Figure OA-1 Panel A in Online Appendix compare the total sales of


12
  We do not find any coherent and significant relationship between our supply chain measures and
employment growth so we omit them.


                                              41
the U.S. parents in our sample and the U.S. Compustat firms in 2004-2006, just before our

sample period and the financial crisis. The firms in our sample are larger. Panel B shows

that the U.S. parents in our sample hold more cash relative to their assets than U.S.

Compustat firms. Finally, Panels C and D compare the financial constraint index due to

Whited and Wu (2006) for the U.S. parents in our sample with Compustat firms during the

same time period; the firms in our sample have much higher index value.

       With this challenge in mind, we proceed to study whether the propagation effect

we find is stronger in firms that can be considered as financially constrained. The first

measure we use is the Whited-Wu index. Since this measure was developed for U.S.

publicly-traded firms, we focus on U.S. parents in our sample. The literature often

considers the bottom 30% or 40% of the U.S. Compustat firms according to this measure

as financially constrained. Very few firms in our sample fall below that threshold so we

use the cutoff of 50% in our analysis, which is reported in Table 12 Panel A. Our focus is

the interaction effect of our treatment indicator with WW50, which takes the value of one

for firms that have lower Whited-Wu index value than the median value for Compustat

firms in 2004-2006, just before our sample period. A negative and statistically significant

coefficient for this interaction term suggests that the propagation effect we find is stronger

in financially constrained firms.

       The first regression in Table 12 Panel A repeats the main regression for the matched

sample from Table 3 with the investment rate as the dependent variable. The only

difference is that WW50 is also used in the matching to incorporate the fact that financially

constrained parents may be different from the unconstrained parents in multiple

dimensions. This way the subsidiary of a financially constrained treated parent is matched




                                             42
to a subsidiary of a financially constrained parent from the pool of control observations.

Other exact and continuous matching variables remain the same. The interaction of

treatment indicator and WW50 has a negative and significant coefficient, which indicates

that the propagation effect we find is indeed stronger for the financially constrained

parents.

       Since we have few financially constrained parents, exact matching on WW50 may

be restrictive so we drop it from matching variables but, instead, include it in the regression

control variables together with its interaction with all other control variables. That way, the

treatment indicator is not the only variable whose coefficient is allowed to be different for

financially constrained parents. The interaction of treatment indicator and WW50 again has

a negative and significant coefficient.

       In columns (3) and (4), we repeat the first two regressions with the employment

growth as the dependent variable. In both cases, the interaction term has a negative

coefficient, which is statistically significant in one of them. Although the number of firms

that have low Whited-Wu index values in our sample is not large enough to allow a

subsample analysis and the power of these tests may be limited, these results suggest that

the propagation effect we find is stronger for firms that are financially constrained as

measured by the Whited-Wu index.

       We repeat this analysis using another indicator of financially constrained parents,

namely, whether the parent firms have credit ratings. Since few countries outside the U.S.

have developed bond markets, we restrict our analysis to U.S. parents. The focus is now

on the coefficient of the interaction of treated indicator and the No-Rating, which takes the

value of one if the parent has no credit rating. We report the results in Table 12 Panel B. In




                                              43
the first two regressions where the dependent variable is the investment rate, the interaction

term has a negative but statistically insignificant coefficient. In columns (3) and (4), where

the dependent variable is the employment growth, this interaction terms has a negative and

statistically significant coefficient. We also do a subsample analysis and report the results

in Table OA-7 of the Online Appendix. The propagation treatment effect is negative and

significant in both matching and regression analysis for both investment rate and

employment growth in the subsample of unrated firms. For rated firms, the propagation

effect is negative but rarely significant. These results suggest that internal capital markets

play an important role in the international propagation of economic downturns.

       We also study the role of internal capital markets in the subsample of firms, for

which the supply chain channel is absent, namely the firms that operate in non-tradeable

products. If we still find propagation through these firms, the propagation channel is likely

to be internal capital markets. We use two different definitions for the industries of non-

tradable products. Our broad definition includes all non-manufacturing industries. Our

second, much narrower definition includes construction (nace=45), retail trade (52), hotels

and restaurants (55), and real estate (70). The advantage of the narrower definition is that

the products of these industries are very unlikely to be traded internationally. The

disadvantage is that the resulting sample is less than 5% of the original sample for the

investment analyses and less than 3% for the employment growth analyses; the statistical

power of analyses using these subsamples is thus much lower.

       Table 13 Panel A presents the results for the subsidiaries in non-tradable industries

according to the broad definition. We find that the subsidiaries of treated parent firms have

both lower investment and employment growth. In Panel B, we present the results for the




                                             44
subsidiaries in non-tradable industries according to the narrow definition. We again find a

lower investment for these subsidiaries at the 5 or 10% statistical significance; the

estimated negative effects are not statistically significant for the employment growth in

this much smaller sample. The finding that there is international propagation of large local

economic downturns to subsidiaries that are very unlikely to have trade links with other

subsidiaries of the same MNC suggests that internal capital markets are contributing to this

propagation. Overall, we conclude that both supply chain links between subsidiaries and,

especially, internal capital markets are likely contributing to the international propagation

of downturns by MNCs we find.


8. Conclusion

       In this paper, we study how non-financial multinational companies propagate large

economic downturns from one country to another through the network of their subsidiaries.

We focus on MNCs whose parent firms are not experiencing an economic downturn

directly but have a subsidiary in a country with a large economic downturn. The investment

and employment growth of other subsidiaries of such affected parent firms are significantly

lower compared to the same country-industry subsidiaries of parent firms that do not have

any subsidiary exposed to an economic downturn. This methodology allows us to identify

how economic downturns are spread across borders in a way different from other known

channels that lead to international co-movement such as global economic crises that affect

multiple economies at the same time or local downturns that are propagated through the

financial sector. We also show that the international propagation channel by MNCs we

identify is able to spread local economic downturns so that the sales and employment of

entire destination economies are affected. These findings may be used in designing public



                                             45
policies aimed at preventing local economic crises from escalating to regional or global

levels.

          An interesting question is whether MNCs also propagate economic upturns

internationally. Our framework allows such a study but there are few MNCs that are

positively treated during our sample period of 2008-2012 without also being negatively

treated in the same year. Many of the positive treatment cases also come right after a major

downturn during this sample period so they may be subject to different dynamics. Hence,

we leave the study of this important and interesting question to future work.




                                            46
References

Acemoglu, Daron, Ufuk Akcigit, and William Kerr. "Networks and the macroeconomy:
        An empirical exploration." NBER Macroeconomics Annual 30, no. 1 (2016): 273-
        335
Acemoglu, Daron, Vasco M. Carvalho, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi,
        2012, The Network Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations, Econometrica 80(5), 1977-
        2016.
Acemoglu, Daron, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, 2015, Systemic Risk and
        Stability in Financial Networks, American Economic Review 105, 564-608.
Alfaro, Laura, and Maggie Xiaoyang Chen, 2012, Surviving the Global Financial Crisis:
        Foreign Ownership and Establishment Performance, American Economic Journal:
        Economic Policy 4(3), 30-55.
Antrás, Pol, and Stephen R. Yeaple, 2014, Multinational Firms and the Structure of
        International Trade, Handbook of International Economics 4, 55-130.
Barrot, Jean-Noel, and Julien Sauvagnat, 2016, Input Specificity and the Propagation of
        Idiosyncratic Shocks in Production Networks, The Quarterly Journal of Economics
        131(3), 1543-1592.
Bernard, Andrew B., Andreas Moxnes, and Yukiko U. Saito. "Production networks,
        geography, and firm performance." Journal of Political Economy 127, no. 2 (2019):
        639-688.
Bosker, Maarten, Thanh Nam Le, and Bastian Westbrock, 2018, The propagation of a trade
        cost shock in the global production network, working paper.
Boehm, Christoph E., Aaron Flaaen, and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar, 2019, "Input linkages and
        the transmission of shocks: firm-level evidence from the 2011 Thoku earthquake."
        Review of Economics and Statistics 101, no. 1 (2019): 60-75.
Burstein, Arial, Christopher Kurz, and Linda Tesar, 2008, Trade, Production Sharing, and
        the International Propagation of Business Cycles, Journal of Monetary Economics
        55(4), 775-795.
Carvalho, Vasco M., 2014, From Micro to Macro via Production Networks, The Journal
        of Economic Perspectives 28(4), 23-47.
Carvalho, Vasco M., Makoto Nirei, Yukiko U. Saito, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, 2020.
        "Supply Chain Disruptions: Evidence From The Great East Japan Earthquake,"
        Working paper.
Carvalho, Vasco M., and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi. "Production networks: A primer." Annual
        Review of Economics 11 (2019): 635-663.
Cetorelli, Nicola and Linda S. Goldberg, 2012, Banking Globalization and Monetary
        Propagation, Journal of Finance 67, 1811-1843.
Cravino, Javier, and Andrei A. Levchenko, 2016, Cravino, Javier, and Andrei A.
        Levchenko. "Multinational firms and international business cycle propagation."
        The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132, no. 2 (2016): 921-962.
Desai, Mihir A., C. Fritz Foley, and Kristin J. Forbes, 2008, Financial Constraints and
        Growth: Multinational and Local Firm Responses to Currency Depreciations,
        Review of Financial Studies 21, 2857-2888.
Desai, Mihir A., C. Fritz Foley, and James R. Hines, 2009, Domestic Effects of the Foreign
        Activities of US Multinationals, American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 1,


                                           47
        181-203.
di Giovanni, Julian, Andrei A. Levchenko, and Isabelle Mejean. "The micro origins of
        international business-cycle comovement." American Economic Review 108, no. 1
        (2018): 82-108.
Duchin, Ran, Amir Goldberg, and Denis Sosyura, 2016. "Spillovers inside conglomerates:
        incentives and capital." The Review of Financial Studies 30, no. 5 (2016): 1696-
        1743.
Erel, Isil, Yeejin Jang, and Michael S. Weisbach, 2015, Do Acquisitions Relieve Target
        Firms' Financial Constraints? Journal of Finance 70, 289-328.
Erel, Isil and Jang, Yeejin and Weisbach, Michael S., The Corporate Finance of
        Multinational Firms, 2020, to appear in "Multinational Corporations in a Changing
        Global Economy," Brookings Institution.
Faccio, Mara, and William O'Brien, 2017, Business Groups and Employment, working
        paper.
Forbes, Kristin J., 2004. The Asian flu and Russian virus: the international propagation of
        crises in firm-level data. Journal of International Economics, 63(1), pp.59-92.
Giroud, X., and H. Mueller, 2017, "Redistribution of Local Labor Market Shocks through
        Firms' Internal Networks," working paper.
Hertzel, Michael G., Zhi Li, Micah S. Officer, and Kimberly J. Rodgers, 2008, Inter-firm
        Linkages and the Wealth Effects of Financial Distress Along the Supply Chain,
        Journal of Financial Economics 87, 374-387.
Imbens, Guido and Jeffrey Wooldridge, 2009, Recent Developments in the Econometrics
        of Program Evaluation, Journal of Economic Literature 47:1, 1­81
Imbens, Guido and Donald Rubin, 2015, Causal Inference for Statistics, Social, and
        Biomedical Sciences: An Introduction, Cambridge University Press, New York.
Jang, Yeejin, 2013, Does International Corporate Diversification Improve Access to
        Capital? Ohio State University Working Paper.
Johnson, Robert C., 2014, Trade in Intermediate Inputs and Business Cycle Comovement,
        American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 6(4), 39-83.
Kahle, Kathy and Rene Stulz, 2013, Access to Capital, Investment, and the Financial Crisis,
        Journal of Financial Economics 110, 280-299.
Kalemli-Özcan, ebnem, Se-Jik Kim, Hyun Song Shin, Bent E. Sørensen, and Sevcan
        Yeilta, 2014 "Financial shocks in production chains," working paper.
Kalemli-Özcan, ebnem, E. Papaioannou, and J. L. Peydró, 2013. Financial regulation,
       financial globalization, and the synchronization of economic activity. The Journal
       of Finance, 68(3), pp.1179-1228.
Kashiwagi, Yuzuka, Yasuyuki Todo, and Petr Matous, 2018, International propagation of
       economic shocks through global supply chains. Vol. 1810. WINPEC working
       paper, 2018.
Kelly, Bryan, Hanno Lustig, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, 2013, Firm Volatility in
       Granular Networks, NBER Working Paper No. 19466.
Khwaja, Asim, and Atif Mian, 2008, Tracing the impact of bank liquidity shocks: Evidence
       from an emerging market, American Economic Review 98, 1413­1442.
Kolay, Madhuparna, Michael Lemmon, and Elizabeth Tashjian. "Spreading the misery?
       Sources of bankruptcy spillover in the supply chain." Journal of Financial and
       Quantitative Analysis 51, no. 6 (2016): 1955-1990.


                                            48
Kose, M. Ayhan, and Kei-Mu Yi, 2001, International Trade and Business Cycles: Is
        Vertical Specialization the Missing Link? The American Economic Review 91(2),
        371-375.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio LopezdeSilanes, and Andrei Shleifer, 1999, "Corporate
        ownership around the world." The Journal of Finance 54 (2), 471-517.
Matvos, Gregor, and Amit Seru, 2014. "Resource allocation within firms and financial
        market dislocation: Evidence from diversified conglomerates." The Review of
        Financial Studies 27, no. 4 (2014): 1143-1189.
Miller, Ronald E., and Peter D. Blair, 2009. Input-Output Analysis: Foundations and
        Extensions. Cambridge University Press.
Peek, Joe, and Eric Rosengren, 1997, The international propagation of financial shocks:
        The case of Japan, American Economic Review 87, 495­505.
Peek, Joe, and Eric Rosengren, 2000, Collateral damage: Effects of the Japanese bank crisis
        on real activity in the United States, American Economic Review 90, 30­45.
Ramondo, Natalia, Veronica Rappaport, and Kim J. Ruhl, 2016, Intrafirm Trade and
        Vertical Fragmentation in U.S. Multinational Corporations, Journal of
        International Economics 98, 51-59.
Santioni, Raffaele, Fabio Schiantarelli, and Philip E. Strahan, 2017. Internal capital
        markets in times of crisis: The benefit of group affiliation in Italy. No. w23541.
        National Bureau of Economic Research.
Schnabl, Philipp, 2012, Financial globalization and the propagation of bank liquidity
        shocks: Evidence from an emerging market, Journal of Finance 67, 897-932.
Wu, Di, 2016, Shock Spillover and Financial Response in Supply Chain Networks:
        Evidence from Firm-Level Data, Working Paper.
Whited, Toni M., and Guojun Wu, 2006. "Financial constraints risk." The Review of
        Financial Studies 19, no. 2 (2006): 531-559
Yeaple, Stephen Ross, 2013, The Multinational Firm, Annual Review of Economics 5, 193-
        217.




                                            49
Figure 1. Matched Treated and Control Observations
Treated subsidiaries are matched to control subsidiaries in the same country. Parent MNCs of both treated and control subsidiaries are
required to be located in the same country. Not depicted is the requirement for both treated and control subsidiaries to operate in the
same industry and the comparison takes place using accounting data from the same year.




                                                                  50
Figure 2. Investment and Employment Growth Around the Downturn Year
This graph presents the difference in the Investment Rate (top panel) and Employment
Growth (bottom panel) both in the directly-affected subsidiaries, which are located in
countries experiencing economic downturns, and the indirectly affected subsidiaries,
which are located in other countries but are owned by the same parents. The differences
are with respect to a matched control sample and estimated using a regression analysis
described in Section 5. Shaded areas designate the 95% confidence interval.

                                          51
Table 1 - Distribution of Subsidiary and Parent Firms' Countries across Years
We present the countries experiencing economic downturns used as sources of treatment and the
distribution of subsidiaries and parent firms across countries and years in the matched sample for
our treatment/control sample. A parent is treated if it has a subsidiary in a country experiencing an
economic downturn that year with the economic downturn defined as a real GDP growth at least
two standard deviations less than the country's long-term average. To construct our control sample,
we use Mahalanobis matching with exact matching for subsidiary country, subsidiary 2-digit
industry classification, parent country, and year in addition to (nearest neighbor) matching on
parent and subsidiary sizes, as measured by the natural logarithm of their total assets. No downturns
in 2009 could be used as a source of treatment due to the scarcity of potential control observations
that year and the requirement for the parents to be located in a country not experiencing a downturn,
an eligibility condition to construct a clean treatment sample. We require our main dependent
variable of interest, subsidiary investment, which is defined as the change in fixed assets plus
depreciation, normalized by lagged total assets, as well as other main continuous variables of
interest (i.e., parent cash flow and lagged subsidiary investment) to be non-missing to be in the
final sample. Panel C counts a parent as many times as it has treated subsidiaries to show the
distribution. Panel D provides statistics on investment and employment growth for the subsidiaries
in the crisis countries during the crisis year and the year before; these subsidiaries are excluded
from the main analysis. Subsidiary Employment Growth is defined as ln(employment(t) /
employment(t-1)) of the subsidiary.

Panel A: Economic Downturns Used in the Analysis

 Country Name                                         Year
 Estonia                                              2008
 Greece                                               2010, 2011, 2012
 Ireland                                              2008
 Iceland                                              2010
 Italy                                                2012
 Latvia                                               2008, 2010
 Netherlands                                          2012
 Portugal                                             2012
 Slovenia                                             2010, 2011, 2012
 Spain                                                2012




                                                 52
Panel B: Treated Subsidiaries: Country-Year Distribution

 Country Name                         2008          2010       2011    2012
 Austria                                53            18         15
 Belgium                               237           139        139     187
 Czech Republic                         64            51         43
 Denmark                                85            58         55       5
 Finland                                53            28         26      22
 France                                231           105        109     350
 Germany                               296           171        110     111
 Greece                                 35
 Hungary                                22            10          8
 Italy                                 359           218        200
 Japan                                                            3
 Korea                                  20             20        15      51
 Netherlands                            25             13         7
 Norway                                 88             49        53      32
 Poland                                 62             81        63      14
 Portugal                               42             21        21
 Romania                                                          9
 Singapore                               9
 Slovakia                                                  6     16
 Slovenia                                4
 Spain                                 318            219        211
 Sweden                                100             53         60      20
 United Kingdom                        421            236        203     571
 Total                               2,524          1,496      1,366   1,363




                                          53
Panel C: Treated Subsidiaries: Parent Firm Country-Year Distribution

 Country Name                                    2008         2010        2011             2012
 Australia                                                                                    3
 Belgium                                                                                      6
 Canada                                                                                       5
 Denmark                                             23          8              6            22
 Finland                                              7
 France                                             291        268         216                  73
 Germany                                            184        165         165                  41
 Ireland                                                                                        13
 Japan                                             139          38            21               193
 Korea, Republic of                                  3
 Netherlands                                        74          38            38
 Spain                                               3
 Sweden                                            109          39          20                  75
 Switzerland                                        66          83          81
 United Kingdom                                    195         121         113                87
 United States of America                        1,430         736         706               845
 Total                                           2,524       1,496       1,366             1,363


Panel D: Subsidiaries in Economic Downturn Countries During the Downturn Year

                                                              Mean   Median         Std. Dev         N
Subsidiary Investment (t)                                     2.778     1.144         5.088 1,596
Subsidiary Investment (t-1)                                   3.209     1.259         5.852 1,596
Change in Subsidiary Investment (from (t-1) to (t))       -0.430*** -0.082***         6.410 1,596

Subsidiary Employment Growth (t)                              0.015     0.000        20.490 1,359
Subsidiary Employment Growth (t-1)                            1.635     0.000        22.249 1,359
Change in Subsidiary Empl. Growth (from (t-1) to (t))      -1.620** -0.054***        28.229 1,359




                                               54
Table 2 - Summary Statistics for the Analysis of Subsidiary Investment
This table presents summary statistics for control variables (Panel A), covariate balance (Panel B), and outcome
variables (Panel C). Results are presented for the treatment sample and control sample as well as for the full sample.
A parent is treated if it has a subsidiary in a country experiencing an economic downturn that year with the
economic downturn defined as a real GDP growth at least two standard deviations less than the country's long-
term average. To construct our control sample, we use Mahalanobis matching with exact matching for subsidiary
country, subsidiary 2-digit industry classification, parent country, and year in addition to (nearest neighbor)
matching on parent and subsidiary sizes. Parents and subsidiaries located in a country experiencing an economic
downturn are excluded from both treatment and control groups. Subsidiary (Parent) Size is measured by the natural
logarithm of the subsidiary (parent) total book assets in millions of Euros Parent Cash Flow is defined as its
Operating profit/loss plus depreciation, over total assets. Subsidiary Investment (t) is defined as the change in fixed
assets from (t-1) to (t) plus depreciation (t) of the subsidiary, normalized by total assets (t-1) and in percentage
points. In Panels A and C, symbols *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively, using mean
difference test (adjusting for clustering of observations at the parent company level) for the difference in means
and Wilcoxon Ranksum Test for the difference in medians in Treatment vs. Control Samples.
Panel A: Summary Statistics of Control Variables
                                                               Treatment
 Variables                                                                       Control Sample             All
                                                                Sample
                                              Mean               9.458               8.547***              9.002
 Parent Size (t-1)                         Median                9.544               8.661***              9.170
                                          Std. Dev.              1.493                 1.396               1.515
                                              Mean               0.139                 0.127               0.133
 Parent Cash Flow (t-1)                    Median                0.134              0.118***               0.125
                                          Std. Dev.              0.070                 0.069               0.069
                                              Mean               3.320               3.015***              3.168
 Subsidiary Size (t-1)                     Median                3.122               2.852***              2.975
                                          Std. Dev.              1.566                 1.335               1.463
                                              Mean               3.079                 3.490               3.284
 Subsidiary Investment (t-1)               Median                1.188               1.437***              1.334
                                          Std. Dev.              5.776                 6.030               5.908
                                                 N               6,749                 6,749              13,498
Panel B: Covariate Balance
  Variables                                      Standardized Difference                        Variance Ratio
                                                  Raw           Matched                        Raw        Matched

  Parent Size (t-1)                               1.254                0.630                   0.697              1.143
  Parent Cash Flow (t-1)                          0.239                0.183                   0.725              1.038
  Subsidiary Size (t-1)                           0.350                0.210                   1.353              1.377
  Subsidiary Investment (t-1)                     -0.027               -0.070                  0.899              0.918
Panel C: Summary Statistics of Outcome Variables
  Variables                                                 Treatment Sample          Control Sample            All
                                                 Mean             2.910                  3.764**              3.337
  Subsidiary Investment (t)                   Median              1.075                 1.477***              1.273
                                             Std. Dev.            5.867                   6.927               6.433
                                                 Mean            -0.169                   0.275               0.0531
  Change in Subsidiary
                                              Median             -0.030                  0.000**              -0.011
  Investment (from (t-1) to (t))
                                             Std. Dev.            6.875                   7.125               7.005
                                                    N             6,749                   6,749               13,498


                                                          55
  Table 3 ­ International Propagation of Economic Downturns by MNCs ­ Subsidiary Investment
  Panel A reports average treatment effect on the treated (ATET) for the outcome variable Subsidiary Investment (t), which is the change in fixed
  assets plus depreciation, normalized by lagged total assets, and in percentage points. In constructing the Propagation Treatment Dummy variable, a
  parent is treated if it has a subsidiary in a country experiencing an economic downturn that year with the economic downturn defined as a real GDP
  growth at least two standard deviations less than the country's long-term average. To construct our control sample, we use Mahalanobis matching
  with exact matching for subsidiary country, subsidiary 2-digit industry classification, parent country, and year in addition to (nearest neighbor)
  matching on parent and subsidiary sizes. Parents and subsidiaries located in a country experiencing an economic downturn are excluded from both
  treatment and control groups. Subsidiary (Parent) Size is measured by the natural logarithm of the subsidiary (parent) total book assets. Parent Cash
  Flow is defined as its Operating profit/loss plus depreciation, over total assets. In Panel A, ATET is bias-adjusted by using subsidiary and parent
  sizes in Column (1), by also parent cash flow in Columns (2), and additionally by lagged subsidiary investment in Column (3). In Panel B, we report
  regression estimates with standard errors in parentheses, where we again use the Subsidiary Investment (t) as the dependent variable. We include
  match-pair fixed effects in all specifications. Standard errors in regressions are corrected for clustering of observations at the parent level. All
  outcome variables are trimmed at the upper and lower 5% level. All control variables are winsorized at the upper and lower 1% level and are included
  in the tests with one lag. Symbols *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.

  Panel A: Propagation Treatment ­ Matching Estimates

                                                          (1)                                   (2)                                  (3)
                                                Subsidiary Investment                  Subsidiary Investment                 Subsidiary Investment
ATET                                                  -1.223***                             -1.266***                              -0.898***
Abadie-Imbens robust std. err.                          (0.198)                               (0.198)                                (0.195)

N (Matched Observations)                               13,498                                13,498                                 13,498
                                                 Subsidiary Country,                   Subsidiary Country,                   Subsidiary Country,
                                                   Parent Country,                       Parent Country,                       Parent Country,
Exact Matches
                                                 Subsidiary Industry,                  Subsidiary Industry,                  Subsidiary Industry,
                                                         Year                                  Year                                  Year
Nearest Neighborhood Mahalanobis                 Subsidiary Size (t-1),                Subsidiary Size (t-1),               Subsidiary Size (t-1),
matching                                           Parent Size (t-1)                     Parent Size (t-1)                     Parent Size (t-1)
                                                                                                                            Subsidiary Size (t-1),
                                                                                       Subsidiary Size (t-1),
                                                 Subsidiary Size (t-1),                                                       Parent Size (t-1),
Bias-adj variables                                                                       Parent Size (t-1),
                                                   Parent Size (t-1)                                                       Parent Cash Flow (t-1),
                                                                                      Parent Cash Flow (t-1)
                                                                                                                          Subsidiary Investment (t-1)




                                                                           56
Panel B: Propagation Treatment ­ Regression Estimates

                                                      (1)                     (2)                     (3)
                                             Subsidiary Investment   Subsidiary Investment   Subsidiary Investment
 Propagation Treatment Dummy                      -0.854***               -0.946***               -0.710***
                                                    (0.227)                 (0.253)                 (0.216)

 Subsidiary Size (t-1)                                                       0.095                   0.007
                                                                            (0.161)                 (0.155)

 Parent Size (t-1)                                                           0.005                   -0.049
                                                                            (0.148)                 (0.130)

 Parent Cash Flow (t-1)                                                    4.607**                  3.256*
                                                                           (2.064)                  (1.826)

 Subsidiary Investment (t-1)                                                                       0.348***
                                                                                                    (0.032)

 Fixed Effects                                    Match pair              Match pair              Match pair
 N (Matched Observations)                          13,498                  13,498                  13,498
 R2                                                0.538                   0.539                   0.588
 N (Firms)                                         5,600                   5,600                   5,600
 N (Clusters/Parents)                              1,145                   1,145                   1,145




                                                               57
Table 4 - Summary Statistics for the Analysis of Subsidiary Employment Growth
This table presents summary statistics for control variables (Panel A), covariate balance (Panel B), and outcome
variables (Panel C). Results are presented for the treatment sample and control sample as well as for the full sample.
A parent is treated if it has a subsidiary in a country experiencing an economic downturn that year with the
economic downturn defined as a real GDP growth at least two standard deviations less than the country's long-
term average. To construct our control sample, we use Mahalanobis matching with exact matching for subsidiary
country, subsidiary 2-digit industry classification, parent country, and year in addition to (nearest neighbor)
matching on parent and subsidiary sizes. Parents and subsidiaries located in a country experiencing an economic
downturn are excluded from both treatment and control groups. Subsidiary (Parent) Size is measured by the natural
logarithm of the subsidiary (parent) total book assets in millions of Euros. Parent Cash Flow is defined as its
Operating profit/loss plus depreciation, over total assets. Subsidiary Employment Growth is defined as
ln(employment(t) / employment(t-1)) of the subsidiary. In Panels A and C, symbols *, **, *** denote significance at
the 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively, using mean difference test (adjusting for clustering of observations at the parent
company level) for the difference in means and Wilcoxon Ranksum Test for the difference in medians in Treatment
vs. Control Samples.

Panel A: Summary Statistics of Control Variables
  Variables                                                Treatment Sample          Control Sample            All
                                                 Mean              9.499               8.649***               9.074
  Parent Size (t-1)                           Median               9.567               8.693***               9.200
                                             Std. Dev.             1.451                  1.324               1.453
                                                 Mean              0.140                  0.128               0.134
  Parent Cash Flow (t-1)                      Median               0.134               0.119***               0.126
                                             Std. Dev.             0.070                  0.068               0.069
                                                 Mean              3.336                3.117**               3.227
  Subsidiary Size (t-1)                       Median               3.197               2.977***               3.064
                                             Std. Dev.             1.473                  1.273               1.381
                                                 Mean              1.574                  1.764               1.669
  Subsidiary Employment
                                              Median               0.000                  0.000               0.000
  Growth (t-1)
                                             Std. Dev.            22.561                 19.143              20.921
                                                    N              5,980                  5,980              11,960
Panel B: Covariate Balance
  Variables                                      Standardized Difference                       Variance Ratio
                                                  Raw           Matched                       Raw        Matched

  Parent Size (t-1)                               1.237               0.612                   0.727             1.201
  Parent Cash Flow (t-1)                          0.240               0.170                   0.745             1.082
  Subsidiary Size (t-1)                           0.272               0.159                   1.294             1.339
  Subsidiary Employment
  Growth (t-1)                                    0.023               -0.009                  1.099             1.389
Panel C: Summary Statistics of Outcome Variables
  Variables                                                Treatment Sample          Control Sample              All
                                                 Mean           -0.238                    1.437                 0.600
  Subsidiary Employment
                                              Median             0.000                    0.000                 0.000
  Growth (t)
                                             Std. Dev.          22.465                  19.975                 21.272
  Change in Subsidiary                           Mean           -1.812                   -0.327                -1.070
  Employment Growth (from                     Median             0.000                    0.000                 0.000
  (t-1) to (t))                              Std. Dev.          30.721                  26.373                 28.638
                                                    N            5,980                    5,980                11,960


                                                          58
  Table 5 ­ International Propagation of Economic Downturns by MNCs ­ Subsidiary Employment Growth
  Panel A reports average treatment effect on the treated (ATET) for the outcome variable Subsidiary Employment Growth (t), which is
  ln(employment(t) / employment(t-1)) of the subsidiary. In constructing the Propagation Treatment Dummy variable, a parent is treated if it has a
  subsidiary in a country experiencing an economic downturn that year with the economic downturn defined as a real GDP growth at least two standard
  deviations less than the country's long-term average. To construct our control sample, we use Mahalanobis matching with exact matching for
  subsidiary country, subsidiary 2-digit industry classification, parent country, and year in addition to (nearest neighbor) matching on parent and
  subsidiary sizes. Parents and subsidiaries located in a country experiencing an economic downturn are excluded from both treatment and control
  groups. Subsidiary (Parent) Size is measured by the natural logarithm of the subsidiary (parent) total book assets. Parent Cash Flow is defined as
  its Operating profit/loss plus depreciation, over total assets. In Panel A, ATET is bias-adjusted by using subsidiary and parent sizes in Column (1),
  by also parent cash flow in Columns (2), and additionally by lagged subsidiary investment in Column (3). In Panel B, we report regression estimates
  with standard errors in parentheses, where we again use the Subsidiary Employment Growth (t) as the dependent variable. We include match-pair
  fixed effects in all specifications. Standard errors in regressions are corrected for clustering of observations at the parent level. All outcome variables
  are trimmed at the upper and lower 5% level. All control variables are winsorized at the upper and lower 1% level and are included in the tests with
  one lag. Symbols *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.

  Panel A: Propagation Treatment ­ Matching Estimates

                                                           (1)                                   (2)                                   (3)
                                               Subsidiary Employment Growth         Subsidiary Employment Growth           Subsidiary Employment Growth
ATET                                                    -1.351**                             -1.522**                                -1.542**
Abadie-Imbens robust std. err.                           (0.653)                              (0.653)                                 (0.653)

N (Matched Observations)                                 11,960                               11,960                                  11,960
                                                   Subsidiary Country,                  Subsidiary Country,                    Subsidiary Country,
                                                     Parent Country,                      Parent Country,                        Parent Country,
Exact Matches
                                                   Subsidiary Industry,                 Subsidiary Industry,                   Subsidiary Industry,
                                                           Year                                 Year                                   Year
Nearest Neighborhood Mahalanobis                   Subsidiary Size (t-1),               Subsidiary Size (t-1),                 Subsidiary Size (t-1),
matching                                             Parent Size (t-1)                    Parent Size (t-1)                      Parent Size (t-1)
                                                                                                                               Subsidiary Size (t-1),
                                                                                        Subsidiary Size (t-1),
                                                   Subsidiary Size (t-1),                                                        Parent Size (t-1),
Bias-adj variables                                                                        Parent Size (t-1),
                                                     Parent Size (t-1)                                                       Parent Cash Flow (t-1),
                                                                                       Parent Cash Flow (t-1)
                                                                                                                       Subsidiary Employment Growth (t-1)




                                                                              59
Panel B: Propagation Treatment ­ Regression Estimates

                                                     (1)                            (2)                            (3)
                                      Subsidiary Employment Growth   Subsidiary Employment Growth   Subsidiary Employment Growth
 Propagation Treatment Dummy                     -1.675***                      -2.183***                      -2.175***
                                                  (0.553)                        (0.665)                        (0.658)

 Subsidiary Size (t-1)                                                          -0.137                         -0.157
                                                                               (0.559)                        (0.554)

 Parent Size (t-1)                                                              0.522                          0.539
                                                                               (0.415)                        (0.413)

 Parent Cash Flow (t-1)                                                         8.079                          7.373
                                                                               (6.835)                        (6.835)

 Subsidiary Employment Growth (t-1)                                                                           0.053*
                                                                                                              (0.029)

 Fixed Effects                                 Match pair                     Match pair                     Match pair
 N (Matched Observations)                       11,960                         11,960                         11,960
 R2                                              0.510                          0.510                          0.511
 N (Firms)                                       4,943                          4,943                          4,943
 N (Clusters/Parents)                            1,038                          1,038                          1,038




                                                                60
Table 6 ­ The Effect of Natural Disasters
This table provides the results from repeating our main tests presented in Tables 3 and 5 by using natural disasters instead of economic downturns.
We report average treatment effect on the treated (ATET) in Columns (1) and (3) and regression estimates in Columns (2) and (4) with robust
standard errors in the parentheses. In constructing the Propagation Treatment Dummy variable, a parent is treated if it has a subsidiary in a country
experiencing a large natural disaster that year with the large natural disaster defined as a disaster whose damage as a fraction of GDP is in the top
decile of all the natural disasters during our sample period. To construct our control sample, we use Mahalanobis matching with exact matching for
subsidiary country, subsidiary 2-digit industry classification, parent country, and year in addition to (nearest neighbor) matching on parent and
subsidiary sizes. Parents and subsidiaries located in a country experiencing a large natural disaster are excluded from both treatment and control
groups. Subsidiary (Parent) Size is measured by the natural logarithm of the subsidiary (parent) total book assets. Parent Cash Flow is defined as
its Operating profit/loss plus depreciation, over total assets. ATETs, reported in Columns (1) and (3) are bias adjusted by all the continuous control
variables of interest. Regressions, reported in Columns (2) and (4), include match-pair fixed effects in all specifications. Standard errors are corrected
for clustering of observations at the parent firm level. Symbols *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.

                                                    (1)                        (2)                        (3)                          (4)
                                           Subsidiary Investment      Subsidiary Investment     Subsidiary Employment        Subsidiary Employment
                                                                                                        Growth                       Growth
  Estimation Method                                Matching                 Regression                 Matching                    Regression
  ATET / Propagation (DISASTER)                   -0.456***                 -0.493***                 -2.320***                     -1.461**
  Treatment Dummy
  Standard Errors                                  (0.187)                      (0.199)                  (0.642)                      (0.662)

  Bias-adj Variables/Controls                                            Subsidiary Size (t-1), Parent Size (t-1),
                                                       And Parent Cash Flow (t-1), Subsidiary Investment/ Employment Growth (t-1)
  Fixed Effects                                                           Match pair                                      Match pair
  N (Matched Observations)                           9,642                  9,642                     8,678                   8,678
  R2                                                                        0.575                                             0.521
  N (Firms)                                                                 4,630                                             4,143
  N (Clusters/Parents)                                                      1,695                                             1,609




                                                                           61
Table 7 ­ Pre- and Post-Downturn Outcomes
This table provides regression estimates where the dependent variable is as of the year before (t-1)_or the
year after (t+1) the treatment event. The first regression in both panels is copied from the main analysis as
a `memo' item. In regression (3), the sample is restricted to the subsidiaries that were eligible to be a control
observation in the previous two years before the main treatment event. In constructing the Propagation
Treatment Dummy variable, a parent is treated if it has a subsidiary in a country experiencing an economic
downturn that year with the economic downturn defined as a real GDP growth at least two standard
deviations less than the country's long-term average. Parents and subsidiaries located in a country
experiencing an economic downturn are excluded from both treatment and control groups. Results are
reported for the Subsidiary Investment, defined as the change in fixed assets plus depreciation, normalized
by lagged total assets and in percentage points, in Panel A, and for the Subsidiary Employment Growth,
defined as the natural logarithm of the employment over lagged employment of the subsidiary, in Panel B.
Subsidiary (Parent) Size is measured by the natural logarithm of the subsidiary (parent) total book assets.
Parent Cash Flow is defined as its Operating profit/loss plus depreciation, over total assets. Standard errors
are in parentheses and are corrected for clustering of observations at the parent firm level. Symbols *, **, ***
denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.

Panel A. Subsidiary Investment

                                               (1)                    (2)                       (3)
                                           Subsidiary              Subsidiary               Subsidiary
                                         Investment (t)         Investment (t+1)         Investment (t-1)
    Propagation Treatment                  -0.946***                -0.442*                   -0.222
    Dummy
                                             (0.253)                 (0.258)                  (0.243)

    Subsidiary Size (t-1)                     0.095                   -0.127                   0.151
                                             (0.161)                 (0.194)                  (0.198)

    Parent Size (t-1)                         0.005                   0.235                    0.127
                                             (0.148)                 (0.179)                  (0.152)

    Parent Cash Flow (t-1)                   4.607**                  2.883                   3.498*
                                             (2.064)                 (2.318)                  (1.863)

    Constant                                2.851**                 0.988                     1.230
                                            (1.413)                (1.336)                   (1.150)
    Fixed Effects                          Match Pair            Match Pair               Match Pair
    Nearest Neighborhood                            Subsidiary Size (t-1), Parent Size (t-1)
    Mahalanobis matching
    Sample                                        Full Matched Sample                    Matched Sample
                                                                                         with "No Crisis
                                                                                         Last Year" Filter
    N (Matched Observations)                 13,498                   8,787                   6,968
    R2                                        0.539                   0.592                   0.527
    N (Firms)                                 5,600                   3,980                   4,382
    N (Clusters/Parents)                      1,145                    799                    1,047




                                                       62
Panel B. Subsidiary Employment Growth

                                (1)                   (2)                   (3)
                            Subsidiary            Subsidiary             Subsidiary
                           Employment            Employment             Employment
                            Growth (t)           Growth (t+1)           Growth (t-1)
 Propagation Treatment      -2.183***               -0.261                 0.584
 Dummy
                              (0.665)               (0.969)                (0.876)

 Subsidiary Size (t-1)         -0.137                0.701                  -0.469
                              (0.559)               (0.871)                (0.746)

 Parent Size (t-1)             0.522                 -0.111                 -0.545
                              (0.415)               (0.675)                (0.487)

 Parent Cash Flow (t-1)        8.079                 1.047                  6.916
                              (6.835)               (9.737)                (6.918)

 Constant                     -3.687                 -3.079                   8.314*
                             (3.724)                (6.547)                   (4.293)
 Fixed Effects              Match Pair            Match Pair               Match Pair
 Nearest Neighborhood                Subsidiary Size (t-1), Parent Size (t-1)
 Mahalanobis matching
 Sample                           Full Matched Sample                 Matched Sample
                                                                      with "No Crisis
                                                                      Last Year" Filter
 N (Matched                   11,960                 8,198                 6,292
 Observations)
 R2                           0.510                  0.584                  0.515
 N (Firms)                    4,943                  3,697                  3,994
 N (Clusters/Parents)         1,038                   763                    966




                                         63
Table 8 ­ Alternative Economic Downturn Definitions
This table provides robustness tests for our main tests presented in Tables 3 and 5 to different economic downturn definitions. We report average
treatment effect on the treated (ATET) in Columns (1) and (3) and regression estimates in Columns (2) and (4) with robust standard errors in the
parentheses. In constructing the Propagation Treatment Dummy variable, a parent is treated if it has a subsidiary in a country experiencing an
economic downturn that year with the economic downturn defined as a real GDP growth less than the country's long-term average at different
thresholds. To construct our control sample, we use Mahalanobis matching with exact matching for subsidiary country, subsidiary 2-digit industry
classification, parent country, and year in addition to (nearest neighbor) matching on parent and subsidiary sizes. Parents and subsidiaries located in
a country experiencing an economic downturn are excluded from both treatment and control groups. Results are reported for the Subsidiary
Investment (t), defined as the change in fixed assets plus depreciation, normalized by lagged total assets, and in percentage points, Subsidiary
Employment Growth (t), defined as ln(employment(t) / employment(t-1)) of the subsidiary. Subsidiary (Parent) Size is measured by the natural
logarithm of the subsidiary (parent) total book assets. Parent Cash Flow is defined as its Operating profit/loss plus depreciation, over total assets.
ATETs, reported in Columns (1) and (3) are bias adjusted by all the continuous control variables of interest. Regressions, reported in Columns (2)
and (4), include match-pair fixed effects in all specifications. Standard errors are corrected for clustering of observations at the parent firm level.
Symbols *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.




                                                                        64
                                              (1)                      (2)                       (3)                        (4)
                                     Subsidiary Investment    Subsidiary Investment    Subsidiary Employment      Subsidiary Employment
                                                                                               Growth                     Growth
Estimation Method                           Matching               Regression                 Matching                  Regression

    Economic downturn cutoffs set to -1.75 standard deviations below long-term country averages for both Treatment and Control samples
ATET / Propagation Treatment                -0.788***                -0.598***                -2.886***                  -2.654***
Dummy
Standard Errors                               (0.206)                 (0.175)                   (0.633)                   (0.716)

    Economic downturn cutoffs set to -2.25 standard deviations below long-term country averages for both Treatment and Control samples
ATET / Propagation Treatment                -0.906***                -0.710***                 -1.528**                  -2.196***
Dummy
Standard Errors                               (0.196)                 (0.216)                   (0.654)                   (0.666)

  Economic downturn cutoff set to 1 standard deviation below long-term country average for the Control sample (Treatment sample uses the
                                               default value of 2 standard deviations below)
ATET / Propagation Treatment               -0.855***                  -0.664***                -1.598**                  -2.055***
Dummy
Standard Errors                              (0.203)                   (0.215)                  (0.678)                    (0.681)

                   No Economic Downturn in the Previous Year (Lagged Propagation Treatment Dummy Equals Zero)
ATET / Propagation Treatment           -0.680***                -0.599**                 -2.096**                        -2.978***
Dummy
Standard Errors                         (0.266)                  (0.292)                  (0.924)                         (0.851)




                                                                  65
     Table 9 ­ Regression Analysis on the Unbalanced Sample
     This table provides regression estimates using the full unbalanced sample for subsidiary investment
     and subsidiary employment growth. Regressions in Panel A include various interactions of
     subsidiary country, subsidiary 2-digit industry classification, parent country, and year fixed effects
     (as specified in the relevant row of the table below). Regressions in Panel B also include parent
     firm fixed effects. In constructing the Propagation Treatment Dummy variable, a parent is treated
     if it has a subsidiary in a country experiencing an economic downturn that year with the economic
     downturn defined as a real GDP growth at least two standard deviations less than the country's
     long-term average. Parents and subsidiaries located in a country experiencing an economic
     downturn are excluded from both treatment and control groups. Results are reported for the
     Subsidiary Investment, defined as the change in fixed assets plus depreciation, normalized by
     lagged total assets and in percentage points, in Columns (1)-(3) and for the Subsidiary Employment
     Growth, defined as ln(employment(t) / employment(t-1)) of the subsidiary Columns (4)-(6).
     Subsidiary (Parent) Size is measured by the natural logarithm of the subsidiary (parent) total book
     assets. Parent Cash Flow is defined as its Operating profit/loss plus depreciation, over total assets.
     Standard errors are in parentheses and are corrected for clustering of observations at the parent firm
     level. Symbols *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.

Panel A. Various Fixed Effects
                          (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)         (6)
                                Subsidiary Investment               Subsidiary Employment Growth
 Propagation
 Treatment            -0.382***      -0.390***    -0.355***       -0.710**     -0.775**       -0.742**
 Dummy
                       (0.099)        (0.099)       (0.098)       (0.343)       (0.352)        (0.353)
 Subsidiary Size
                        0.041          0.039         0.038         0.080         0.081          0.091
 (t-1)
                       (0.027)        (0.027)       (0.027)        (0.108)       (0.108)      (0.108)
 Parent Size (t-1)      0.022          0.021         0.015       -0.315***     -0.314***     -0.320***
                       (0.026)        (0.026)       (0.026)        (0.089)       (0.089)      (0.090)
 Parent Cash Flow
                      3.406***       3.432***      3.333***      13.508*** 13.722***         13.852***
 (t-1)
                       (0.568)        (0.571)       (0.570)       (1.930)       (1.935)        (1.942)
 Subsidiary
 Investment
                      0.303***       0.303***      0.303***      0.038***      0.038***       0.037***
 /Employment
 Growth (t-1)
                       (0.008)        (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.012)       (0.012)        (0.012)

 Fixed Effects        Subsidiary   Parent           Parent       Subsidiary   Parent           Parent
                       Country, Country ´         Country ´       Country, Country ´         Country ´
                        Parent      Year,            Year,         Parent      Year,            Year,
                       Country, Subsidiary        Subsidiary      Country, Subsidiary        Subsidiary
                      Subsidiary Country,         Country ´      Subsidiary Country,         Country ´
                       Industry, Subsidiary          Year,        Industry, Subsidiary          Year,
                         Year     Industry        Subsidiary        Year     Industry        Subsidiary
                                                   Industry                                   Industry
 N                      40,847        40,814        40,796         38,149       38,126         38,112
 R2                     0.144         0.149          0.178         0.020        0.024           0.030
 N (parents)            3,221         3,215          3,215         3,093        3,088           3,087



                                                    66
Panel B. Parent Firm Fixed Effects Together with Various Fixed Effects

                        (1)            (2)           (3)          (4)         (5)        (6)
                               Subsidiary Investment             Subsidiary Employment Growth
 Propagation
 Treatment           -0.236**       -0.248**      -0.194*       -0.128      -0.220      -0.174
 Dummy
                      (0.120)       (0.119)        (0.111)      (0.460)     (0.477)     (0.477)
 Subsidiary Size
                       0.027         0.025         0.028         0.155      0.157        0.161
 (t-1)
                      (0.030)       (0.030)        (0.030)      (0.128)     (0.128)     (0.129)
 Parent Size (t-1)     0.221         0.069          0.069        1.423       1.219       1.151
                      (0.255)       (0.271)        (0.267)      (1.083)     (1.129)     (1.120)
 Parent Cash
                      2.329**      2.461***       2.518***     15.901*** 16.541***     16.866***
 Flow (t-1)
                      (0.909)       (0.934)        (0.918)      (3.733)     (3.810)     (3.857)
 Subsidiary
 Investment
                     0.238***      0.238***       0.237***       0.008      0.008        0.007
 /Employment
 Growth (t-1)
                      (0.009)       (0.009)        (0.009)      (0.013)     (0.013)     (0.013)

 Fixed Effects         Parent     Parent        Parent Firm,   Subsidiary   Parent       Parent
                        Firm,      Firm,           Parent       Country, Country ´     Country ´
                     Subsidiary   Parent         Country ´       Parent      Year,       Year,
                      Country, Country ´            Year,       Country, Subsidiary    Subsidiary
                     Subsidiary    Year,         Subsidiary    Subsidiary Country,     Country ´
                      Industry, Subsidiary       Country ´      Industry, Subsidiary     Year,
                        Year     Country,           Year,         Year     Industry    Subsidiary
                                Subsidiary       Subsidiary                             Industry
                                 Industry         Industry
 N                     40,327     40,291           40,273       37,668      37,641      37,627
 R2                     0.227     0.231            0.259        0.105       0.110        0.116
 N (parents)            2,701     2,692            2,692        2,612       2,604        2,603




                                                  67
Table 10 ­ Impact of the International Propagation on Destination Economies
Table reports regression estimates of industry total sales and employment on propagation share
using country-industry panel for the 2008-2012 period. In Panel B, the dependent variable is the
natural logarithm of total country-industry sales in regressions (1)-(4) and the natural logarithm of
total country-industry employment in regressions (5)-(8). In Panel C, the dependent variable is the
natural logarithm of total country-industry sales in regressions (1)-(2) and the natural logarithm of
total country-industry employment in regressions (3)-(4). Propagation Share is measured by the
sum of lagged sales or employment of foreign subsidiaries by treated parent firms in each country
not experiencing an economic downturn, industry, and year scaled by the lagged total country-
industry-year sales or employment, depending on the dependent variable. A parent firm is treated
in a given year if it is headquartered in a country not experiencing an economic downturn but has
a subsidiary in a country that is experiencing one that year. The economic downturn is defined as
a real GDP growth at least two standard deviations less than the country's long-term average. Size
of Foreign Subsidiaries is the sum of lagged sales or employment of all foreign subsidiaries in each
country-industry-year. Share of Subsidiaries from Parent Countries That Have an economic
downturn is the lagged sales or employment share of foreign subsidiaries whose parents are
headquartered in a country that have an economic downturn in a given year. In Panel C, leads and
lags of Propagation Share are obtained by normalizing leads and lags of the numerator with the
denominator always measured as of t-1 to avoid simultaneity. Panel A shows descriptive statistics
of the main variables corresponding to the samples used in Panel B regressions (2) and (6).
Industries are defined at the NACE 3-digit level. Standard errors robust to clustering at the country-
industry level are reported in parentheses. Symbols *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and
1% level respectively.

Panel A: Descriptive Statistics

                                                 Std.
                                    Mean         Dev.        Pctile 10       Median       Pctile 90
 Propagation Share_Sales            0.046        0.129         0.000          0.000        0.126
 Ln(Sales)                          7.236        1.681         5.064          7.162        9.421
 Propagation Share_Empl.            0.030        0.092         0.000          0.000        0.081
 Ln(Empl.)                          8.999        1.465         7.185          9.006        10.863

                                   Country      Industry       Year         Country        Country
                                                                           ´ Industry      ´ Year

 N                                    25            99           4            1,195          96




                                               68
Panel B: Regression Analysis

                                                             (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)
                                                          Ln(Sales) Ln(Sales) Ln(Sales) Ln(Sales) Ln(Empl.) Ln(Empl.) Ln(Empl.) Ln(Empl.)
Propagation Share                                         -0.303** -0.368** -1.301*** -1.322*** -0.367*** -0.460*** -1.610*** -1.711***
                                                           (0.121) (0.150) (0.167)       (0.167)   (0.136)   (0.171)   (0.191) (0.190)

Ln(Size of Foreign Subsidiaries)                                             0.162*** 0.166***                        0.170*** 0.184***
                                                                              (0.013)  (0.013)                         (0.013) (0.014)

Share of Subsidiaries whose Parent Firms                                               -0.454***                               -3.798***
          Reside in Countries with an economic downturn                                 (0.172)                                 (0.396)

Country, Industry, and Year FEs                             Yes       No        No        No        Yes       No        No        No
Country ´ year and Industry ´ year FEs                      No        Yes       Yes       Yes       No        Yes       Yes       Yes
N (Observations)                                           4,477     4,466     3,091     3,091     4,541     4,528     3,012     3,012
R2                                                         0.802     0.790     0.839     0.841     0.795     0.783     0.834     0.839




                                                                    69
Panel C: Placebo Test

                                                  (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)
                                              Ln(Sales)   Ln(Sales)   Ln(Empl.)   Ln(Empl.)
Propagation Share (t+2)                         -0.024      -0.057      -0.185      -0.101
                                               (0.230)     (0.233)     (0.259)     (0.295)

Propagation Share (t+1)                         -0.010      0.099       0.111       0.166
                                               (0.329)     (0.350)     (0.337)     (0.403)

Propagation Share                             -0.805**    -1.037**    -1.893***   -2.235***
                                               (0.374)     (0.433)      (0.353)     (0.412)

Propagation Share (t-1)                         -0.108      -0.096     -0.534*      -0.456
                                               (0.337)     (0.380)     (0.319)     (0.343)

Propagation Share (t-2)                         -0.247      -0.270    1.137***    1.117***
                                               (0.246)     (0.288)     (0.339)     (0.324)

Ln(Size of Foreign Subsidiaries)              0.135***    0.162***    0.144***    0.169***
                                               (0.011)     (0.013)     (0.012)     (0.013)

Country, Industry, and Year FEs                 Yes         No           Yes         No
Country ´ year and Industry ´ year FEs          No          Yes          No          Yes
N (Observations)                               3,118       3,091        3,046       3,012
R2                                             0.841       0.839        0.838       0.835




                                         70
Table 11 ­ Supply Chain Links among the Subsidiaries and the Propagation of Economic Downturns
This table provides regression results about the role of supply chain relationships in the propagation of economic downturns based on the location
and industry of the subsidiary that lead the parent firm to be treated. The dependent variable is Subsidiary Investment (t), which is the change in
fixed assets plus depreciation, normalized by lagged total assets, and in percentage points. In constructing the Propagation Treatment Dummy
variable, a parent is treated if it has a subsidiary in a country that experiences an economic downturn that year (henceforth referred as `affected
subsidiary'). The economic downturn defined as a real GDP growth at least two standard deviations less than the country's long-term average. To
construct our sample, we use Mahalanobis matching with exact matching for subsidiary country, subsidiary 2-digit industry classification, parent
country, and year in addition to (nearest neighbor) matching on parent and subsidiary sizes. Affected Sub in Up Stream is a binary indicator that is
equal to one if the input requirement from the country-industry of the affected subsidiary to the subsidiary's country-industry (and vice versa for
Affected Sub in Down Stream) is in the top decile in our sample; both measures are defined only for the treated subsidiaries (see text for details).
Total input requirement coefficients computed using the country-industry level Input-Output Tables are used to measure the importance of these
relationships. Controls include Subsidiary and Parent Size, measured by the natural logarithm of the subsidiary and parent total book assets,
respectively, Parent Cash Flow, defined as its Operating profit/loss plus depreciation, over total assets, and Subsidiary Investment (t-1). Regressions
include match-pair fixed effects in all specifications. Standard errors are corrected for clustering of observations at the parent firm level. Symbols *,
** ***
  , denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.




                                                                         71
                                       (1)         (2)          (3)              (4)        (5)          (6)
                                                                 Subsidiary Investment
Propagation Dummy             (a)   -0.922***   -0. 7467***   -0.761***        -0.609***   -0.834***   -0.651***
                                     (0.240)      (0.225)      (0.227)          (0.209)      (0.240)     (0.217)

Affected Sub in Up Stream     (b)    0.754*       0. 4401                                   0.863*       0.544
                                     (0.455)      (0.396)                                   (0.455)     (0.402)

Affected Sub in Down Stream   (b)                               -0.892         -0.897*      -0.983*    -0.954**
                                                               (0.568)         (0.481)      (0.565)     (0.481)

Controls                               No          Yes           No               Yes         No         Yes
Fixed Effects                                                        Match Pair
(a) + (b)                             -0.002       -0.003     -0.017***       -0.0150***    -0.0095    -0. 0106*
                                     (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.006)          (0.005)    (0.0068)     0. 0059
N (Matched Observations)             13,490       13,490        13,490          13,490       13,490     13,490
R2                                     0.538        0.588        0.539           0.588       0.539       0.588
N (Firms)                              5,594        5,594        5,594           5,594       5,594       5,594
N (Clusters/Parents)                   1,142        1,142        1,142           1,142       1,142       1,142




                                                   72
Table 12 ­ International Propagation of Economic Downturns by MNCs ­ The Role of Financial Constraints
This table repeats our main regression analysis in Tables 3 and 5 by interacting the treatment indicator with an indicator for financially constrained
firms. WW50 is an indicator that takes the value of one for the parents whose Whited-Wu index is lower than the median index for U.S. Compustat
firms. No-Rating is an indicator that takes the value of one for parent firms that do not have a credit rating. The sample in both panels is restricted
to U.S. parent firms and is based on matching as in Tables 3 and 5. In constructing the Propagation Treatment Dummy variable, a parent is treated
if it has a subsidiary in a country experiencing an economic downturn that year with the economic downturn defined as a real GDP growth at least
two standard deviations less than the country's long-term average. To construct our control sample, we use Mahalanobis matching with exact
matching for subsidiary country, subsidiary 2-digit industry classification, parent country, and year in addition to (nearest neighbor) matching on
parent and subsidiary sizes. Parents and subsidiaries located in a country experiencing an economic downturn are excluded from both treatment
and control groups. Subsidiary (Parent) Size is measured by the natural logarithm of the subsidiary (parent) total book assets. Parent Cash Flow is
defined as its Operating profit/loss plus depreciation, over total assets. All regressions include match-pair fixed effects. Standard errors are
corrected for clustering of observations at the parent firm level. Symbols *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.




                                                                        73
Panel A: Whited-Wu Index

                                     (1)                        (2)                           (3)                         (4)
                            Subsidiary Investment      Subsidiary Investment        Subsidiary Employment       Subsidiary Employment
                                                                                            Growth                      Growth
Transmission Treatment             -0.652**                   -0.582**                     -2.147**                    -1.806**
Dummy (a)                           (0.275)                    (0.280)                      (0.895)                     (0.908)

Transmission Treatment           -14.183***                    -3.294*                     -10.362**                     -5.565
Dummy ´ WW50 (b)                   (4.773)                     (1.908)                       (4.529)                    (4.118)

WW50                                                           19.062*                                                  37.617
                                                               (11.044)                                                (30.228)

 (a) + (b)                         -14.835***                  -3.876**                    -12.509***                    -7.371*
                                    (4.768)                     (1.871)                      (4.426)                     (3.956)
Fixed Effects                     Match pair                 Match pair                    Match pair                  Match pair
Controls                     Subsidiary Size (t-1),     Same as regression (1)        Subsidiary Size (t-1),   Same as regression (3) and
                               Parent Size (t-1),     and their interactions with       Parent Size (t-1),       their interactions with
                            Parent Cash Flow (t-1),             WW50                 Parent Cash Flow (t-1),             WW50
                                and Subsidiary                                           and Subsidiary
                               Investment (t-1)                                     Employment Growth (t-1)
Exact Matching Variables        WW50, Year,                     Year,                    WW50, Year,                     Year,
                             Subsidiary Country,         Subsidiary Country,          Subsidiary Country,         Subsidiary Country,
                               Parent Country,             Parent Country,              Parent Country,             Parent Country,
                              Subsidiary Industry        Subsidiary Industry           Subsidiary Industry        Subsidiary Industry
N (Matched Observations)             6,882                      7,129                         6,324                      6,555
R2                                   0.585                      0.599                         0.512                      0.524
N (Firms)                            2,750                      2,869                         2,521                      2,628
N (Clusters/Parents)                  476                        509                           461                        489
N (Parents with WW50 = 1)              12                        30                             13                         29
N (Treated Parents with                 7                        16                             8                          17
WW50 = 1)




                                                                74
Panel B: Credit Rating

                                           (1)                         (2)                          (3)                         (4)
                                  Subsidiary Investment       Subsidiary Investment      Subsidiary Employment       Subsidiary Employment
                                                                                                 Growth                      Growth
 Transmission Treatment                   -0.297                     -0.543*                      -0.809                      -0.685
 Dummy (a)                               (0.303)                     (0.292)                     (0.883)                     (0.900)

 Transmission Treatment Dummy            -0.194                       -0.486                    -4.323**                    -4.230**
 ´ No-Rating (b)                         (0.639)                     (0.652)                     (2.075)                     (2.129)

 No-Rating                                                           -4.328*                                                  -7.799
                                                                     (2.553)                                                 (7.774)

 (a) + (b)                                -0.943*                     -1.028*                   -5.132***                    -4.915**
                                          (0.573)                     (0.565)                     (1.949)                     (1.887)
 Fixed Effects                          Match pair                  Match pair                  Match pair                 Match pair
 Controls                          Subsidiary Size (t-1),   Same as regression (1) and     Subsidiary Size (t-1),     Same as regression (3)
                                     Parent Size (t-1),       their interactions with        Parent Size (t-1),     and their interactions with
                                  Parent Cash Flow (t-1),            No-Rating            Parent Cash Flow (t-1),           No-Rating
                                      and Subsidiary                                          and Subsidiary
                                     Investment (t-1)                                    Employment Growth (t-1)
 Exact Matching Variables            No-Rating, Year,                 Year,                  No-Rating, Year,                 Year,
                                   Subsidiary Country,         Subsidiary Country,         Subsidiary Country,         Subsidiary Country,
                                     Parent Country,             Parent Country,             Parent Country,             Parent Country,
                                    Subsidiary Industry        Subsidiary Industry          Subsidiary Industry        Subsidiary Industry
 N (Matched Observations)                  6,140                      7,434                        5,716                      6,878
 R2                                        0.567                      0.586                        0.506                      0.509
 N (Firms)                                 2,521                      2,967                        2,300                      2,728
 N (Clusters/Parents)                       471                        530                          452                        510
 N (Parents with No-Rating = 1)             204                        245                          193                        234
 N (Treated Parents with                    113                        126                          108                        125
 No-Rating = 1)




                                                              75
Table 13 ­ International Propagation of Economic Downturns by MNCs ­ Non-Tradable Industries
This table repeats our main tests presented in Tables 3 and 5 in a sample restricted to subsidiaries in non-tradable industries. Broad definition of non-
tradable industries includes all the non-manufacturing industries. Narrow definition includes construction (nace=45), retail trade (52), hotels and
restaurants (55), and real estate (70). We report average treatment effect on the treated (ATET) in Columns (1) and (3) and regression estimates in
Columns (2) and (4) with robust standard errors in the parentheses. In constructing the Propagation Treatment Dummy variable, a parent is treated
if it has a subsidiary in a country experiencing an economic downturn that year with the economic downturn defined as a real GDP growth at least
two standard deviations less than the country's long-term average. To construct our control sample, we use Mahalanobis matching with exact
matching for subsidiary country, subsidiary 2-digit industry classification, parent country, and year in addition to (nearest neighbor) matching on
parent and subsidiary sizes. Parents and subsidiaries located in a country experiencing an economic downturn are excluded from both treatment and
control groups. Results are reported for the Subsidiary Investment (t-1), defined as the change in fixed assets plus depreciation, normalized by lagged
total assets, and in percentage points, Subsidiary Employment Growth (t-1), defined as ln(employment(t-1) / employment(t-2)) of the subsidiary.
Subsidiary (Parent) Size is measured by the natural logarithm of the subsidiary (parent) total book assets. Parent Cash Flow is defined as its
Operating profit/loss plus depreciation, over total assets. ATETs, reported in Columns (1) and (3) are bias adjusted by all the continuous control
variables of interest. Regressions, reported in Columns (2) and (4), include match-pair fixed effects in all specifications. Errors are corrected for
clustering of observations at the parent firm level. Symbols *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.

Panel A: Non-Tradable Industries - Broad Definition

                                                          (1)                      (2)                     (3)                        (4)
                                                     Subsidiary               Subsidiary        Subsidiary Employment       Subsidiary Employment
                                                     Investment               Investment                Growth                      Growth
  Estimation Method                                  Matching                 Regression               Matching                   Regression
  ATET / Propagation Treatment Dummy                  -0.859***                -0.665***                 -1.116                    -1.803**
  Standard Errors                                       (0.228)                 (0.242)                 (0.776)                     (0.763)

  Bias-adj Variables/Controls                                              Subsidiary Size (t-1), Parent Size (t-1),
                                                         And Parent Cash Flow (t-1), Subsidiary Investment/ Employment Growth (t-1)
  Fixed Effects                                                           Match pair                                      Match pair
  N (Matched Observations)                            10,818                10,818                    9,372                  9,372
  R2                                                                         0.58                                            0.511
  N (Firms)                                                                  4,401                                           3,750
  N (Clusters/Parents)                                                       1,045                                            931




                                                                         76
Panel B: Non-Tradable Industries - Narrow Definition

                                                (1)                    (2)                   (3)                      (4)
                                            Subsidiary             Subsidiary     Subsidiary Employment    Subsidiary Employment
                                            Investment             Investment             Growth                   Growth
  Estimation Method                          Matching              Regression            Matching                Regression
  ATET / Propagation Treatment Dummy         -2.524**                -1.796*               -3.510                   -5.698
  Standard Errors                             (1.103)                (1.085)              (4.441)                  (5.336)

  Bias-adj Variables/Controls                                      Subsidiary Size (t-1), Parent Size (t-1),
                                                 And Parent Cash Flow (t-1), Subsidiary Investment/ Employment Growth (t-1)
  Fixed Effects                                                  Match pair                                       Match pair
  N (Matched Observations)                      564                  564                      340                    340
  R2                                                                0.595                                            0.51
  N (Firms)                                                          215                                             140
  N (Clusters/Parents)                                               94                                               66




                                                              77
                     Online Appendix to

"The International Propagation of Economic Downturns Through

    Multinational Companies: The Real Economy Channel"



                           Jan Bena
                University of British Columbia

                        Serdar Dinc
                     Rutgers University

                          Isil Erel
                    Ohio State University




                             1
Table OA-1 ­ Robustness ­ Geographic Subsamples
This table provides robustness tests for our main tests presented in Tables 3 and 5 in different geographic subsamples. We report average treatment
effect on the treated (ATET) in Columns (1) and (3) and regression estimates in Columns (2) and (4) with robust standard errors in the parentheses.
In constructing the Propagation Treatment Dummy variable, a parent is treated if it has a subsidiary in a country experiencing an economic downturn
that year with the economic downturn defined as a real GDP growth at least two standard deviations less than the country's long-term average. To
construct our control sample, we use Mahalanobis matching with exact matching for subsidiary country, subsidiary 2-digit industry classification,
parent country, and year in addition to (nearest neighbor) matching on parent and subsidiary sizes. Parents and subsidiaries located in a country
experiencing an economic downturn are excluded from both treatment and control groups. Results are reported for the Subsidiary Investment (t),
defined as the change in fixed assets plus depreciation, normalized by lagged total assets, and Subsidiary Employment Growth (t), defined as
ln(employment(t) / employment(t-1)) of the subsidiary. Subsidiary (Parent) Size is measured by the natural logarithm of the subsidiary (parent) total
book assets. Parent Cash Flow is defined as its Operating profit/loss plus depreciation, over total assets. ATETs, reported in Columns (1) and (3)
are bias adjusted by all these continuous control variables of interest. Regressions, reported in Columns (2) and (4), include match-pair fixed effects
in all specifications. Errors are corrected for clustering of observations at the parent firm level. Symbols *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%,
and 1% respectively.

Panel A. Only subsidiaries in countries that do not have a common border with the country experiencing an economic downturn

                                                    (1)                        (2)                         (3)                          (4)
                                           Subsidiary Investment      Subsidiary Investment      Subsidiary Employment        Subsidiary Employment
                                                                                                         Growth                       Growth
  Estimation Method                                Matching                   Regression                Matching                    Regression
  ATET / Transmission Treatment                   -0.566***                   -0.792***                 -2.062**                    -2.028***
  Dummy
  Standard Errors                                  (0.228)                     (0.241)                    (0.890)                      (0.739)

  Bias-adj Variables/Controls                                             Subsidiary Size (t-1), Parent Size (t-1),
                                                        And Parent Cash Flow (t-1), Subsidiary Investment/ Employment Growth (t-1)
  Fixed Effects                                                            Match pair                                      Match pair
  N (Matched Observations)                           11,370                 11,370                    10,488                  10,488
  R2                                                                         0.580                                             0.511
  N (Firms)                                                                  5,048                                             4,638
  N (Clusters/Parents)                                                       1,055                                              987




                                                                          2
Panel B: U.S. Parents Excluded

                                            (1)                     (2)                    (3)                   (4)
                                   Subsidiary Investment   Subsidiary Investment       Subsidiary            Subsidiary
                                                                                   Employment Growth     Employment Growth
    Estimation Method                    Matching                Regression            Matching             Regression
    ATET / Propagation Treatment        -1.005***                 -0.615*               -2.217**              -3.353***
    Dummy
    Standard Errors                       (0.282)                 (0.349)                (0.958)                (0.952)

    Bias-adj Variables/Controls                               Subsidiary Size (t-1), Parent Size (t-1),
                                         Parent Cash Flow (t-1), and Subsidiary Investment (t-1)/Employment Growth (t-1)
    Fixed Effects                                                 Match pair                                   Match pair
    N (Matched Observations)               6,064                     6,064                   5,082               5,082
    R2                                                               0.593                                       0.522
    N (Firms)                                                        2,644                                       2,230
    N (Clusters/Parents)                                              634                                         536




                                                           3
Panel C: Subsidiaries and their Parents are in the EU

                                             (1)                     (2)                      (3)                       (4)
                                    Subsidiary Investment   Subsidiary Investment   Subsidiary Employment     Subsidiary Employment
                                                                                            Growth                    Growth
  Estimation Method                          Matching              Regression              Matching                 Regression
  ATET / Propagation Treatment            -1.274***               -0.868**                 -2.526**                 -3.935***
  Dummy
  Standard Errors                          (0.354)                   (0.481)                (1.131)                   (1.355)

  Bias-adj Variables/Controls                                      Subsidiary Size (t-1), Parent Size (t-1),
                                              Parent Cash Flow (t-1), and Subsidiary Investment (t-1)/Employment Growth (t-1)
  Fixed Effects                                                     Match pair                                       Match pair
  N (Matched Observations)                    4,532                    4,532                    3,826                   3,826
  R2                                                                   0.584                                            0.518
  N (Firms)                                                            1,874                                            1,565
  N (Clusters/Parents)                                                  421                                              361




                                                                 4
Panel D: Subsidiaries and their Parents are in the Eurozone

                                             (1)                       (2)                      (3)                     (4)
                                    Subsidiary Investment     Subsidiary Investment   Subsidiary Employment   Subsidiary Employment
                                                                                              Growth                  Growth
   Estimation Method                         Matching                  Regression            Matching               Regression
   ATET / Propagation Treatment           -2.156***                   -1.927**                -1.749                  -1.543
   Dummy
   Standard Errors                        (0. 6734)                   (0.742)                (1.339)                  (1.142)

   Bias-adj Variables/Controls                                     Subsidiary Size (t-1), Parent Size (t-1),
                                              Parent Cash Flow (t-1), and Subsidiary Investment (t-1)/Employment Growth (t-1)
   Fixed Effects                                                     Match pair                                      Match pair
   N (Matched Observations)                   2,114                     2,114                   1,738                  1,738
   R2                                                                   0.589                                          0.510
   N (Firms)                                                             811                                             657
   N (Clusters/Parents)                                                  166                                             130




                                                                  5
Panel E: U.S. Parents Only

                                          (1)                     (2)                      (3)                     (4)
                                 Subsidiary Investment   Subsidiary Investment   Subsidiary Employment   Subsidiary Employment
                                                                                         Growth                  Growth
  Estimation Method                    Matching                 Regression              Matching               Regression
  ATET / Propagation Treatment        -0.699***                 -0.693***                -1.273                  -1.500*
  Dummy
  Standard Errors                       (0.270)                  (0.256)                (0.869)                  (0.842)

  Bias-adj Variables/Controls                                 Subsidiary Size (t-1), Parent Size (t-1),
                                         Parent Cash Flow (t-1), and Subsidiary Investment (t-1)/Employment Growth (t-1)
  Fixed Effects                                                Match pair                                       Match pair
  N (Matched Observations)               7,434                    7,434                    6,878                  6,878
  R2                                                              0.584                                           0.506
  N (Firms)                                                       2,967                                           2,728
  N (Clusters/Parents)                                             530                                              510




                                                            6
Table OA-2 ­ Robustness ­ Subsamples and Alternative Specifications
This table provides robustness tests for our main tests presented in Tables 3 and 5 in different subsamples. In Panels A and B, we report average treatment
effect on the treated (ATET) in Columns (1) and (3) and regression estimates in Columns (2) and (4) with robust standard errors in the parentheses. In Panel
C, matching estimates are not different from those in the main analysis so only the regression estimates are provided. In constructing the Propagation
Treatment Dummy variable, a parent is treated if it has a subsidiary in a country experiencing an economic downturn that year with the economic downturn
defined as a real GDP growth at least two standard deviations less than the country's long-term average. To construct our control sample, we use
Mahalanobis matching with exact matching for subsidiary country, subsidiary 2-digit industry classification, parent country, and year in addition to (nearest
neighbor) matching on parent and subsidiary sizes. Parents and subsidiaries located in a country experiencing an economic downturn are excluded from
both treatment and control groups. To construct our sample, we use Mahalanobis matching with exact matching for subsidiary country, subsidiary 2-digit
industry classification, parent country, and year in addition to (nearest neighbor) matching on parent and subsidiary sizes. Results are reported for the
Subsidiary Investment (t), defined as the change in fixed assets plus depreciation, normalized by lagged total assets, and Subsidiary Employment Growth
(t), defined as ln(employment(t) / employment(t-1)) of the subsidiary. Subsidiary (Parent) Size is measured by the natural logarithm of the subsidiary
(parent) total book assets. Parent Cash Flow is defined as its Operating profit/loss plus depreciation, over total assets. ATETs, reported in Columns (1) and
(3) are bias adjusted by all these continuous control variables of interest. Regressions, reported in Columns (2) and (4), include match-pair fixed effects in
all specifications. Errors are corrected for clustering of observations at the parent firm level. Symbols *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
respectively.

Panel A: Majority-Owned Subsidiaries

                                                     (1)                         (2)                          (3)                          (4)
                                            Subsidiary Investment       Subsidiary Investment       Subsidiary Employment        Subsidiary Employment
                                                                                                            Growth                       Growth
  Estimation Method                                 Matching                     Regression                Matching                    Regression
  ATET / Propagation Treatment                     -1.138***                    -1.012***                   -0.940                       -1.127
  Dummy
  Standard Errors                                   (0.204)                      (0.242)                     (0.743)                      (0.757)

  Bias-adj Variables/Controls                                               Subsidiary Size (t-1), Parent Size (t-1),
                                                       Parent Cash Flow (t-1), and Subsidiary Investment (t-1)/Employment Growth (t-1)
  Fixed Effects                                                              Match pair                                       Match pair
  N (Matched Observations)                            10,178                   10,178                    9,060                  9,060
  R2                                                                            0.583                                           0.519
  N (Firms)                                                                     4,258                                           3,786
  N (Clusters/Parents)                                                           982                                              897




                                                                            7
Panel B: Controlling for Parent's Growth Opportunities

                                       (1)                        (2)                    (3)                       (4)
                              Subsidiary Investment      Subsidiary Investment        Subsidiary               Subsidiary
                                                                                  Employment Growth        Employment Growth
   Estimation Method                 Matching                    Regression           Matching                   Regression
   ATET / Propagation              -0.883***                   -0.779***               -1.295*                  -1.679**
   Treatment Dummy
   Standard Errors                   (0.234)                     (0.235)                 (0.693)                   (0.724)
   Subsidiary Size (t-1)                                          -0.049                                            -0.504
                                                                 (0.188)                                           (0.524)
   Parent Size (t-1)                                              0.012                                             0.572
                                                                 (0.159)                                           (0.498)
   Parent Cash Flow (t-1)                                         -2.034                                          -10.672
                                                                 (2.407)                                          (8.387)
   Subsidiary Investment/                                       0.352***                                            0.031
   Employment Growth (t-1)                                       (0.036)                                           (0.032)

   Parent Q (t-1)                                               0.429***                                         1.582***
                                                                 (0.153)                                          (0.608)

   Bias-adj Variables          Subsidiary Size (t-1), Parent Size (t-1), Parent   Subsidiary Size (t-1), Parent Size (t-1), Parent
                                Cash Flow (t-1), Parent Q (t-1), Subsidiary        Cash Flow (t-1), Parent Q (t-1), Subsidiary
                                             Investment (t-1)                                  Employment (t-1)
   Fixed Effects                                                  Match pair                                       Match pair
   N (Matched Observations)          10,742                      10,742                  9,922                     9,922
   R2                                                             0.582                                            0.511
   N (Firms)                                                      4,353                                            3,988
   N (Clusters/Parents)                                            790                                              763




                                                                    8
Panel C: Size-Weighted Estimation

                                                        (1)                       (2)
                                               Subsidiary Investment    Subsidiary Employment
                                                                                Growth
               Estimation Method: Regression
               Propagation Treatment Dummy           -0.648***                 -2.122***
               Standard Errors                         (0.209)                  (0.685)

               Controls                             Subsidiary Size (t-1), Parent Size (t-1),
                                               Parent Cash Flow (t-1), and Subsidiary Investment
                                                        (t-1)/Employment Growth (t-1)
               Fixed Effects                         Match pair                Match pair
               N (Matched Observations)                13,498                     11,960
               R2                                      0.593                       0.525
               N (Firms)                               5,600                       4,943
               N (Clusters/Parents)                    1,145                       1,038




                                                     9
Panel D: Randomized Inference Test

This table repeats our main tests presented in Tables 3 and 5 in subsamples when the significance of the estimates is assessed using a randomized
inference test described in Section 5. The empirical standard error is computed as the standard deviation of the 1,000 estimated coefficients and
empirical p-value as the percentile that the coefficient obtained using our original sample has in the empirical distribution of the 1,000 estimated
coefficients. ATETs, reported in Columns (1) and (3) are bias adjusted by all the continuous control variables of interest. Regressions, reported in
Columns (2) and (4), include match-pair fixed effects in all specifications. Symbols *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
respectively.

                                                   (1)                       (2)                        (3)                         (4)
                                          Subsidiary Investment     Subsidiary Investment     Subsidiary Employment       Subsidiary Employment
                                                                                                      Growth                      Growth
  Estimation Method                              Matching                   Regression               Matching                   Regression
  ATET / Propagation Treatment                  -0.989***                   -0.710**                  -1.542*                    -2.175**
  Dummy

  Empirical Standard Error                        (0.206)                    (0.201)                  (0.883)                     (0.842)
  Empirical p-value                                0.006                      0.031                    0.092                       0.024

  Bias-adj Variables/Controls                   Subsidiary Size (t-1), Parent Size (t-1), Parent Cash Flow (t-1), and Subsidiary Investment/
                                                                                 Employment Growth (t-1)
  Fixed Effects                                                            Match pair                                            Match pair




                                                                       10
Panel E: Double Clustering the Standard Errors at the Parent and Parent Country-Year Levels

This table repeats our main tests presented in Tables 3 and 5 with standard errors robust to double clustering of observations at parent and the
parent country-year levels.

                                                (1)                        (2)                         (3)                          (4)
                                       Subsidiary Investment      Subsidiary Investment      Subsidiary Employment        Subsidiary Employment
                                                                                                     Growth                       Growth
 Estimation Method                            Regression               Regression                 Regression                Regression
 Propagation Treatment Dummy                 -0.854***                 -0.710***                   -1.675***                    -2.175***
                                               (0.232)                  (0.198)                      (0.501)                      (0.607)

 Subsidiary Size (t-1)                                                    0.007                                                     -0.157
                                                                         (0.175)                                                   (0.495)

 Parent Size (t-1)                                                        -0.049                                                    0.539
                                                                         (0.131)                                                   (0.421)

 Parent Cash Flow (t-1)                                                   3.256                                                     7.373
                                                                         (2.091)                                                   (6.539)

 Subsidiary Investment / Empl.                                          0.348***                                                   0.053*
 Growth (t-1)                                                            (0.029)                                                   (0.030)

 Fixed Effects                                 Match pair               Match pair                  Match pair                    Match pair
 N (Matched Observations)                      13,498                    13,498                      11,960                        11,960
 R2                                             0.538                     0.588                       0.510                        0.511
 N (Firms)                                      5,600                     5,600                       4,943                        4,943
 N (Parent Country-Year)                         41                        41                          39                            39




                                                                       11
Table OA-3 ­ Difference-in-Differences Estimates
This table provides the results of Difference-in Differences estimates (regressions (1) and (2)) and
the pre-trend analysis (regressions (3) and (4)) for our main results. Event Year is an indicator that
takes the value of one in the year the parent treated; Pre-Event Year is one in the previous year.
The sample for regressions (3) and (4) includes only the parent that were not also treated in previous
two years before the event year to allow a pre-trend analysis. In constructing the Propagation
Treatment dummy variable, a parent is treated if it has a subsidiary in a country experiencing an
economic downturn that year with the economic downturn defined as a real GDP growth less than
the country's long-term average at different thresholds. To construct our control sample, we use
Mahalanobis matching with exact matching for subsidiary country, subsidiary 2-digit industry
classification, parent country, and year in addition to (nearest neighbor) matching on parent and
subsidiary sizes as of two years before the event year. Parents and subsidiaries located in a country
experiencing an economic downturn are excluded from both treatment and control groups. Results
are reported for the Subsidiary Investment (t), defined as the change in fixed assets plus
depreciation, normalized by lagged total assets, and in percentage points, Subsidiary Employment
Growth (t), defined as ln(employment(t) / employment(t-1)) of the subsidiary. Subsidiary (Parent)
Size is measured by the natural logarithm of the subsidiary (parent) total book assets. Parent Cash
Flow is defined as its Operating profit/loss plus depreciation, over total assets. Regressions also
include match-pair fixed effects in all specifications. Errors are corrected for clustering of
observations at the parent firm level. Symbols *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
respectively.




                                               12
                                (1)                (2)                   (3)               (4)
                             Subsidiary         Subsidiary            Subsidiary        Subsidiary
                           Investment (t)      Employment          Investment (t-1)    Employment
                                                Growth (t)                             Growth (t-1)
Propagation Treatment ×     -0.668***            -1.475*
Event Year
                              (0.226)             (0.785)

Subsidiary Size (t-1)       -4.044***              -2.683
                              (0.483)             (1.915)

Parent Size (t-1)              -0.337              -0.570
                              (0.725)             (2.663)

Parent Cash Flow (t-1)         -0.574             15.305
                              (2.771)             (9.297)

Propagation Treatment ×                                                 0.178             1.463
Pre-Event Year
                                                                       (0.239)            (1.128)

Subsidiary Size (t-2)                                                 -4.174***          -6.366**
                                                                       (0.596)            (2.870)

Parent Size (t-2)                                                       0.371              1.937
                                                                       (0.923)            (3.859)

Parent Cash Flow (t-2)                                                  -1.209             4.172
                                                                       (3.253)           (15.134)

Nearest Neighborhood                       Subsidiary Size (t-2), Parent Size (t-2)
Mahalanobis matching                     (in addition to the exact match variables)
Sample                           Full Matched Sample                  Matched Sample with "No
                                                                      Treatment in Previous Two
                                                                              Years" Filter
N (Matched Observations)      10,200               9,562                 5,558              4,900
R2                            0.531                0.508                 0.531              0.486
N (Firms)                     4,302                3,914                 3,562              3,135
N (Clusters/Parents)           969                  886                   885                807




                                        13
Table OA-4 ­ Matching Estimates for Changes in Subsidiary Investment and Employment Growth
Table reports average treatment effect on the treated (ATET) with Abadie-Imbens (AI) robust standard errors in the parentheses. In constructing the
Propagation Treatment Dummy variable, a parent is treated if it has a subsidiary in a country experiencing an economic downturn that year with the
economic downturn defined as a real GDP growth at least two standard deviations less than the country's long-term average. To construct our control
sample, we use Mahalanobis matching with exact matching for subsidiary country, subsidiary 2-digit industry classification, parent country, and
year in addition to (nearest neighbor) matching on parent and subsidiary sizes. Parents and subsidiaries located in a country experiencing an economic
downturn are excluded from both treatment and control groups. The statistic is calculated for the change in subsidiary investment from (t-1) to t,
where subsidiary investment is defined as the change in fixed assets plus depreciation, normalized by lagged total assets. Subsidiary (Parent) Size
is measured by the natural logarithm of the subsidiary (parent) total book assets. Parent Cash Flow is defined as its Operating profit/loss plus
depreciation, over total assets. ATET is bias-adjusted by using subsidiary and parent sizes in Columns (1) and (3) and then by all these continuous
control variables of interest in Columns (2) and (4). All outcome variables are trimmed at the upper and lower 5% level. All control variables are
winsorized at the upper and lower 1% level and are included in the tests with one lag. Symbols *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
respectively.

                                                   (1)                         (2)                          (3)                    (4)
                                           Change in Subsidiary        Change in Subsidiary             Change in          Change in Subsidiary
                                               Investment                  Investment                   Subsidiary         Employment Growth
                                            (from (t-1) to (t))         (from (t-1) to (t))            Employment           (from (t-1) to (t))
                                                                                                          Growth
                                                                                                    (from (t-1) to (t))
   Estimation Method                             Matching                    Matching                   Matching                 Matching
   ATET / Propagation Treatment                  -0.451**                    -0.460**                    -1.890**                -1.746**
   Dummy
   Abadie-Imbens robust std. err.                 (0.216)                      (0.216)                   (0.827)                  (0.827)

   Bias-adj Variables/Controls             Subsidiary Size (t-1),    Subsidiary Size (t-1),     Subsidiary Size (t-1),     Subsidiary Size (t-1),
                                             Parent Size (t-1)      Parent Size (t-1), Parent     Parent Size (t-1)       Parent Size (t-1), Parent
                                                                        Cash Flow (t-1)                                       Cash Flow (t-1)
   N (Matched Observations)                         13,498                     13,498                    11,960                   11,960




                                                                       14
Table OA-5 ­ Robustness ­ Alternative Matching
This table provides robustness tests for our main tests presented in Tables 3 and 5 to different matching metrics. In Panels A and B, we report average
treatment effect on the treated (ATET) in Columns (1) and (3) and regression estimates in Columns (2) and (4) with robust standard errors in the
parentheses. In constructing the Propagation Treatment Dummy variable, a parent is treated if it has a subsidiary in a country experiencing an
economic downturn that year with the economic downturn defined as a real GDP growth at least two standard deviations less than the country's
long-term average. To construct our sample, we use Mahalanobis matching with exact matching for subsidiary country, subsidiary 2-digit industry
classification, parent country, and year in addition to (nearest neighbor) matching on our continuous variables of interest in Panels A and B as well
as Coarsened Exact Matching in Panel C. Linearized Propensity Scores (LPS) in Panel B are calculated as the natural logarithm of the ratio of the
estimated propensity score over (1-estimated propensity score), running a logistic regression of Propagation Treatment Dummy on Subsidiary Size
(t-1), Parent Size (t-1), Parent Cash Flow (t-1), and Subsidiary Investment (t-1)/Employment Growth (t-1). Results are reported for the Subsidiary
Investment (t), defined as the change in fixed assets plus depreciation, normalized by lagged total assets, and Subsidiary Employment Growth (t),
defined as ln(employment(t) / employment(t-1)) of the subsidiary. Subsidiary (Parent) Size is measured by the natural logarithm of the subsidiary
(parent) total book assets. Parent Cash Flow is defined as its Operating profit/loss plus depreciation, over total assets. ATETs, reported in Columns
(1) and (3) are bias adjusted by all these continuous control variables of interest. Regressions, reported in Columns (2) and (4), include match-pair
fixed effects in all regressions in Panels A and B. All regressions include strata fixed effects in Panel C. Errors are corrected for clustering of
observations at the parent firm level. Symbols *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.

Panel A: Mahalanobis Matching using All Control Variables
                                                   (1)                        (2)                       (3)                          (4)
                                          Subsidiary Investment      Subsidiary Investment    Subsidiary Employment        Subsidiary Employment
                                                                                                      Growth                       Growth
  Estimation Method                               Matching                   Regression              Matching                    Regression
  ATET / Propagation Treatment                   -0.950***                   -0.541***              -2.407***                    -2.609***
  Dummy
  Standard Errors                                 (0.167)                     (0.201)                  (0.620)                     (0.682)

  Bias-adj Variables/Controls                                            Subsidiary Size (t-1), Parent Size (t-1),
                                                    Parent Cash Flow (t-1), and Subsidiary Investment (t-1)/Employment Growth (t-1)
  Fixed Effects                                                           Match pair                                       Match pair
  N (Matched Observations)                         13,498                   13,498                   11,960                  11,960
  R2                                                                         0.565                                            0.528
  N (Firms)                                                                  5,737                                            5,057
  N (Clusters/Parents)                                                       1,189                                            1,076




                                                                        15
Panel B: Mahalanobis Matching using Linearized Propensity Scores

                                                 (1)                       (2)                    (3)                        (4)
                                        Subsidiary Investment     Subsidiary Investment        Subsidiary                Subsidiary
                                                                                           Employment Growth         Employment Growth
    Estimation Method                         Matching                  Regression             Matching                 Regression
    ATET / Propagation Treatment             -1.070***                  -0.803***               -1.234*                  -1.655***
    Dummy
    Standard Errors                            (0.235)                    (0.216)                (0.739)                  (0.634)

    Bias-adj Variables/Controls                                    Subsidiary Size (t-1), Parent Size (t-1),
                                              Parent Cash Flow (t-1), and Subsidiary Investment (t-1)/Employment Growth (t-1)
    Fixed Effects                                                      Match pair                                   Match pair
    Matching
                                Exact                           Subsidiary Country, Parent Country, Year, Industry
                Mahalanobis-proximity                                      Linearized Propensity Score
    N (Matched Observations)                    13,498                     13,498                 11,960                  11,960
    R2                                                                      0.580                                          0.515
    N (Firms)                                                               5,332                                          4,745
    N (Clusters/Parents)                                                    1,056                                           997




                                                                   16
Panel C: Coarsened Exact Matching

                                       (1)             (2)            (3)                  (4)               (5)          (6)
                                              Subsidiary Investment                            Subsidiary Employment Growth
 Propagation Treatment              -0.242         -0.434**       -0.655***              -0.494          -2.261***     -1.702**
 Dummy
 Standard Errors                    (0.295)          (0.188)         (0.187)             (1.076)           (0.718)         (0.677)

 Controls                           Subsidiary Size (t-1), Parent Size (t-1),            Subsidiary Size (t-1), Parent Size (t-1),
                             Parent Cash Flow (t-1), Subsidiary Investment (t-1)    Parent Cash Flow (t-1), Employment Growth (t-1)
 Fixed Effects                Match strata       Match strata,       Match strata    Match strata     Match strata,       Match strata
                                                Parent Country                                       Parent Country
                                                     × Year                                               × Year
 N (Matched Observations)         1,859               5,675               6,653         1,707             5,103              6,126
 R2                               0.481               0.432               0.305         0.403             0.387              0.189
 N (Firms)                        1,431               3,913               4,003         1,314             3,501              3,713
 N (Strata)                        702                1,714               1,149          637              1,548              1,061
 N (Clusters/Parents)              582                1,158               1,007          532              1,063                933
 Exact Matching Variables    Parent Country,      Subsidiary             Parent    Parent Country,     Subsidiary            Parent
                              Sub Country,      Country, Year,       Country, Sub   Sub Country,     Country, Year, Country, Sub
                               Year, Sub            Industry        Country, Year,    Year, Sub          Industry       Country, Year,
                                Industry                             Sub Industry      Industry                          Sub Industry
 Continuous Matching         Subsidiary Size Subsidiary Size          Parent Size  Subsidiary Size Subsidiary Size        Parent Size
 Variables                    & Parent Size      & Parent Size                      & Parent Size    & Parent Size




                                                               17
Table OA-6 Robustness - Impact of the International Propagation on Destination Economies
Table reports regression estimates analogous to those presented in Table 9 except that we use standard errors (reported in parentheses) robust to
double clustering at the country and industry level. Symbols *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level respectively.

                                                              (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)
                                                           Ln(Sales) Ln(Sales) Ln(Sales) Ln(Sales) Ln(Empl.) Ln(Empl.) Ln(Empl.) Ln(Empl.)
Propagation Share                                           -0.303* -0.368* -1.301*** -1.322*** -0.367** -0.460** -1.610*** -1.711***
                                                            (0.157) (0.192) (0.216)       (0.215)   (0.174)   (0.215)   (0.273) (0.271)

Ln(Size of Foreign Subsidiaries)                                                 0.162*** 0.166***                             0.170*** 0.184***
                                                                                  (0.018)  (0.018)                              (0.021) (0.022)

Share of Subsidiaries whose Parent Firms                                                     -0.454**                                    -3.798***
Reside in Countries with an economic downturn                                                 (0.201)                                     (0.431)

Country, Industry, and Year FEs                               Yes        No         No         No          Yes        No         No          No
Country-year and Industry-year FEs                            No         Yes        Yes        Yes         No         Yes        Yes         Yes
N (Observations)                                             4,477      4,466      3,091      3,091       4,541      4,528      3,012       3,012
R2                                                           0.802      0.790      0.839      0.841       0.795      0.783      0.834       0.839




                                                                       18
Table OA-7 Subsample Analysis of Rated and Non-Rated Parent Firms
This table repeats our main tests presented in Tables 3 and 5 in subsamples restricted to U.S. parents that have no credit rating (Panel
A) and have one (Panel B) respectively. We report average treatment effect on the treated (ATET) in Columns (1) and (3) and
regression estimates in Columns (2) and (4) with robust standard errors in the parentheses. In constructing the Propagation Treatment
Dummy variable, a parent is treated if it has a subsidiary in a country experiencing an economic downturn that year with the economic
downturn defined as a real GDP growth at least two standard deviations less than the country's long-term average. To construct our
control sample, we use Mahalanobis matching with exact matching for subsidiary country, subsidiary 2-digit industry classification,
parent country, and year in addition to (nearest neighbor) matching on parent and subsidiary sizes. Parents and subsidiaries located in
a country experiencing an economic downturn are excluded from both treatment and control groups. Results are reported for the
Subsidiary Investment (t-1), defined as the change in fixed assets plus depreciation, normalized by lagged total assets, and Subsidiary
Employment Growth (t-1), defined as ln(employment(t-1) / employment(t-2)) of the subsidiary. Subsidiary (Parent) Size is measured
by the natural logarithm of the subsidiary (parent) total book assets. Parent Cash Flow is defined as its Operating profit/loss plus
depreciation, over total assets. ATETs, reported in Columns (1) and (3) are bias adjusted by all the continuous control variables of
interest. Regressions, reported in Columns (2) and (4), include match-pair fixed effects in all specifications. Errors are corrected for
clustering of observations at the parent firm level. Symbols *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.

Panel A. Unrated U.S. Parents

                                               (1)                       (2)                       (3)                         (4)
                                      Subsidiary Investment     Subsidiary Investment    Subsidiary Employment       Subsidiary Employment
                                                                                                 Growth                      Growth
  Estimation Method                           Matching                Regression                Matching                   Regression
  ATET / Propagation Treatment               -1.510**                 -1.363**                 -6.705***                     -3.839*
  Dummy
  Standard Errors                            (0.639)                   (0.584)                    (1.769)                    (1.990)

  Bias-adj Variables/Controls               Subsidiary Size (t-1), Parent Size (t-1), Parent Cash Flow (t-1), and Subsidiary Investment/
                                                                             Employment Growth (t-1)
  Fixed Effects                                                        Match pair                                            Match pair
  N (Matched Observations)                      694                        694                       598                         598
  R2                                                                      0.548                                                 0.537
  N (Firms)                                                                450                                                   381
  N (Clusters/Parents)                                                     201                                                   190
Panel B. Rated U.S. Parents

                                         (1)                      (2)                        (3)                        (4)
                                Subsidiary Investment    Subsidiary Investment     Subsidiary Employment      Subsidiary Employment
                                                                                           Growth                     Growth
 Estimation Method                     Matching                 Regression                Matching                  Regression
 ATET / Propagation Treatment          -0.517*                   -0.281                    -0.798                     -0.549
 Dummy
 Standard Errors                       (0.300)                     (0.278)                 (0.966)                     (0.882)

 Bias-adj Variables/Controls    Subsidiary Size (t-1), Parent Size (t-1), Parent Cash Flow (t-1), and Subsidiary Investment/ Employment
                                                                                Growth (t-1)
 Fixed Effects                                                    Match pair                                            Match pair
 N (Matched Observations)                5,446                       5,446                     5,118                      5,118
 R2                                                                  0.572                                                0.506
 N (Firms)                                                           2,090                                                1,941
 N (Clusters/Parents)                                                 283                                                  272




                                                              20
Table OA-8 ­ Subsidiaries in Downturn Countries Around the Downturn Year
This table provides regression estimates for investment rate and employment growth for the
subsidiaries in downturn countries before, during, and after the year of economic downturn relative
to matched control subsidiaries. The sample is constructed by matching the subsidiaries in
downturn countries by exact match of industry, parent country, and year in addition to the
Mahalanobis nearest neighbor match based on subsidiary and parent size. Subsidiaries of whose
parents are themselves located in a country experiencing an economic downturn are excluded from
the sample. The economic downturn is defined as a real GDP growth at least two standard
deviations less than the country's long-term average. In regression (3), the sample is restricted to
the subsidiaries that were eligible to be a control observation in the previous two years before the
main treatment event. Results are reported for the Subsidiary Investment, defined as the change in
fixed assets plus depreciation, normalized by lagged total assets and in percentage points, in
Columns (1)-(3) and for the Subsidiary Employment Growth, defined as the natural logarithm of
the employment over lagged employment of the subsidiary Columns (4)-(6). Subsidiary (Parent)
Size is measured by the natural logarithm of the subsidiary (parent) total book assets. Parent Cash
Flow is defined as its Operating profit/loss plus depreciation, over total assets. Standard errors are
in parentheses and are corrected for clustering of observations at the parent firm level. Symbols *,
** ***
  , denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.

Panel A. Subsidiary Investment

                                         (1)                     (2)                     (3)
                                      Subsidiary              Subsidiary              Subsidiary
                                    Investment (t)         Investment (t+1)        Investment (t-1)
Subs in Crisis                        -2.013***                 -1.074                  -0.761
                                        (0.507)                (0.857)                 (0.476)

Subsidiary Size (t-1)                   0.338                   1.279                   -0.535
                                       (0.456)                 (1.029)                 (0.404)

Parent Size (t-1)                       0.324                   -0.646                  0.295
                                       (0.310)                 (0.644)                 (0.264)

Parent Cash Flow (t-1)                 7.346**                  2.074                  6.592*
                                       (2.867)                 (6.414)                 (3.371)

Constant                                -0.075                  5.690                   2.190
                                       (2.574)                 (5.023)                 (2.190)
Fixed Effects                         Match Pair             Match Pair               Match Pair
Exact Matching                                     Parent Country, Year, Industry
Nearest Neighborhood                            Subsidiary Size (t-1), Parent Size (t-1)
Mahalanobis Matching
Sample                                      Full Matched Sample                   Matched Sample
                                                                                  with "No Crisis
                                                                                  Last Year" Filter
N (Matched Observations)                3204                     492                    2750
R2                                      0.514                   0.639                   0.503
N (Firms)                               2,012                    329                    1,918
N (Clusters/Parents)                    1,003                    223                     988


                                                 21
Panel B. Subsidiary Employment Growth

                                  (1)                    (2)                    (3)
                               Subsidiary             Subsidiary             Subsidiary
                              Employment             Employment             Employment
                               Growth (t)            Growth (t+1)           Growth (t-1)
 Subs in Crisis                 -1.818*                 -4.841*                 0.801
                                (1.022)                 (2.540)                (1.164)

 Subsidiary Size (t-1)           1.658                   5.653                  1.272
                                (1.688)                 (5.537)                (1.223)

 Parent Size (t-1)              -1.055*                  -0.999                 -0.763
                                (0.607)                 (2.297)                (0.656)

 Parent Cash Flow (t-1)          4.504                  22.041                 0.197
                                (7.960)                (16.533)               (10.097)

 Constant                        5.255                  -9.581                  5.152
                                (5.673)                (18.348)                (4.602)
 Fixed Effects                 Match Pair             Match Pair               Match Pair
 Exact Matching                             Parent Country, Year, Industry
 Nearest Neighborhood                    Subsidiary Size (t-1), Parent Size (t-1)
 Mahalanobis matching
 Sample                             Full Matched Sample                   Matched Sample
                                                                          with "No Crisis
                                                                          Last Year" Filter
 N (Matched                      3,178                    643                   2,784
 Observations)
 R2                              0.506                   0.668                  0.487
 N (Firms)                       2,004                    451                   1,921
 N (Clusters/Parents)             972                     281                    957




                                            22
Figure OA-1 U.S. Parent Firms in our Sample versus Compustat Firms

Panel A: Parent Firm Size




                                                         23
Panel B: Parent Firm Cash Holdings




                                     24
Panel C: Parent Firm Whited-Wu Index ­ Subsidiary Investment Sample




                                                             25
Panel D: Parent Firm Whited-Wu Index ­ Subsidiary Employment Growth Sample




                                                           26
