                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            THE EFFECTS OF GOVERNMENT LICENSING ON E-COMMERCE:
                           EVIDENCE FROM ALIBABA

                                          Ginger Zhe Jin
                                           Zhentong Lu
                                           Xiaolu Zhou
                                           Chunxiao Li

                                       Working Paper 27884
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27884


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2020




We are grateful to Alibaba Group for providing us proprietary data, to Kaifu Zhang, Yuan Tian,
and Zhe Yuan for helping us access the data, and to various Alibaba employees that patiently
answered many of our questions. This research is supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (grant 71803162). Jin, Lu and Zhou were consultants for Alibaba Group
during part of this research. The paper reflects the authors' opinion, not the opinion of Alibaba or
any other institutions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Ginger Zhe Jin, Zhentong Lu, Xiaolu Zhou, and Chunxiao Li. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of Government Licensing on E-commerce: Evidence from Alibaba
Ginger Zhe Jin, Zhentong Lu, Xiaolu Zhou, and Chunxiao Li
NBER Working Paper No. 27884
October 2020
JEL No. D82,K23,L5,L81

                                           ABSTRACT

Using proprietary data from Alibaba, we examine how the 2015 Food Safety Law (FSL) affects
e-commerce in China. The FSL requires most food sellers on e-commerce platforms to obtain a
valid, online license for retail food handling. Because the FSL was rolled out progressively, we
have a rare opportunity to observe a gradual transition from voluntary certification to partial
licensing and mandatory licensing.

Data summary shows that, conditional on sellers with valid licensing information, those that had
a better online reputation and more online food sales before FSL tend to display their FSL license
earlier on the platform, and buyers are more willing to transact with a seller after she displays her
FSL license.

To identify the causal impact of the FSL, we compare food and non-food categories via synthetic
control matching. We find the average quality of surviving food sellers has improved after partial
and mandatory licensing, partly because those who are unwilling to obtain the FSL license must
exit the platform. Despite an increase in seller concentration, the platform's gross merchandise
value (GMV) in the food category did not decline post FSL, nor did the average sales price
increase significantly one year into full enforcement of the FSL.

Ginger Zhe Jin                                    Xiaolu Zhou
University of Maryland                            Xiamen University
Department of Economics                           D239 Economic Building
College Park, MD 20742-7211                       422 Siming South Rd
and NBER                                          Siming, Fujian
ginger@umd.edu                                    China
                                                  xiaoluzhou2008@gmail.com
Zhentong Lu
Bank of Canada                                    Chunxiao Li
234 Wellington St. W.                             Alibaba Group
Ottawa, ON K1A 0G9                                969 West Wen Yi Road
Canada                                            Yu Hang District
zlu@bankofcanada.ca                               Hangzhou, Zhejiang 311121
                                                  China
                                                  lcx144022@alibaba-inc.com
1       Introduction
The Internet enables transactions anytime anywhere, but how to ensure product and ser-
vice quality is a first order question for all online platforms. Indeed, online platforms have
adopted many tools to address potential quality problems, including seller reputation2 , volun-
tary certification, platform warranty, buyer insurance, third-party certification, and internal
policing.3 These tools are often imperfect, as some quality dimensions are not readily ob-
servable post transaction, many buyers do not leave a review, and some consumer reviews
could be gamed or faked.
    More generally, online platforms can set rules based on what they observe, but a lot of
information crucial to consumer welfare--for example, the supply chain that contributes to
product quality and seller qualification--is not always available to the platform, especially
when the information is offline and sellers may not report it truthfully. In the meantime,
government can impose occupational licensing or quality standards, and therefore obtain
key information that is hidden from the platform. However, government is often short
of resources and cannot monitor compliance in the real time. In fact, it is difficult for a
government intervention to take effect on a digital market until the platform tracks relevant
data, detects potential violations, and enforces compliance. These pros and cons suggest
that it is valuable to assess classical regulations in the new world of e-commerce.
    In this paper, we evaluate a nationwide food safety regulation on Alibaba, China's largest
e-commerce platform. More specifically, China introduced the Food Safety Law (FSL) in
2015, requiring most food sellers on e-commerce platforms to obtain a valid, offline license
for retail food handling. This licensing requirement is seller-specific but not product-specific.
To be licensed, a food seller must have an offline production, packaging, and storage site
that meets the local government's hygiene requirements. That site must have adequate
facilities for disinfection and waste disposal, as well as adequate personnel for food safety
    2
     See Bajri and Hortacsu (2004) and Tadelis (2016) for review of seller reputation on e-commerce platforms.
In theory, when many buyers review the same product or the same seller, the average review should indicate
the true quality of the product or the seller. However, this reputation system is imperfect, as buyer reviews
may not be objective and independent (Dai et al. (2018)), sellers may have an incentive to fake or game
reviews (Mayzlin et al. (2014), Luca and Zervas (2016)), and the platform's review policy could encourage
retaliation between users (Dellarocas (2003)).
   3
     Jin and Kato (2007) examine how sellers voluntarily provide professional grading information for baseball
cards on eBay; Lewis (2011) studies how car photos help used car sales on eBay; Roberts (2011), Cai et al.
(2014), and Hui et al. (2016) have studied buyer insurance and platform warrantees; Uber has used third-party
companies (Checkr and Appriss) for driver background check on a continuous basis (news by Mashable.com,
7/13/2018); and almost all e-commerce platforms have an internal department that could warn, suspend
and eliminate bad users. See Luca (2017) and Tadelis (2016) for two recent reviews.



                                                      1
and management. The cost of licensing can be non-trivial, especially for small, family-
owned businesses in remote areas. To address this, China exempts sellers of raw, agricultural
products from the FSL. In the meantime, some special food types--for example, alcoholic
drinks--had already been subject to a separate licensing requirement before 2015. In light
of this, we study how the 2015 FSL affects non-agricultural non-alcoholic (NANA) food on
Alibaba's two e-commerce markets (Taobao and Tmall). Because buyers see the two markets
on the same digital interface, we treat them as a single platform.
    The FSL was rolled out progressively. In January 2015, Alibaba notified all food sellers
the forthcoming Food Safety Law. In the meantime, Alibaba updated its user interface so
that licensed sellers can upload their local government license directly on the platform. In
October 2015, Alibaba started to disallow unlicensed food sellers to create new listings on
Taobao and Tmall, while existing listings remained valid. Starting April 2016, Alibaba pro-
hibited any unlicensed sellers from selling any food on its platform unless they are exempted
by the FSL. Thus, starting January 2014, we observe periods of no regulation (January
2014 - December 2014), voluntary certification (VC, January 2015 - September 2015), par-
tial licensing (PL, October 2015 - March 2016), and mandatory licensing (ML, April 2016 -
June 2018). These changes are gradual rather than sudden regime shifts, because some local
governments are delayed in application approval and it is difficult to detect all violations
immediately given the platform's size.
    Unfortunately, due to a missing-data problem (described in Section 3), we only observe
the licensing status for a subset of NANA food sellers, and therefore cannot document the
month-by-month licensing rate for the full sample. However, sales data is available for all
NANA food sellers, so we can track a seller's sales revenue, average sales price, total quantity
sold, average quality, and exit. Our main specification identifies the effect of the FSL via
synthetic control matching between NANA food and non-food categories. This approach
does not use any information on whether an individual NANA food seller has obtained FSL
license or not, and therefore gets around the missing-data problem.
    Data summary shows that, conditional on sellers with valid licensing information, those
that had a better online reputation and more online food sales before FSL tend to display
their FSL license earlier on the platform. This is not surprising, as larger and more reputable
sellers may have a lower cost to meet the licensing requirement and expect more revenue
loss if they have to exit the platform without a license. Moreover, within a seller, buyers
are more willing to transact with the seller after she displays her FSL license. This positive
response is stronger for younger and less reputable sellers, suggesting that license provides


                                               2
useful information in addition to what consumers have observed on the platform.
    After using synthetic control matching between NANA food and non-food categories,
we find the average quality of surviving sellers has improved after partial and mandatory
licensing, partly because those who are unwilling to obtain the FSL license must exit the
platform. Despite an increase in seller concentration, the platform's gross merchandise value
(GMV) in NANA food did not decline post FSL, nor did the average sales price increase
significantly one year after the full enforcement of the FSL. This suggests that FSL does not
hamper the long run performance of the regulated market, probably because it has enhanced
seller quality and market transparency on the platform.
    Our work contributes to a large literature about occupational licensing and minimum
quality standard. While the bulk of the literature focuses on offline licensing, we extend
the study of licensing from local offline markets to a nationwide online market. To our
best knowledge, only two recent papers study the role of offline licensing in online markets.
Farronato et al. (2020) study sellers' voluntary reporting of offline license on an online plat-
form for professional services. They find that consumers pay little attention to (validated)
licensing information, but respond vigilantly to online customer reviews. Hall et al. (2019)
study local licensing and background screening requirements of Uber drivers. They find that
occupational licensing often does not improve ride safety or ride quality outcomes. In the
meantime, costly licensing and screening requirements tend to discourage Uber drivers' entry
into local ride sharing markets. Unlike both studies, we find buyers respond positively and
significantly to the FSL license information, and this response is stronger for young and less
reputable sellers. Our findings suggest that licensing provides new and useful information in
addition to the information already available on the platform.
    More importantly, the gradual transition from voluntary certification (VC) to partial
licensing (PL) and mandatory licensing (ML) allows us to dive deeper into the heterogeneous
effects of certification and licensing. Theorists often view VC and ML as different tools to
address the same information problem, but believe VC is more flexible than ML because it
allows sellers below the licensing standard to stay on the market (Leland (1979) and Shapiro
(1986)). These low-quality sellers can serve consumers that prefer low-quality low-price
products. In contrast, ML is often advocated to eliminate poor-quality or unsafe products,
but it could raise product price, limit entry, and reduce market competition. Corresponding
to the ambiguous theoretical predictions4 , empirical evidence on the effect of VC and ML
   4
    Theoretical ambiguity could arise because of product differentiation. For example, ML eliminates below-
standard sellers, which mechanically improves the average quality available on the market (Leland (1979)).
However, if competition is imperfect, it could motivate above-standard sellers to further improve quality,


                                                    3
are often mixed5 . We add to this rich literature by studying a gradual transition from no
regulation to VC and ML in the same empirical setting. We do find the regulated category to
have a higher Herfindahl index (HHI) post FSL, but the surviving sellers are of better quality
and expand their listings. In sum, the total sales in NANA food did not decline significantly
and the average sales price did not increase post FSL, relative to non-food categories. These
findings suggest benefits from the FSL, despite higher market concentration and non-trivial
costs in compliance and enforcement.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the background. Section
3 presents the data, including data summaries that examine who has valid licensing infor-
mation, who tends to display FSL license earlier, who exits, and how consumers respond to
FSL licensing as observed in the data. To identify the causal effects of FSL, Section 4 uses
synthetic control matching to compare NANA food category with non-food categories. The
comparison is conducted at both the category level and the individual seller level. A brief
conclusion is offered in Section 5.


2     Background
In 2015, the Chinese government announced a new Food Safety Law (FSL), which for the
first time requires online e-commerce food distribution to comply with the same regulations
as the traditional, offline distribution channels.
    The new law introduces a licensing system for food production and trade, setting stan-
dards for food production, storage, equipment, personnel, and raw materials. For example,
it requires the ownership of an offline production or storage site that is clean and tidy, and in
a prescribed distance from pollution sources. It also requires the licensee have professional
because product differentiation softens price competition (Ronnen (1991)). This prediction is sensitive to
the number of firms in the market (Scarpa (1998)) and in some cases the incentive to differentiate could
even lower the average quality on the market (Garella and Petrakis (2008)). When ML is not fully enforced
­ as in our PL period ­ low-quality sellers may choose to stay below standard, while high-quality sellers are
better motivated to comply with the minimum quality standard (Chen and Serfes (2012)).
    5
      See Dranove and Jin (2010) for the literature of quality disclosure and certification. For ML, Law and
Kim (2005) andLaw and Marks (2009) find occupational licensing improved markets when it was hard to
ascertain quality of professional services or quality of workers. In contrast, Pashigian (1979) finds state-
specific occupational licensing reduce the interstate mobility of professionals; Shepard (1978) finds higher
price of dental services and higher dentist income in jurisdictions that do not offer reciprocity in ML; Kleiner
and Kudrle (2000) find no improved dental outcomes but higher prices of basic dental services in places with
stricter licensing; Adams III et al. (2003) find fewer births by midwifery upon more stringent licensing; and
Kleiner and Todd (2009) find mortgage broker licensing had no impact on the number of foreclosures but
led to higher price of mortgages.



                                                       4
equipment or facilities suitable for food production, have qualified equipment for disinfec-
tion, disposal and garbage, and have adequate personnel for food safety and management.
Online platforms have the responsibility to display the license to consumers. Also, different
types of food have different exposure to the licensing system. Non-agricultural products
face the most stringent standard. Any sales of non-agricultural products have to obtain a
legal license. But raw, agricultural products, for example, seafood that had not been hyper-
processed, are exempted from mandatory licensing. Also, alcoholic drinks have already been
subject to a special licensing requirement before 2015 so the FSL does not apply to them.
    Alibaba is the leading e-commerce provider in China. It owns two marketplaces, Taobao
and Tmall, each of which has a non-trivial market share in China. The new law affects seven
level-one food groups on Taobao and Tmall, including snacks, fruits/vegetables/seafood
and cooked food, oil/rice/noodle/seasoning, nutrition food, tea, coffee/oatmeal, milk/infant
formula. We thus focus on the effect of the FSL on non-agricultural non-alcoholic (NANA)
food, and pool all NANA food-related groups as one treatment category. All the other
134 level-one non-food groups form the control donor pool for the category-level analysis in
Section 4.
    To implement the FSL licensing system, Alibaba has taken many actions from January
2015 to March 2016. Alibaba changed its user interface so that sellers can show their FSL
licenses to consumers. Starting January 2015, Alibaba had notified all food producers and
retailers, encouraging them to obtain a legal FSL license and disclose it online. Since October
2015, Alibaba prohibited any new listings from unlicensed sellers. Alibaba also started to
clean up the existing food listings from unlicensed sellers and finished it by the end of March
2016.
    Because the FSL was implemented gradually on the market, we have a unique opportu-
nity to compare the effect of VC and ML in the marketplace. We have four periods with
different intensity of regulation. From January 2014 (the beginning of our sample period)
to December 2014, all sellers did not have a license, indicating a period with no regulation
and no information disclosure. From January 2015 to September 2015, some sellers had
obtained and disclosed their license, while, unlicensed sellers had also been allowed to sell
online, suggesting a period of voluntary certification (VC). From October 2015 to March
2016, sellers had to disclose their licenses before listing new products, but sellers who listed
products before the regulation were still able to sell without a license, corresponding to a pe-
riod of partial licensing (PL). From April 2016 to June 2018 (the end of our sample period),
all sellers needed a license to sell food products, indicating a period of mandatory licensing


                                               5
(ML).
    The existing literature of VC and ML usually assumes perfect enforcement. In the con-
text of FSL, enforcement is rather difficult for at least two reasons. First, some sellers
may game the system by uploading wrong documents or posting regulated items as non-
regulated listings. It takes time and resources to validate documents and listings. Since
the FSL applies nationwide but licensing criteria and paperwork vary significantly across
local governments, it is impossible for the platform to detect all violations immediately and
precisely. Throughout the whole rollout period, Alibaba worked closely with the government
and received only one small fine for a minor violation in FSL enforcement. Second, the
FSL put significant stress on local governments, which have to process a massive number
of applications, send inspectors to inspect an applicant's physical facilities on site, and deal
with all the idiosyncrasies of approval, appeal, reinspection, etc. We were told that lack of
government resources had generated long delay between licensing application and licensing
approval in some provinces. At times, the tension was so severe that Alibaba was allowed
to acknowledge government receipt of licensing application as evidence of compliance and
permit temporary selling without a final licensing approval. For these two reasons, our data
most likely reflects a gradual transition from VC to ML, rather than sudden regime shifts.


3     Data
We have access to aggregated, proprietary data from Alibaba Group for all listings in all
categories. From January 2014 to June 2018, the data includes product information, seller
information, price, quantity sold, and revenue.
    Product information includes the specific title of a listing, a set of product characteristics,
and the product classification the listing belongs to (as defined by Alibaba). Excluding digital
and service goods such as real estate, ticket booking and gift cards, Alibaba's classification
has 141 level-one groups, 7 of which are food related.
    Our data on food listings has a special indicator for alcoholic drinks, but it does not
explicitly indicate whether a food item is agricultural or not. This presents a challenge, as
only non-agricultural food is subject to the FSL law. To address it, we use listing titles to
infer whether an item is agricultural or non-agricultural, depending on whether the item on
sale comes in an original retail package from the manufacturer. We were told that this feature
is a strong indicator for non-agricultural food, although not having it does not necessarily
imply the item must be agricultural. For example, dried fruits that are individually wrapped


                                                6
by the manufacturer is non-agricultural for sure, but if a seller sells the same product by
weight and without the original retail package, it is hard to tell whether it is agricultural or
not. Whenever we have doubts, we classify the food listing as "unknown." In doing so, we
identify 2% of food listings as agricultural food or alcoholic drinks, 32% as non-agricultural
non-alcoholic (NANA food), and the rest 66% as unknowns. Throughout the paper, we
exclude all agricultural food, alcoholic drinks and the unknowns from the analysis. All
results are robust if we include the unknowns.6
   We analyze data at both the category level and the individual seller level. Below we
summarize the data at these two levels separately.


3.1       Category-level data summary
For category-level analysis, we take NANA food as one treated category and the 134 non-food
level-one groups as control categories. Among non-food groups, seven focus on household
items, including kitchen products, decorations, cleansers, gifts and festival products, house-
hold goods (lamp), and storage boxes. We refer to them as "household" categories. Because
NANA food is most similar to household categories, part of our analysis will highlight the
comparison between NANA food and household sellers.
    Each category-month can be summarized by seller count, average sales price, average
seller quality, and total GMV. By seller count, we mean the number of unique sellers that
sold anything in category c and month t. If a seller has sold in multiple categories at that
month, she is counted as active in each of these categories. For each category-month, we
can count the number of unique listings that have positive revenue. Across all listings in a
category-month, we can sum up the total revenue and total units sold. The ratio of the two
yields average sales price.
    We rely on Alibaba's consumer rating system and return records to measure seller quality.
Alibaba displays seller-specific rating scores in three dimensions: product description, service,
and shipping. Each score is the average for all reviews given by previous consumers who have
purchased from the seller in the last six months. Across the three scores, we compute an
average for each seller. Thus, the resulting average score is seller-month specific, indicating
the overall product, shipping, and service quality of the seller in the past six months. An
average of the three average rating scores gives us one overall measure of average seller
quality per category-month. Similarly, based on the return records, we compute "average
  6
      Results are available upon request.



                                               7
percentage of returns due to quality problem per active seller" and "average percentage of
returns due to counterfeit per active seller" as two other measures of average seller quality.
    Seller reputation is another important attribute of sellers. At any particular time, Alibaba
defines a seller's reputation as her total count of positive consumer feedback minus total count
of negative feedback. By definition, this measure is accumulative across time and across all
categories since the seller's entry onto the platform. Seller reputation is important for both
buyers and sellers because it is highly visible on the platform and Alibaba uses it to classify
sellers into stars and crowns. However, because it is cumulative and negative feedback is rare
on average, seller reputation is more related to the seller's age and overall trading volume on
the platform, than to the seller's product or service quality per transaction. That said, being
able to survive for a long period and for many transactions could in itself be interpreted as
a signal of seller quality.
    Across the four periods (no regulation, VC, PL, and ML), Table 1 summarizes our
category-level sample for NANA food, the 7 household categories, and the other 127 non-food
non-household categories. To avoid revealing Alibaba's business secrets, we normalize the
summary statistics by deducting the platform-level mean and dividing the difference by the
platform-level standard deviation in each month. The table thus shows the category-level
variations relative to platform-wide average.
    Panel A shows how the number of unique sellers varies over time for food and non-
food categories. In the no-regulation period, the number of food sellers was 0.112 standard
deviation above the platform average, which further increased to 0.687 and 0.697 during VC
and PL, but dropped below that of no-regulation (-0.021) after ML started. This suggests
that many food sellers may have entered the market under VC, but exited under ML. In
contrast, the number of sellers increased steadily over time for household items and declined
slightly for non-food non-household categories.
    Panel B shows the category-level HHI in the four periods. For NANA food, HHI increased
over time, especially after ML started. The HHI of household categories and non-food non-
household categories were relatively stable throughout the four periods.
    Panel C indicates changes in average rating score per active seller. From no-regulation
to VC, the average rating score declined for both NANA food and household categories, but
the decrease was more pronounced in NANA food. From VC to PL and ML, the average
rating score increased for NANA food and decreased for household categories. In comparison,
average rating score of sellers in non-food non-household categories went up and down in a
much smaller magnitude. These patterns suggest that the average seller quality of NANA


                                               8
food may have improved as the FSL became more binding in PL and ML.
    Panel D summarizes average reputation per active seller. For NANA food, average seller
reputation was below platform average during no regulation, VC and PL, but rose above
platform average during ML. In comparison, average seller reputation was always above
platform average in the household categories, but declined steadily from no-regulation to
ML. For non-food non-household categories, average seller reputation is close to the platform
average, with a small gradual decline over time.
    Panels E and F summarize average percentage of return due to quality problems or
counterfeits per active seller. Both metrics were extraordinarily high for NANA food in the
no-regulation period, but they decreased steadily throughout VC, PL and ML. In comparison,
they either fluctuated or increased over time for non-food categories. Again, the patterns
suggest that seller quality had a relative increase in NANA food as the FSL became more
effective over time, consistent with what we have seen in average rating score and average
seller reputation.
    Panel G shows that average sales price (per unit sold) increased by a similar small amount
for both NANA food and household categories, while decreased slightly for non-food non-
household categories. As for category-level GMV, Panel H shows that GMV fluctuated for
NANA food and non-food non-household categories, but decreased in every period for the
household categories.


3.2     Seller-level data summary
Category-level comparison helps to describe the big picture, but it ignores many hetero-
geneities within a category. As a supplement, we extract a random sample of individual
sellers from NANA food and household categories.7 Below we first summarize the sample
of individual NANA food sellers, and then compare it to the sample of individual household
sellers.

3.2.1    The random sample of NANA food sellers

We draw a random sample of 1,926 NANA food sellers from those that had NANA food
sales for at least three months in 2014 (roughly 1%). For the drawn sellers, we keep all
   7
    As shown in Table 1, the household categories are more similar to NANA food than other control
categories, in terms of average rating score and average sales price before FSL. Therefore, our random draw
of individual sellers focus on NANA food and household categories. But for category-level analysis, the
number of household categories (7) is too small so we use all non-food categories to form the donor pool.



                                                    9
their NANA food listings from January 2014 to June 2018, and aggregate the listings by
seller-month. For each seller-month, we compute total revenue, total number of NANA food
listings that have any sales, and average sales price (total revenue divided by total units
sold).
     By definition, such sampling is limited to incumbent sellers who had sales during the no
regulation period. Because new entrants have no pre-FSL period, they are not included in
the individual-seller sample. Towards the end of the paper, we will present statistics on the
NANA food sellers that entered the platform post 2014.
     Table 2 summarizes the 1,926 NANA food sellers in our random sample. A seller is
defined as exiting the platform at month t if t is the last month she had positive NANA
food sales and t is not the last month of our data. By this definition, 1,613 (83.7%) of the
1,926 sellers have exited by the end of our sample period. The high exit rate is not unique
to NANA food, as the whole platform is featured by high entries and exits, and sellers often
jump categories over time. Over time, we observe a smaller number of exits in no-regulation
and VC periods (292 and 387) than in PL and ML (419 and 828). The higher exit rate
during PL and ML could be driven by tighter enforcement of FSL licensing in these two
periods.
     Although our sales data is complete for all sellers throughout January 2014 to June 2018,
some historical FSL licensing data was overwritten in recent years. As a result, we only
have FSL licensing data for a subset of NANA food sellers. Whenever we have FSL licensing
data for a seller, we know exactly when she first obtained and displayed the FSL license on
the platform.8 For those without FSL licensing data, we do not know whether they never
displayed any FSL license before June 2018 or they had done so but the record is missing.
Nevertheless, we were told that a seller that had any NANA food sales post the start of
ML must have a valid FSL license or a reasonable excuse to be temporarily exempted from
the delisting enforcement (e.g. local government has a technical delay processing the seller's
FSL application).
     Out of the 1,926 NANA food sellers in our random sample, we observe 335 (17.4%)
display a FSL license by June 2018. As lack of license could be driven by missing data or
by sellers not obtaining the FSL license, we zoom into the 901 sellers that had positive sales
post ML. In theory, they should have all displayed the FSL license by the end of our data if
the delay of local government approval is not too severe. Among them, 303 (33.7% of 901)
   8
    This information is cumulative, as no sellers switched from being licensed to no license unless they exit
the NANA food category or the platform as a whole.



                                                     10
have displayed an FSL license sometime, while the other 598 did not. In contrast, only 32
(3.1%) of the 1,296 sellers that did not sell any NANA food post ML have any FSL licensing
data. This suggests that the vast majority of those exiting before ML did not bother to
get licensed, while those that continued to sell post ML suffer a non-trivial missing data
problem.
    Conditional on the sellers that had positive NANA food sales post ML, Table 3 compares
them by whether their license data is missing. As shown in the first two columns, those
with valid FSL licensing data were older, bigger and more reputable before FSL than the
ones without FSL licensing data. However, post ML, those without FSL licensing data have
a higher monthly GMV, although they are on average active for fewer months. To further
examine the missing pattern, the last two columns of Table 3 zoom into the 382 sellers that
sold any NANA food in 2018 (the last six months of our data). If local government delay
is one important reason for missing licensing data, we should observe less missing in this
subgroup. Indeed, only 35.2% (135 out of 382) of them miss licensing data, which is much
lower than the percent of missing (66.3%) among those that sold anything post ML. The
two subgroups--with and without licensing data--are also more similar to each other once
we condition on having sales in 2018. Above all, we conclude that data overwriting accounts
for some of the missing data, but it is also possible that license approval was delayed in
some local governments when ML started and such delay was alleviated over time. Unable
to tell the exact reason for each missing data point, our comparison between licensed and
unlicensed sellers will likely underestimate the real difference, as the unlicensed group would
include some that actually got the license.
    Conditional on the 335 sellers with valid licensing information in our data, the second
panel of Table 2 describes the distribution of the timing of their license display: only 96 of
them (28.7%) obtained and displayed their FSL license in the VC period, while 129 (38.5%)
got licensed in PL and the other 110 (32.8%) in ML. This pattern suggests that the tighter
enforcement of PL and ML may have given sellers an extra motivation to acquire and display
FSL license.
    The next block of Table 2 summarizes GMV, number of orders, number of unique buyers,
and total quantity sold per active seller-month. By active seller-month, we mean each seller
that has positive sales in a specific month. In total, there are 41,272 active seller-months in
our sample. To capture potential skewness, we show mean, median and standard deviation
for each measure. It is obvious that all these sales measures are highly skewed, with the
mean and standard deviation much higher than the median.


                                              11
    The last two blocks of Table 2 classifies the 1,926 NANA food sellers by their reputation
and age on the platform. Among all active seller-months, the average seller reputation is
21,932, and the median is 2,419. If we classify the 1,926 sellers by their average reputation
in the no-regulation period, 669 (34.7%) had a reputation no higher than 250. We refer to
them as "low-reputation" sellers, and the rest as "high-reputation" sellers.
    Seller age is defined as the number of months since the seller opened her first store in
Alibaba marketplaces. Across the whole sample of individual NANA food sellers, the average
seller age (per active seller-month) is 21.89 months and the median is 10. If we classify the
1,926 sellers by their average age in the no-regulation period, 641 of them (33.3%) were less
than 12 months old. We refer to them as "young" sellers and the rest as "old" sellers.

3.2.2   Who obtains FSL license and who exits?

Despite the missing data problem, the observed licensing data may still tell us something
about who got the FSL license and when. So we summarize it below.
    Figure 1 plots the hazard rate of licensing for all NANA food sellers (before we sample
individual sellers). Each point represents the fraction of sellers that started to display the
FSL license during time t if they had not been FSL licensed by the beginning of t. The three
vertical lines indicate the start of VC, PL, and ML respectively. Because sellers without
licensing data are counted as never licensed in this figure, the absolute hazard rate will
underestimate the actual hazard rate, but relative change of hazard rate is still informative if
the missing data problem is random. Consistent with Table 2, Figure 1 shows that unlicensed
sellers are more likely to obtain FSL license right before PL and ML, probably because of
the threat of more stringent enforcement from the platform. During ML, there is another
spike of licensing hazard rate near the end of 2016, which may reflect batch approvals from
some local governments at that time.
    Accordingly, Figure 2 plots the exit hazard rate for NANA food sellers. Recall that exit
is defined by a seller's last sales record in our data, which does not suffer any missing data
problem. Generally speaking, the exit hazard increased from no-regulation to VC, peaked
during PL, and declined in ML. There was a small rise of exit rate at the start of VC and
PL, likely reflecting the (perceived) tightening in platform enforcement.
    To further understand seller behavior, we apply a duration model with Cox proportional
hazard to the sample of 1,926 individual NANA food sellers. In particular, we assume the
hazard of seller i uploading the FSL license at month t is as follows, conditional on she has



                                              12
not displayed such license by t - 1:

                        (discloselicenset |Xit ) = 0 (t) × exp(Xit  ),                     (1)

where Xit includes the interactions between the dummies of VC, PL and ML periods and a
seller's pre-FSL GMV and reputation (both in log). Because sellers cannot upload the FSL
license until VC started in January 2015, the estimation sample excludes the no-regulation
period and the stand-alone terms of pre-FSL GMV and pre-FSL reputation are dropped
(otherwise there would be perfect collinearity). By definition, every seller in our individual
seller sample had positive sales in at least three months before FSL, so we compute her
pre-FSL GMV and pre-FSL reputation as the monthly average during no-regulation.
    Table 4 presents the results in two columns. The first column uses all of the 1,926 NANA
food sellers in our random sample; the second column is conditional on the 335 sampled
sellers that have some FSL licensing data. Obviously, the second column is a highly selected
sample because sellers that intended to exit before ML may not bother to seek FSL license.
However, because we cannot distinguish them from those that got FSL license but have
missing value in our data, a focus on the licensed ones would at least tell us who tends to get
the FSL license earlier than others. In comparison, the first column is subject to the missing
data problem and may underestimate the baseline hazard rate and the impact of observable
factors.
    As shown in Column 1 of Table 4, the hazard ratio of log(pre-FSL GMV) is significantly
higher than one in VC and PL periods (1.356 and 1.180), but lower than one in ML (0.783).
Results are qualitatively similar in Column 2 (but with smaller magnitudes), suggesting that
sellers with higher sales before the FSL are more likely to obtain and upload an FSL license
early, rather than wait until the platform adopted the tightest enforcement in ML. This is
not surprising, as sellers of higher pre-FSL sales should have more resources to pay for the
licensing cost and would face more revenue loss if they have to exit the platform without a
license. In comparison, the hazard ratio on log(pre-FSL reputation) follows a similar pattern:
it is significantly higher than one in VC and PL (1.353 and 1.145) but not distinguishable
from one in ML (1.011). Results are qualitatively similar in Column 2, suggesting that the
pattern is unlikely driven by the missing data problem.
    We run a similar duration model for seller exit. For seller i, we code her as exiting in
month t if t is the last month we observe her positive sales in NANA food and t is not the
last month of our data (June 2018). This definition may over-count exit if some sellers only
sell seasonal NANA food that has high demand in May but little demand in June.

                                              13
    Table 5 reports the duration results on seller exit. Although we could compute the
hazard rate of exit during no-regulation, we choose to exclude the no-regulation period from
the estimation sample, because the sellers are sampled conditional on sales before FSL and
our key variables ­ pre-FSL GMV and pre-FSL seller reputation ­ are computed from the
seller's whole history during no-regulation. As we do not have any missing data problem for
sales and exit, we only report the results for the full sample of 1,926 NANA food sellers.
    Consistent with the hazard of licensing, Table 5 shows that sellers of higher pre-FSL
reputation are significantly less likely to exit in VC and PL periods . This makes sense, as
more reputable sellers are more likely to obtain FSL license during VC and PL, thus having
less need to exit. In comparison, conditional on survival at the beginning of ML, they are
more likely to exit during ML, probably because the platform has tightened FSL enforcement
during ML and those that chose to be unlicensed have to exit. Surprisingly, those that had
a higher pre-FSL GMV are more likely to exit during VC and PL, which is opposite to the
effects of VC and PL on those that had a higher pre-FSL reputation. As pre-FSL GMV
and pre-FSL reputation are positively correlated, we do not have a good explanation. One
possibility is that FSL triggered multiple types of reactions: some were motivated to obtain
FSL license early and remain active post-FSL; others may try to clear out all food items
before the FSL became binding. Both types could involve big or small sellers. In Section 4,
we will use synthetic control matching for each individual seller, to better understand how
the FSL affects the distribution of NANA food sellers.

3.2.3    Consumer response to FSL license

Whether a seller is motivated to seek licensing depends on how consumers respond to the
display of FSL license. To gauge consumer response, we use the monthly records of the same
1,926 NANA sellers as in Tables 4 and 5. If we condition on active sellers (i.e. with positive
sales in a month), the panel consists of 41,272 observations by seller-month. We refer to this
sample as the active selling sample. If we include those who have not exited but made zero
sales in a month, there are 56,364 seller-months. We refer to this sample as the potential
selling sample.
    Our econometric specification is:

 yit = 1 1{F SLlicense,it} · 1{V C } + 2 1{F SLlicense,it} · 1{P L} + 3 1{F SLlicense,it} · 1{M L} + i + µt +   it   (2)

where i denotes the seller, t is month, i is seller fixed effects, and µt is year-month fixed


                                                        14
effects. When we use the potential selling sample, the dependent variable yit is the dummy of
whether seller i making any NANA food sales in month t. Conditional on the active selling
sample, the dependent variables are the seller's monthly GMV, number of orders, number
of buyers, and quantities sold.
    Our main independent variables are the interaction between the seller's license status
(1{F SLlicense,it} ) and the dummies of VC, PL and ML. Again, because no license is available
until VC started, the stand alone term of 1{F SLlicense,it} is dropped due to collinearity. All
regressions include seller fixed effects, thus {1 , 2 , 3 } measure how yit changes within the
same seller after she displayed the FSL license on the platform. We do not include seller
reputation, quality, or average sales price on the right hand side, because seller fixed effects
already absorb each seller's pre-FSL characteristics, and any concurrent change in reputa-
tion, quality or price could reflect consumer response to FSL licensing. For this reason,
{1 , 2 , 3 } should not be interpreted as the causal effect of randomly assigning FSL license
to an incumbent NANA seller. Rather, they capture the average within-seller change of
sales likelihood and sales amount when the seller switches from no license to having an FSL
licensing in a particular post-FSL period. Licensed sellers could be a selected group, and the
licensing dummy reflects whatever factors that drive the seller's licensing decision.
    Table 6 shows the estimation results for the full sample of 1,926 NANA food sellers.
According to Column (5), displaying an FSL license during the VC period is related to
a 14.1% higher probability to make any sales, relative to the no regulation period. The
boosting effect of licensing in PL and ML are even higher 31% and 32.3%. Conditional on
making sales, Column (1) shows that, displaying a FSL license in VC is associated with
30.4% more GMV within the same seller, as compared to pre-FSL. Positive effects also occur
in PL (53.8%) and ML (69.7%). Similar patterns appear in other sales measures. In short,
consumers' positive response to FSL licensing is consistent with the fact that some sellers
sought licensing even when the mandate was not fully in effect.
    Tables 7 and 8 rerun the same specification by subsamples, according to whether a seller
was more than 12 months old before FSL and whether a seller's pre-FSL reputation was
over 250. Comparing young and old sellers in Table 7, we find 13 out of all 15 coefficients
are higher for young sellers. Same pattern occurs in Table 8, where all 15 coefficients are
higher for low-reputation sellers than high-reputation sellers (although the 4 coefficients on
low-reputatble sellers in VC are not significant from zero due to insufficient data variations).
Some of the found effects may not be fully attributable to FSL license as we do not control the
full information set of consumers. But the pattern suggests that FSL license helps consumers


                                              15
to trust younger and less reputation sellers on the platform, probably because the license
provides useful information in addition to what consumers can observe on the platform.
    The above results are based on the full sample of the 1,926 NANA food sellers, which
could be biased due to the missing data problem in licensing records. To the extent that
the unlicensed sellers in our data could have obtained an FSL license in reality, these results
could under-estimate the true effect of FSL license display. Because of this caveat, we regard
these results as data description rather than the causal effects of FSL. Later on, we will
identify the effect of FSL via synthetic control matching, which does not depend on any
seller's licensing status.

3.2.4   Comparing NANA food sellers with household sellers

Table 9 compares the sample of 1,926 NANA food sellers to a random sample of 5,721
household sellers. These household sellers are random draws from those that had been
actively selling household items in at least three months pre-FSL. We compare these two
types of sellers in their monthly average revenue, average rating score, average sales price,
and number of active listings. To avoid revealing Alibaba's business secrets, all numbers are
normalized by sample mean and sample standard deviation.
    As shown in Panel A of Table 9, the average monthly revenue per active NANA food
seller has dropped from no-regulation to VC but increased in PL and ML, and its absolute
level in PL and ML was higher than that of no-regulation. In comparison, average month
revenue per active household seller is much more stable, with slight decrease in PL and ML
than in no-regulation and VC.
    Panel B shows that the average rating score per active NANA food seller declined steadily
over the four periods, but increased for household sellers. As for average sales price (Panel
C), it tends to increase for NANA food sellers from no-regulation to PL, but dropped back
during PL and ML. The trend is almost reversed for household sellers, with the average sales
price at roughly the same level during ML as in the no-regulation period. Finally, an active
NANA food seller had a greater number of active listings during PL and ML than before,
while the number of active listings declined slightly for an active household seller in the same
time frame.
    All these comparisons are raw average across the sampled sellers, which may not be
exactly comparable at the individual-seller level. In Section 4, we will conduct synthetic
control matching for each individual NANA seller, to ensure comparability.



                                              16
4       Main Results from Synthetic Control Matching
So far, we have documented the supply of FSL license among NANA sellers and consumer
response to such licensing information. However, these descriptive statistics do not control
for what else was happening on the platform at the same time, and is subject to missing
values in licensing information. A more rigorous evaluation of FSL should compare NANA
food with non-food categories, and do not depend on the observed licensing status. In
this section, we do so by synthetic control matching. We adopt synthetic control matching
rather than difference-in-differences (DID), because NANA food and non-food categories
were different even before FSL. We start by describing the synthetic control method, and
then present evidence at the category level and seller level separately.


4.1     Method
Both synthetic control matching and difference-in-differences (DID) rely on control units to
tease out the treatment effect from the treated units' over-time variations. But different from
DID, synthetic control matching does not require parallel pre-treatment trends for treated
units and control units. Instead, the method puts weights on the control donor pool and
constructs a synthetic unit that can perfectly match the pre-treatment trend for the treated
unit (Abadie and Gardeazabal (2003) and Abadie et al. (2010)).
    Synthetic control matching is developed for case studies with one outcome variable, but
we consider multiple outcome variables including seller count, average price, seller quality,
etc. Ideally, we want to find the synthetic control unit to be the same as the treated across
all outcome variables. But when we try to match all variables jointly, the pre-treatment
matching quality is uneven across outcome variables.9 Ex ante, it is difficult to judge which
outcome variable should receive more weight in the overall quality of joint matching. In light
of this, we apply synthetic control matching to each outcome variable independently.
    We start with category-level analysis for the seven outcome variables listed in Table 1.
This is to understand the average treatment effects of the FSL on NANA food. For each
outcome variable, we look for a synthetic control unit from the donor pool of the 134 non-
food categories, including 7 household categories and 127 non-food non-household categories.
We match the outcome variables during no regulation and keep the weights unchanged for
the periods of VC, PL and ML.
    9
   Robbins et al. (2017) proposed a micro-synthetic control method for multiple outcome variables and a
RStudio package microsynth.R. We have tried the new method jointly matching all outcome variables.



                                                  17
    We then conduct a seller-level analysis to understand the heterogeneous treatment effects
on different types of sellers. For each of the 1,926 NANA sellers in our random sample,
we find the synthetic control unit from the donor pool of 5,721 individual sellers in the 7
household categories. Based on data from the no-regulation period, we perform synthetic
control matching on each of the four outcome variables separately: seller's monthly GMV,
average rating score, average sales prices, and the number of active listings.
    We do not have a balanced panel for average sales price if a seller has zero sales in a
month, because we calculate sellers' average sales price from GMV and quantities sold. To
deal with it, we aggregate the seller-month-level prices to seller-quarter-level prices and drop
sellers who still have unbalanced quarterly prices during no regulation. Also, we observe
missing rating scores if a seller has no sales in a month. We impute the missing value as
the seller's non-missing average rating score in the latest previous month with positive sales,
because the rating score is mechanically calculated based on purchases in the last six months
according to the platform. Therefore, the results for sellers' monthly GMV, average rating
score, and the number of active listings are all unconditional on seller survival, but the result
for average sales price is conditional on seller survival.


4.2    Category-level Results
Figure 3 presents the effects of the FSL on NANA food over three treated periods (VC,
PL and ML). To protect Alibaba's business secrets, we only display the relative difference
between the treated unit and the synthetic control rather than their actual values.
    Table 10 displays the treatment effects and the inference of the FSL on the food category
in the first month of each treatment period. The inference is computed from bootstrapping.
In particular, we conduct the synthetic control for each of the control categories while using
all categories except for itself as the donor pool. This gives us a distribution of treatment
effects under the null hypothesis of zero effect. We use the distribution to calculate p-values.
For the positive treatment effect, its one-sided p-value is the probability that placebo effects
are above the treatment effect. For the negative treatment effect, its one-sided p-value is the
probability that placebo effects are below the treatment effect.
    Consistent with data summary in Table 1, seller count in NANA food has a 15.4%
increase in the first month of VC but a 1.4% drop in the first month of ML, all relative to no
regulation. Most time, the effect on seller count is not statistically different from zero. The
HHI increase in NANA food started in VC, but became statistically significant in PL and ML.
Average rating score per seller was on the upper end of the confidence interval during VC,

                                               18
PL and the first half of ML, and eventually became significantly positive in the second half
of ML.10 In the meantime, the percentage of returns due to quality and counterfeit problems
dropped significantly. For these two variables, the quality of synthetic control matching is
not as good as other outcome variables, partly because they are designed to capture small
probability events, partly because their values for NANA food were extraordinarily high in
part of 2014 (Table 1). The synthetic matching results also suggest that these two variables
improved significantly even before the beginning of VC. We don't know the exact reason. If
Alibaba had started to target the food category for quality issues before the official start of
the FSL, the large improvement post FSL may not be fully attributable to the adoption of
FSL. Overall, the three quality measures suggest that average seller quality has improved
post FSL. As for average sales price, the point estimate is positive but rarely significant.
Similarly, the effect of FSL on the platform's total GMV in NANA food was always within
the 95% confidence interval. This suggests that the FSL does not hamper the long run
performance of the regulated market, probably because it has enhanced seller quality and
market transparency on the platform.


4.3     Seller-level Results
For each of the 1,926 randomly drawn NANA food sellers, we use synthetic control matching
to find the comparable control from the sample of 5,721 randomly drawn household sellers.
This is done for each of the four outcomes separately (i.e. monthly GMV, average rating
score, average sales price conditional on sales, and number of unique active listings). In
total, we obtain a treatment effect for each NANA food seller in each outcome.
    Figure 4 presents the heterogeneous effects by sellers' pre-FSL GMV. We classify sellers
into 10 groups based on the quantiles of their pre-FSL GMV in no-regulation. The x-axis
shows the 10 groups from low to high. For each group, we show the distribution of the
treatment effect with a whisker box plot. The bottom, middle, and top lines of the box
show the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles. The two caps show the upper and lower adjacent
values, which are the 25th (75th) percentile plus (minus) the 1.5 times the interquartile
  10
    The abnormal dip towards the end of VC was driven by Alibaba's algorithm change on rating score.
Since late 2015, Alibaba's rating system no longer includes transactions in which the final transaction price is
extremely low (<5 RMB, equivalent to 80cents in US$). This policy applies to historical cumulative ratings
and affects different categories differently depending on the price distribution specific to each category.
Because food items are more likely to be of low price, this algorithm causes the average rating score to drop
significantly in late 2015. However, average rating score is a 6-month moving average, so the impact of this
change attenuates over time. To the extent that it remains to affect food more than other categories, our
synthetic control estimate may under-estimate the effect of the FSL on sellers' rating score.


                                                      19
range. Values within the caps and out of the box are mild outliers, and the dotted values
outside the caps are extreme values. This graph is drawn for each of the four outcomes
separately.
    Figure 5 presents the heterogeneous effects of the FSL by sellers' pre-FSL reputation.
Same as before, we classify the sampled sellers into 11 groups according to sellers' pre-FSL
reputation based on Alibaba's definition for stars, crowns, and diamonds. For each group,
we show the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles with the whisker box, the upper and lower
adjacent values with two caps, and extreme outliers with dots.
    Table 11 and 12 show the point estimates for the median and 75th percentile of the
individual treatment effects for each seller group, with p-value. The inference is drawn from
bootstrapping. In particular, we randomly draw 30% (1,716) sellers from the 5,721 individual
household sellers, and pretend them as a hypothetical treatment group. We then compute
the placebo treatment effect for each seller and each outcome, and group these "treated"
placebo sellers into 10 groups by their pre-FSL GMV (or 11 groups by pre-FSL reputation).
For each group, we can compute the placebo median effect and the placebo 75th percentile
effect. Repeating this 100 times, we compute the one-sided p-value for the treatment median
effect and the treatment 75th percentile effect. For the positive treatment effect, its one-
sided p-value is the probability that placebo effects are above the treatment effect. For the
negative treatment effect, its one-sided p-value is the probability that placebo effects are
below the treatment effect.
    Among the multiple treatment periods, we only show the results in ML because that
is the period with the most dramatic changes according to our category analysis. Results
suggest that sellers in the top decile of pre-FSL GMV are more able to survive and grow
their GMV in the ML period than sellers in all the other deciles; they are also more able
to expand number of listings in ML than other sellers. That being said, even the top decile
sellers suffer from a large, significant drop in GMV at median and 75th percentile, suggesting
that the true dynamics is more complicated than just the largest survive and grow. As shown
in Figure 4, each decile has some outlier sellers enjoying a significant GMV growth post FSL,
which in combination drives the significant increase of HHI in NANA food (Figure 3). As
for average rating and price, sellers of all groups have positive median effects, and there
is no obvious relationship between the magnitude of these effects and pre-FSL GMV. This
suggests that ML could encourage higher seller quality and allow higher price regardless of
the seller's pre-treatment size, if they can survive. When we group sellers by their pre-FSL
reputation, the heterogeneity is similar.


                                             20
    Figure 6 compares new entrants in NANA food with new entrants in the 7 household
categories. A seller is counted new in month t if she opened the store on Alibaba after
January 2014 and still has sales on or after month t. By this definition, the new seller count
is cumulative since January 2014, conditional on survival at the study time. Figure 6 is
limited to NANA food and household categories, because we do not have individual seller
data to track seller entry time in other categories. For the same reason, we do not have
enough non-food categories to construct category-level synthetic control for the pattern of
seller entry. That said, the raw comparison between NANA food and household categories
is still informative.
    Over time, Figure 6a displays the percentage of new sellers among all surviving sellers in
NANA food, relative to household categories. For example, if at month $t$, x% of all sellers
active in the household categories are new since January 2014 and (x+1)% of NANA food
sellers are new, then the graph plots 1% for month $t$. The three straight lines indicate the
start of VC, PL and ML respectively.
    In short, Figure 6a shows relatively fewer new sellers in NANA food after the beginning
of ML, although more entries occurred in NANA food during VC and PL. The latter could
happen if VC and PL prompted new non-licensible sellers to take the last opportunity to
sell NANA food without license.
    Figure 6b plots the new entrants' average rating score after 3 months post entry, in NANA
food relative to the household categories. Throughout the whole sample period (January
2014 to June 2018), new entrants in NANA food tend to have higher average rating score
than similar entries into household categories, at an average of 0.035. This gap became
somewhat smaller in the first half of ML and larger in the second half of ML. Recall from the
category-level analysis that FSL has a positive effect on seller quality, especially during PL
and ML. Figure 6a and Figure 6b suggest that such quality improvement is unlikely driven
by new entrants, as NANA food saw fewer new entrants than household categories in the
ML period and the quality gap of the new entrants in NANA food and household categories
did not rise significantly during PL and ML.


5    Conclusion
We examine how the 2015 Food Safety Law (FSL) affects e-commerce in China. Because the
FSL was rolled out progressively, we have a rare opportunity to observe a gradual transition
from voluntary certification to partial licensing and mandatory licensing.


                                             21
    We find that FSL licensing provides an opportunity for younger and less reputable sellers
to stand out as quality food sellers, and consumers respond positively to the display of FSL
license on the platform. In addition, as compared to non-food categories, it seems that FSL
has improved average seller quality in the regulated food category without driving down its
overall GMV or raising its average sales price one year post the full enforcement of the FSL.
These findings suggest that the FSL may have brought substantial benefits to the market.
    In the meantime, anecdotes suggest that enforcement and compliance costs are non-
trivial. Because the FSL is an offline licensing requirement for online sellers, enforcement
entails both offline resources from local governments and online resources from the platform.
Besides enforcement costs, the cost of compliance is likely non-trivial for at least some food
sellers, which may explain why larger and reputable sellers are more likely to obtain the FSL
license despite the fact that consumers respond more positively to the licensing of younger
and less reputable sellers. Another cost of the FSL may be reflected in the increased seller
concentration. In our sample period, the higher concentration has not led to detectable
price increase, but we do observe fewer new entrants into NANA food in the ML period, as
compared to entrants in the household categories. It remains to be seen whether the higher
barrier to entry due to the FSL would generate more costs for market competition in the
future.


References
Abadie, A., A. Diamond, and J. Hainmueller (2010). Synthetic control methods for compar-
 ative case studies: Estimating the effect of californias tobacco control program. Journal
 of the American Statistical Association 105 (490), 493­505.

Abadie, A. and J. Gardeazabal (March, 2003). The economic costs of conflict: A case study
 of the basque country. The American Economic Review 93 (1), 113­132.

Adams III, A. F., R. B.Ekelund Jr., and J. D. Jackson (Jan. 2003). Occupational licensing
 of a credence good: The regulation of midwifery. Southern Economic Journal 69 (3),
 659­675.

Bajri, P. and A. Hortacsu (2004). Economic insights from internet auctions. Journal of
  Economic Literature 42 (2), 457­48.




                                             22
Cai, H., G. Z. Jin, C. Liu, and L. an Zhou (2014). More trusing, less trust? an investigation
  of early e-commerce in china. NBER working paper No.18961 .

Chen, M. and K. Serfes (2012). Minimum quality standard regulation under imperfect quality
 observability. Journal of Regulatory Economics 41, 269­291.

Dai, W. D., G. Z. Jin, J. Lee, and M. Luca (2018). Aggregation of consumer ratings: an
 application to yelp.com. Quantitative Marketing and Economics 16 (3), 289­339.

Dellarocas, C. (2003). The digitization of word of mouth: Promise and challenges of online
  feedback mechanisms. Management Science 49 (10), 14071424.

Dranove, D. and G. Z. Jin (December 2010). Quality disclosure and certification: Theory
  and practice. Journal of Economic Literature (4), 936­963.

Farronato, C., A. Fradkin, B. Larsen, and E. Brynjolfsson (2020). Consumer protection in
  an online world: An analysis of occupational licensing. NBER Working Paper No. 26601 .

Garella, P. G. and E. Petrakis (2008). Minimum quality standards and consumers informa-
 tion. Economic Theory 36 (2), 283­302.

Hall, J., J. Hicks, M. M. Kleiner, and R. Solomon (2019). Occupational licensing of uber
  drivers. working paper .

Hui, X., M. Saeedi, Z. Shen, and N. Sundaresan (2016). Reputation and regulations: Evi-
 dence from ebay. Management Science .

Jin, G. Z. and A. Kato (July 2007). Dividing online and offline: A case study.

Kleiner, M. M. and R. T. Kudrle (2000). Does regulation affect economic outcomes? the
  case of dentistry. Journal of Law and Economics 43 (2), 547­82.

Kleiner, M. M. and R. M. Todd (2009). Mortgage Broker Regulations That Matter: Analyzing
  Earnings, Employment, and Outcomes for Consumers. MIT and University of Chicago
  Press.

Law, M. T. and S. Kim (2005). Specialization and regulation: The rise of professionals
  and the emergence of occupational licensing regulation. The Journal of Economic His-
  tory 65 (3), 723­756.



                                             23
Law, M. T. and M. S. Marks (2009). Effects of occupational licensing laws on minorities:
  Evidence from the progressive era.

Leland, H. E. (December, 1979). Quacks, lemons, and licensing: A theory of minimum
  quality standards. Journal of Political Economy 87 (6), 1328­1346.

Lewis, G. (2011). Asymmetric information, adverse selection and online disclosure: The case
  of ebay motors. American Economic Review 101 (4), 1535­46.

Luca, M. (2017). Designing Online Marketplaces: Trust and Reputation Mechanisms, Vol-
  ume 17.

Luca, M. and G. Zervas (2016). Fake it till you make it: Reputation, competition and yelp
  review fraud. Management Science 62 (12), ivvii, 3393­3672.

Mayzlin, D., Y. Dover, and J. Chevalier (2014). Promotional reviews: An empirical investi-
 gation of online review manipulation. American Economic Review 104 (8), 2421­55.

Pashigian, B. P. (April 1979). Occupational licensing and the interstate mobility of profes-
  sionals.

Robbins, M. W., J. Saunders, and B. Kilmer (2017). A framework for synthetic control
  methods with high-dimensional, micro-level data: Evaluating a neighborhood- specific
  crime intervention. Journal of the American Statistical Association 112 (517), 109­126.

Roberts, J. W. (2011). Can warranties substitute for reputations?      American Economic
  Journal: Microeconomics 3 (3), 69­85.

Ronnen, U. (1991). Minimum quality standards, fixed costs, and competition. The Rand
  Journal of Economics 22 (4), 490­504.

Scarpa, C. (1998). Minimum quality standards with more than two firms. International
  Journal of Industrial Organization 16 (5), 665­676.

Shapiro, C. (Oct. 1986). Investment, moral hazard, and occupational licensing. The Review
  of Economic Studies 53 (5), 843­862.

Shepard, L. (1978). Licensing restrictions and the cost of dental care. The Journal of Law
  and Economics 21 (1), 187­201.



                                            24
Tadelis, S. (2016). Reputation and feedback systems in online platform markets. Annual
  Review of Economics 8 (1), 321­340.




                                         25
6     Appendix
6.1     Tables


                      Table 1: Summary Statistics of Cateogry-level Sample

                              NANA Household         Non-food              NANA Household         Non-food
                               Food                Non-household            Food               Non-household
                                   Panel A: Total Number of                      Panel B: Category HHI
                                      Unique Active Sellers
 No Regulation                0.112      -0.171        0.020               -0.356       -0.395           0.057
 Voluntary Certification      0.687      -0.048       -0.006               -0.188       -0.333           0.046
 Partially Licensing          0.697      -0.009       -0.011                0.265       -0.443           0.052
 Mandatory Licensing          -0.021      0.215       -0.027               1.886        -0.395           0.016

                                   Panel C: Avg. Rating Score                   Panel D: Avg. Reputation
                                          per Active Seller                           per Active Seller
 No Regulation                 0.885      0.395          -0.066            -0.127     1.264          -0.159
 Voluntary Certification       0.586      0.177          -0.033            -0.277     0.853          -0.104
 Partially Licensing           1.495     -0.577           0.046            -0.125     0.447          -0.055
 Mandatory Licensing           1.337     -0.320           0.016            0.218      0.299          -0.042

                                Panel E: Avg. %Returns due to                 Panel F: Avg. %Returns due to
                               Quality Problem per Active seller               Counterfeits per Active Seller
 No Regulation                2.036      0.510        -0.102                4.719      0.012          -0.087
 Voluntary Certification      -0.645     1.714        -0.206               -0.221      0.327          -0.038
 Partially Licensing          -0.782     1.640        -0.194               -0.431       0.076         -0.002
 Mandatory Licensing          -1.520     0.959        -0.094               -1.183      -0.212          0.048

                                       Panel G: Avg. Price                          Panel H: Total GMV
                                        per Active Listing
 No Regulation                -0.329      -0.346          0.050            -0.282       -0.584           0.079
 Voluntary Certification      -0.327      -0.348          0.050            -0.352       -0.574           0.080
 Partially Licensing          -0.317      -0.336          0.048            -0.339       -0.530           0.074
 Mandatory Licensing          -0.311      -0.325          0.047            -0.313       -0.413           0.058
Notes: All statistics are average across categories over months. To avoid revealing Alibaba's business secrets,
all numbers are normalized by the platform-level mean and standard deviation. For example, 0.112 in Panel
A means that the number of sellers in the NANA food category is 0.112 standard deviation above the
platform-wide mean during no-regulation.




                                                      26
   Table 2: Summary Statistics for A Random Sample of NANA Food Sellers

                                                                Mean     Median   Std. Dev.
  No. of Sellers                                                1,926      -          -
  #Seller-Month Observations                                    41,272     -          -

  #Sellers   obtaining   a   license                             335       -           -
  #Sellers   obtaining   a   license during VC                   96        -           -
  #Sellers   obtaining   a   license during PL                   129       -           -
  #Sellers   obtaining   a   license during ML                   110       -           -

  #Sellers   exiting   the   market                             1,613      -           -
  #Sellers   exiting   the   market   during   Non-regulation    292       -           -
  #Sellers   exiting   the   market   during   VC                387       -           -
  #Sellers   exiting   the   market   during   PL                419       -           -
  #Sellers   exiting   the   market   during   ML                828       -           -

  Seller   Monthly   GMV ($)                                    4,929     268       42,177
  Seller   Monthly   No. of Orders                               393       12        2,724
  Seller   Monthly   No. of Buyers                               437       13        3,034
  Seller   Monthly   Quantities                                 1,376      46       11,091

  Sellers' Reputation                                           21,932   2,419      81,070
  #Low Reputation Sellers (<=250 Pos. Ratings)                   669       -           -
  #High Reputation Sellers (>250 Pos. Ratings)                  1,257      -           -

  Sellers' Age (Months)                                         21.89      10        27.55
  #Young (Pre-treat Age<=12 Months)                              641        -          -
  #Old sellers (Pre-treat Age>12 Months)                        1,284       -          -
Notes: This table summarizes the random sample of 1,926 individual sellers who have sales in
NANA food for at least three months during no regulation. A seller's reputation is defined by
Alibaba as her total count of positive consumer feedback minus total count of negative feedback.
GMV is translated from China RMB to US dollars using the exchange rate of 6.




                                                  27
    Table 3: Comparing NANA food sellers with and without licensing information

                                      Sellers with Sales Post ML        Sellers with Sales in 2018
                                           no             with               no             with
                                     License Data License Data         License Data License Data
No. of Sellers                             598             303               135            247
Pre-FSL Monthly GMV ($)                 2502.25         4523.71           6565.82         5137.24
Pre-FSL Monthly Reputation              6315.19        18146.22          12221.09        19380.29
Pre-FSL Avg. Age (Months)                276.17          400.78            306.89         416.63
Monthly GMV ($)                         7803.13         7066.75          18263.28        7815.51
Monthly No. of Buyers                    386.89          678.55            956.34          761.24
Monthly No. of Orders                   425.329          762.25           1051.54          856.30
Monthly Quantities                     1081.003         2511.21          2032.633        2829.15
No. of Active Months                      29.59           44.42             45.51          46.39
Post-ML Monthly GMV ($)                15294.48         8054.57          26887.98        8640.94
Post-ML Monthly No. of Buyers            688.29          741.54           1262.79         798.94
Post-ML Monthly No. of Orders            763.05          850.65           1398.74          917.22
Post-ML Monthly Quantities              1582.52         2331.55           2485.84        2515.97
Post-ML No. of Active Months             13.71           23.50              24.68          25.40
Notes: This table presents the average pre-FSL attributes and the average outcome variables by sellers
with and without FSL license information, conditional on having NANA food sales post mandatory
licensing (ML) or post 2018. As we miss the licensing record of some sellers, those that have sales
post ML but no license is subject to a missing data problem. Pre-FSL GMV and pre-FSL reputation
are computed as monthly average during no-regulation taking into account inactive months. During
inactive months, the GMV is imputed with zero and the reputation is imputed with the latest reputation
up to that inactive month. GMV is translated from China RMB to US dollars using the exchange rate
of 6.




                                                 28
  Table 4: Duration Model Result for NANA Food Sellers Displaying an FSL License

Covariates                                                    Full Sample           Sellers with Valid
                                                                                  Licensing Data Only
                                                            Hazard      Std.       Hazard         Std.
                                                             Ratio       Err.       Ratio         Err.
Log of pre-FSL GMV×Voluntary Certification                 1.356***    (0.098)     1.192**      (0.082)
                     ×Partially Licensing                  1.180***    (0.051)      1.032       (0.048)
                     ×Mandatory Licensing                  0.783***    (0.039)      0.841       (0.042)
Log of pre-FSL Reputation×Voluntary Certification          1.353***    (0.102)     1.236**      (0.091)
                     ×Partially Licensing                   1.145*     (0.052)      1.087       (0.057)
                     ×Mandatory Licensing                    1.011     (0.053)      0.925       (0.044)
No. of Subjects                                              1,631                   331
No. of Observations                                         26,453                  4,491
Log-likelihood                                            -1664.183               -1289.506
 Notes: This table presents the Cox proportional hazard regression results for NANA food sellers'
 propensity of displaying a license. The pre-FSL GMV and the pre-FSL reputation are both monthly
 average including inactive months in 2014. For each inactive month, we impute the seller's GMV
 with zero and impute her reputation with her latest reputation up to that month. Standard errors in
 parentheses, "* p<0.05 ** p<0.01 *** p<0.001". The estimation drops 3 sellers with missing reputation
 measures in 2014.




       Table 5: Duration Model Result for NANA Food Sellers Exiting the Market

        Covariates                                                 Hazard Ratio     Std. Err.
        Log of pre-FSL GMV×Voluntary Certification                   1.508***        (0.031)
                             ×Partially Licensing                     1.063**        (0.019)
                             ×Mandatory Licensing                    0.695***        (0.012)
        Log of pre-FSL Reputation×Voluntary Certification            0.765***        (0.020)
                             ×Partially Licensing                     0.943*         (0.022)
                             ×Mandatory Licensing                     1.047*         (0.022)
        No. of Subjects                                                1,631
        No. of Observations                                           34,028
        Log-likelihood                                              -7835.657
   Notes: This table presents the Cox proportional hazard regression results for NANA food sellers'
   behavior of exiting the marketplace. The pre-FSL GMV and the pre-FSL reputation are both
   the monthly average including inactive months in 2014. For each inactive month, we impute the
   seller's GMV with zero and impute her reputation with her latest reputation up to that month.
   Standard errors in parentheses, "* p<0.05 ** p<0.01 *** p<0.001". The estimation drops 3
   sellers with missing reputation measures in 2014.




                                                  29
        Table 6: Demand Responses to NANA Food Sellers' License Status

                                                   Dependent Variable
                                                Log of Sellers'                     Dummy of
                                  GMV        #Orders #Buyers Quantities             Pos. Sales
                                   (1)         (2)        (3)       (4)                (5)
 Disclosing a License
  ×Voluntary Certification       0.304***    0.272***    0.276***     0.331***       0.141***
                                  (0.088)     (0.077)     (0.076)      (0.089)        (0.021)
  ×Partially Licensing           0.538***    0.561***    0.559***     0.522***       0.310***
                                  (0.054)     (0.047)     (0.046)      (0.055)        (0.013)
  ×Mandatory Licensing           0.697***    0.680***    0.665***     0.618***       0.323***
                                  (0.033)     (0.029)     (0.029)      (0.034)        (0.007)
 No. of Observations              41,272      41,272      41,272       41,272         56,364
Notes: This table presents consumers' demand responses to NANA food sellers' license status. All
columns display the OLS estimates from a linear model with seller-level fixed effects and monthly
dummies. Columns (1) to (4) use active seller-month observations, and column (5) includes
inactive months. Standard errors in parentheses, "* p<0.05 ** p<0.01 *** p<0.001".




                                               30
Table 7: Heterogeneous Demand Responses to NANA Food Sellers' License Status: By Age

                                                        Dependent Variable
                                                    Log of Sellers'                     Dummy of
                                      GMV        #Orders #Buyers Quantities             Pos. Sales
                                       (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)              (5)
                                                       Panel A: Young Sellers
     Disclosing a License
      ×Voluntary Certification        0.498*      0.429*      0.437*       0.558*         0.183**
                                      (0.225)     (0.196)     (0.193)      (0.228)        (0.056)
      ×Partially Licensing           0.867***    0.866***    0.867***     0.905***       0.293***
                                      (0.136)     (0.118)     (0.116)      (0.137)        (0.032)
      ×Mandatory Licensing           1.014***    1.099***    1.084***     1.028***       0.274***
                                      (0.078)     (0.068)     (0.067)      (0.079)        (0.017)
     No. of Observations              10,736      10,736      10,736       10,736         16,399

                                                         Panel B: Old Sellers
     Disclosing a License
      ×Voluntary Certification        0.284**    0.241**      0.245**     0.294**        0.121***
                                      (0.095)     (0.083)     (0.082)      (0.096)        (0.022)
      ×Partially Licensing           0.485***    0.500***    0.498***     0.456***       0.293***
                                      (0.059)     (0.051)     (0.050)      (0.059)        (0.013)
      ×Mandatory Licensing           0.679***    0.627***    0.613***     0.564***       0.318***
                                      (0.037)     (0.032)     (0.032)      (0.038)        (0.008)
     No. of Observations              30,536      30,536      30,536       30,536         39,965
    Notes: This table presents heterogeneous demand responses to NANA food sellers' license status,
    by young and old sellers. All columns display the estimates from a linear model with seller-level
    fixed effects and monthly dummies. Columns (1) to (4) use the sample of active seller-month
    observations, and column (5) includes inactive months. Young sellers are defined as those who
    have opened a store in the marketplace for less than 12 months until December 2014, and old
    sellers are those who have opened a store in the marketplace more than 12 months until December
    2014. Standard errors in parentheses, "* p<0.05 ** p<0.01 *** p<0.001".




                                                   31
Table 8: Heterogeneous Demand Responses to NANA Food Sellers' License Status: By
Reputation

                                                       Dependent Variable
                                                    Log of Sellers'                     Dummy of
                                       GMV       #Orders #Buyers Quantities             Pos. Sales
                                        (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)                (5)
                                                     Panel A: Low Reputation
     Disclosing a License
      ×Voluntary Certification         0.634       0.439        0.479        0.661         0.230*
                                      (0.384)     (0.301)      (0.293)      (0.383)        (0.106)
      ×Partially Licensing           0.715***    0.655***     0.656***     0.674***       0.313***
                                      (0.202)     (0.158)      (0.154)      (0.201)        (0.051)
      ×Mandatory Licensing           1.311***    1.480***     1.502***     1.311***       0.444***
                                      (0.112)     (0.088)      (0.085)      (0.111)        (0.026)
     No. of Observations               7,966       7,966        7,966        7,966         14,775

                                                        Panel B: High Reputation
     Disclosing a License
      ×Voluntary Certification        0.282**    0.253**       0.254**     0.305***       0.098***
                                      (0.091)     (0.081)      (0.080)      (0.092)        (0.020)
      ×Partially Licensing           0.548***    0.564***     0.564***     0.537***       0.252***
                                      (0.057)     (0.050)      (0.050)      (0.057)        (0.012)
      ×Mandatory Licensing           0.675***    0.640***     0.622***     0.593***       0.261***
                                      (0.035)     (0.031)      (0.031)      (0.036)        (0.007)
     No. of Observations               33306       33306        33306        33306         41,598
    Notes: This table presents heterogeneous demand responses to NANA food sellers' license sta-
    tus, by low- and high-reputation sellers. All columns display the estimates from a linear model
    with seller-level fixed effects and monthly dummies. Columns (1) to (4) use active seller-month
    observations, and column (5) includes inactive months. Low-reputation sellers are defined as
    those with the lowest level of stars granted by Alibaba during the no-regulation period, and the
    high-reputation sellers are those above the lowest level of stars during the no-regulation period.
    Standard errors in parentheses, "* p<0.05 ** p<0.01 *** p<0.001".




                                                   32
Table 9: Summary Statistics of NANA Food and Household Seller Samples

                                   NANA Food Sellers Household Sellers
                                        Panel A: Seller Revenue
       No Regulation                    0.115               -0.039
       Voluntary Certification          0.089               -0.035
       Partially Licensing              0.161               -0.058
       Mandatory Licensing              0.187               -0.046

                                         Panel B: Seller Rating Score
       No Regulation                      0.207                -0.070
       Voluntary Certification            0.170                -0.067
       Partially Licensing                0.126                -0.046
       Mandatory Licensing                0.118                -0.030

                                            Panel C: Sellers' Price
       No Regulation                       0.079               -0.027
       Voluntary Certification             0.090               -0.035
       Partially Licensing                 0.152               -0.055
       Mandatory Licensing                 0.114               -0.028

                                     Panel D: Number of Active Listings
       No Regulation                     -0.005               0.002
       Voluntary Certification           -0.022              0.009
       Partially Licensing                0.083              -0.030
       Mandatory Licensing                0.117              -0.029
Notes:This table presents the average outcome variables per active seller-month for the
1,926 NANA food sellers and 5,721 household sellers. To avoid revealing Alibaba's
business secrets, all numbers are normalized by the sample mean and sample standard
deviation in each month.




                                          33
                  Table 10: Synthetic Control: Treatment Effects of the FSL on NANA Food

                      Log of        Log of        Log of           Log of              Log of          Log of       Log of
                     Total No.     Category        Avg.             Avg.                Avg.         Avg. Price     Total
                        of           HHI         Rating         %Returns             %Returns        per Active     GMV
                      Unique                      Score            due to              due to         Listing
                      Active                    per Active    Quality Problem       Counterfeits
                      Sellers                     Seller        per Active           per Active
                                                                   Seller              Seller
     Voluntary          0.154        -0.046        0.001           -1.038              -1.493           0.067        0.137




34
     Certification     (0.000)      (0.426)       (0.066)         (0.000)             (0.000)          (0.213)      (0.180)
     Partial            0.313         0.861        0.004           -1.241              -1.316           0.208        -0.013
     Licensing         (0.115)      (0.049)       (0.131)         (0.000)             (0.000)          (0.311)      (0.508)
     Mandatory          -0.014        1.337        0.004           -1.206              -1.730           0.302        -0.002
     Licensing         (0.393)      (0.016)       (0.098)         (0.000)             (0.000)          (0.148)      (0.557)
      Notes: This table displays the treatment effect t = xt - x    ^t and its p-value on the NANA food category at the
      start of voluntary certification, partial licensing and mandatory licensing, respectively, where xt is the treatment
      and x^t = j w  ^j xjt is the synthetic control for the treated unit. P-values are calculated through bootstrap. We
      run the placebo test for each control unit j while using all of other control units as the donor pool. Then, for each
      control unit and each month t, we obtain a distribution of placebo effects {jt }1000j =1 . Comparing the distribution
      and t , we compute the one-sided p-value: P r(t > jt ) for t > 0 and P r(t < jt ) for t < 0.
Table 11: Synthetic Control: Heterogeneous Effects of Mandatory Licensing on NANA Food
Sellers : by Pre-FSL GMV

 Pre-FSL     Median     P-value    75th Perc.    P-value   Median     P-value    75th Perc.    P-value
 GMV
 Group
                       Panel A: Sellers' GMV                    Panel B: Sellers'   Rating Score
 1            -1.000     0.000      -1.000        0.000     0.004     0.000         0.011      0.000
 2            -1.000     0.000      -1.000        0.000     0.002     0.300         0.012      0.060
 3            -1.000     0.000      -0.974        0.110     0.002     0.290         0.012      0.160
 4            -1.000     0.000      -0.954        0.350     0.006     0.000         0.015      0.000
 5            -1.000     0.000      -0.965        0.000     0.004     0.000         0.013      0.010
 6            -1.000     0.000      -0.988        0.000     0.003     0.010         0.014      0.040
 7            -0.999     0.000      -0.924        0.000     0.005     0.000         0.015      0.010
 8            -0.997     0.000      -0.816        0.150     0.004     0.000         0.013      0.080
 9            -0.976     0.000      -0.783        0.000     0.004     0.150         0.012      0.560
 10           -0.948     0.000      -0.679        0.000     0.005     0.000         0.011      0.170

                       Panel C: Sellers' Price                 Panel D: #Unique Active Listings
                       Conditional on Survival                            per Seller
 1            -0.049     0.000       0.045        0.990     -1.000    0.000      -1.000     0.000
 2            -0.165     0.000       0.007        0.990     -1.000    0.000      -1.000     0.000
 3            -0.144     0.110       0.084        0.860     -1.000    0.000      -0.766     0.020
 4            -0.181     0.050       0.018        1.000     -1.000    0.000      -0.855     0.000
 5            -0.267     0.010       0.021        0.970     -1.000    0.000      -0.834     0.000
 6            -0.175     0.110       0.341        0.010     -1.000    0.000      -0.861     0.000
 7            -0.106     0.580       0.543        0.010     -0.965    0.050      -0.185     0.370
 8            -0.059     0.960       0.768        0.000     -0.949    0.000      -0.179     0.140
 9            -0.182     0.040       0.695        0.100     -0.655    0.710      0.282      0.310
 10           -0.200     0.210       0.897        0.000      0.309    0.000       1.851     0.000
Notes: This table presents the median and 75th percentile of the effect of mandatory licensing, and their
one-sided p-values for sellers in different percentiles of pre-FSL GMV. The pre-FSL GMV is computed as
the monthly average during the no-regulation period taking into account sellers' inactive months, where
a seller's missing GMV is imputed with zero. Each group contains 10 percent of sellers. The p-value is
calculated by bootstrapping.




                                                   35
Table 12: Synthetic Control: Heterogeneous Effects of Mandatory Licensing on NANA Food
Sellers by Pre-FSL Reputation

 Pre-FSL        Median     P-value    75th Perc.    P-value    Median     P-value    75th Perc.    P-value
 Reputation
 Group
                         Panel A: Sellers' GMV                       Panel B: Sellers'   Rating Score
 1              -1.000     0.000      -1.000         0.000      -0.009     0.940         0.004      0.110
 2              -1.000     0.000      -1.000         0.000      -0.009     0.840         0.011      0.000
 3              -1.000     0.000      -0.999         0.000      -0.007     0.030         0.011      0.400
 4              -1.000     0.000      -0.998         0.000      -0.001     0.950         0.014      0.000
 5              -1.000     0.000      -0.953         0.000      0.005      0.010         0.015      0.170
 6              -1.000     0.000      -0.962         0.000      0.008      0.000         0.015      0.040
 7              -1.000     0.000      -0.956         0.000      0.005      0.240         0.015      0.240
 8              -0.998     0.010      -0.907         0.040      0.005      0.060         0.014      0.260
 9              -0.987     0.130      -0.773         0.090      0.006      0.000         0.014      0.040
 10             -0.978     0.020      -0.608         0.230      0.006      0.000         0.013      0.000
 11             -0.951     0.370      -0.587         0.200      0.006      0.000         0.010      0.070

                         Panel C: Sellers' Price                   Panel D: #Unique Active Listings
                         Conditional on Survival                          Panel D: per Seller
 1              -0.230     0.160      -0.097         0.040      -1.000    0.000      -1.000     0.000
 2              -0.247     0.020      -0.019         0.000      -1.000    0.000      -1.000     0.000
 3              -0.109     0.270       0.034         0.980      -1.000    0.000      -0.950     0.000
 4              -0.248     0.000      -0.089         0.000      -1.000    0.000      -0.972     0.000
 5              -0.105     0.040       0.076         0.960      -1.000    0.000      -0.531     0.040
 6              -0.087     0.380       0.668         0.010      -1.000    0.000      -0.406     0.080
 7              -0.147     0.020       0.174         0.790      -1.000    0.000      -0.533     0.000
 8              -0.054     0.730       0.456         0.000      -0.941    0.190      -0.162     0.800
 9              -0.145     0.140       0.320         0.000      -0.806    0.590       0.373     0.000
 10             -0.137     0.390       0.146         0.780      -0.689    0.330       0.717     0.010
 11             -0.217     0.590       0.075         0.900      -0.084    1.000       1.313     0.000
Notes: This table presents the median and 75th percentile of the effect of mandatory licensing, and their
one-sided p-values for sellers in different groups of pre-FSL reputation. Pre-FSL reputation is computed
as monthly average of seller reputation during no-regulation taking into account sellers' inactive months,
where the missing seller reputation is imputed with the seller's latest reputation up to that month. Sellers
are then classified to 11 groups according to seller's pre-FSL reputation based on Alibaba's classification
for stars, crowns, and diamonds. The p-value is calculated by bootstrapping.




                                                    36
6.2   Figures

       Figure 1: Hazard Ratio of NANA Food Sellers Displaying an FSL License




       Notes: This figure presents the hazard rate of NANA food sellers displaying an FSL
       license in period t conditional on surviving and not-licensed yet at the beginning of
       period t. The three lines are the start time of voluntary certification, partial licensing,
       and mandatory licensing, respectively.




                                                   37
    Figure 2: Hazard Ratio of NANA Food Sellers Exiting the Market




Notes: This figure presents the hazard rate of NANA food sellers exiting the market at
the end of period t conditional on surviving at the beginning of period t. The three lines
are the start time of voluntary disclosing, partial licensing, and mandatory licensing,
respectively. A seller is defined as exiting the market at t if t is the last month we
observe her positive sales in NANA food and t is the not the last month of our data
(June 2018).




                                           38
       Figure 3: Synthetic Control: Treatment Effects of the FSL on NANA Food
(a) Log of Total Number of                                             (c) Log of Avg. Rating Score
                                      (b) Log of Category HHI
Unique Active Sellers                                                  per Active Seller




(d) Log of (1+Avg. %Returns (e) Log of (1+Avg. %Returns
                                                              (f) Log of Avg. Price per Active
due to Quality Problem per Ac- due to Counterfeits per Active
                                                              Listing
tive Seller)                   Seller)




                                        (g) Log of Total GMV




   Notes: This figure shows the treatment effects of the FSL on the NANA food category. To avoid
   revealing Alibaba's business secrets, we only display the difference between the treated category
   and the synthetic control unit rather than their actual trends. The three vertical red lines are the
   beginning of voluntary disclosing, partial licensing, and mandatory licensing.




                                                   39
Figure 4: Synthetic Control: Heterogenous Effects of the FSL by NANA Food Sellers' Pre-
FSL GMV
                    (a) Sellers' GMV                             (b) Sellers' Rating Score




      (c) Sellers' Prices Conditional on Survival         (d) #Unique Active Listings per Seller




Notes: This figure displays the distribution of treatment effects of mandatory licensing on NANA food sellers
by different bins of pre-FSL GMV. Using a random sample of 1,926 NANA food sellers and 5,721 individual
sellers in the household categories, we estimate the treatment effect of the FSL for each NANA food seller
with synthetic control. We match the pre-FSL monthly trend for the outcome variables of GMV, quality and
number of listings, and match the quarterly trend for average sales price due to missing values in inactive
months. We then evenly divide NANA food sellers to 10 groups according to their pre-FSL GMV. The pre-
FSL GMV is computed as the monthly average during the no-regulation period taking into account sellers'
inactive months, where a seller's missing GMV is imputed with zero. Each box indicates the 25%, 50%, and
75% percentiles of the treatment effects for a group. The upper cap and the lower caps indicate the range
of mild outliers, while the dots indicate extreme outliers. Mild and extreme outliers are defined according
to the upper and lower adjacent values, which are the 25%/75% percentile plus/minus the 1.5 times of the
difference between 75% and 25% percentiles.




                                                     40
Figure 5: Synthetic Control: Heterogenous Effects of the FSL by NANA Food Sellers' pre-
FSL Reputation
                    (a) Sellers' GMV                               (b) Sellers' Rating Score




                    (c) Sellers' Prices                    (d) #Unique Active Listings per Seller




Notes: This figure displays the distribution of treatment effects of mandatory licensing on NANA food
sellers in different bins of pre-FSL reputation. Using a random sample of 1,926 NANA food sellers and 5,721
individual sellers in the household categories, we estimate the treatment effect of the FSL for each NANA
food seller with synthetic control. We match the pre-FSL monthly trend for the outcome variables of GMV,
quality and number of listings, and match the quarterly trend for average sales price due to missing values in
inactive months. We then divide food sellers to 11 groups according to sellers' pre-FSL reputation based on
Alibaba's classification of stars, crowns, and diamonds. Pre-FSL reputation is computed as monthly average
of seller reputation during no-regulation taking into account sellers' inactive months, where the missing seller
reputation is imputed with the seller's latest reputation up to that month. Each box shows the 25%, 50%,
and 75% percentiles of the treatment effects for a group. The upper cap and the lower cap indicate the range
of mild outliers, and the dots indicate extreme outliers. Mild and extreme outliers are defined according
to the upper and lower adjacent values, which are the 25%/75% percentile plus/minus the 1.5 times of the
difference between 75% and 25% percentiles.




                                                      41
            Figure 6: New Sellers: NANA Food Category v.s. Household Category
                               (a) Pecentage of New Sellers to All Sellers




                   (b) New Sellers' Average Rating Score after 3 months post entry




Notes: The upper figure shows the difference in percent of new sellers in all sellers between NANA food and
household categories. The lower figure shows the difference in new sellers' average rating score after three
months post entry between the NANA food and household categories. The three straight lines indicate the
start of voluntary certification, partial licensing, and mandatory licensing. A new seller is counted new in
month t if she first shows up in the data after January 2014 and still has sales on or after month t. By this
definition, the new seller count is cumulative since January 2014, conditional on survival at the study time.




                                                     42
