                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    WHEN INFORMATION IS NOT ENOUGH:
            EVIDENCE FROM A CENTRALIZED SCHOOL CHOICE SYSTEM

                                       Kehinde F. Ajayi
                                      Willa H. Friedman
                                      Adrienne M. Lucas

                                     Working Paper 27887
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27887


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2020




For useful comments and suggestions we thank Felipe Barerra-Osorio, Jim Berry, Eric Chyn,
Justine Hastings, Chris Neilson, Jeremy Tobacman, and seminar participants at Georgetown
University, Harvard Graduate School of Education, Howard University, the University of
Delaware, the University of Minnesota, the E-con of Education Virtual Seminar, and the Ghana
Education Evidence Summit. We gratefully acknowledge funding from the Post-Primary
Education Initiative of the Jameel Poverty Action Lab (J-PAL), the Weiss Family Program Fund,
and the University of Delaware Institute for Global Studies' Global Exchange Program. For
exceptional support in Ghana we thank Kym Cole, Jonathan Addie, Cornelius Adjei, and Helen
Habib. Phillip Ross provided excellent research assistance. The findings, interpretations, and
conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, the National Bureau of Economic
Research or the governments of the countries they represent. AEA RCT Registry number
AEARCTR-0001017. The Boston University, Innovations for Poverty Action, and University of
Delaware IRBs approved this project. Ghana Education Service reviewed and approved the
research protocol.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Kehinde F. Ajayi, Willa H. Friedman, and Adrienne M. Lucas. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
When Information is Not Enough: Evidence from a Centralized School Choice System
Kehinde F. Ajayi, Willa H. Friedman, and Adrienne M. Lucas
NBER Working Paper No. 27887
October 2020
JEL No. D84,I21,I24,I25,O15

                                           ABSTRACT

Students often make school choice decisions with inadequate information. We present results
from delivering information to randomly selected students (and some randomly selected parents)
across 900 junior high schools in Ghana, a country with universal secondary school choice. We
provided guidance on application strategies and reported the selectivity and exit exam
performance of secondary schools, information students and parents prioritized. We find that
despite information changing the characteristics of schools to which students applied and students
gaining admission to higher value-added schools, they were not more likely to matriculate on
time or at all. Information was not the only constraint.

Kehinde F. Ajayi                                  Adrienne M. Lucas
The World Bank                                    Lerner College of Business and Economics
1818 H St NW                                      University of Delaware
Washington, DC 20433                              419 Purnell Hall
kajayi@worldbank.org                              Newark, DE 19716
                                                  and NBER
Willa H. Friedman                                 alucas@udel.edu
Department of Economics
University of Houston
3623 Cullen Boulevard Room 204
Houston, TX 77204-5019
willa.friedman@gmail.com




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/1017
1     Introduction

Each year, millions of families face the daunting task of selecting a school for their child
to attend. School choice can offer families an array of academic options, but families can
only accurately apply their preferences when they have adequate information about the
available alternatives. Previous research from settings as varied as Boston, China, Ghana,
Kenya, and Mexico has shown that families (especially those from lower socio-economic
backgrounds) lack critical information, leading to sub-optimal choices and an inefficient
allocation of household and schooling sector resources (Abdulkadiroglu et al., 2006; Pathak
and S¨
     onmez, 2008; Lai et al., 2009; Lucas and Mbiti, 2012; Ortega Hesles, 2015; Ajayi et al.,
2017).
    This paper investigates the effects of information on school choice. We focus on three
questions: 1) What information do parents and students say they want? 2) Does receiving
this information affect their school choices and educational outcomes? 3) Does who receives
this information matter? To address these questions, we conducted a randomized controlled
trial in 900 junior high schools in Ghana, a country with universal secondary school choice.
We designed and distributed a booklet, produced and screened a video, and facilitated a
school-based workshop to close the information gaps that students, parents, and researchers
had identified as barriers to efficient secondary school choice and evidence of information
deficiencies­37 percent of students matriculate to a school other than the one to which they
were admitted and fewer than half of students who matriculate in the first year after junior
high school do so in the first six weeks of the academic year. Together, the intervention pro-
vided information on both how to navigate the school choice process and the characteristics
of available secondary schools. We then experimentally varied receipt of this information
among students in their final year of junior high school and their parents.
    Theoretically, providing agents with information, especially the information they say
they want, should result in more informed decisions and better outcomes. We find that even
though our information was what principals, teachers, parents, and students stated would


                                              2
help them make more informed choices and was salient, our information campaign did not
change the likelihood of enrollment or on-time matriculation. We confirm that respondents
received, believed, and understood the information provided. Respondents even remembered
specific details of the intervention materials more than one year later. The information
changed students' application decisions, but it did not improve students' outcomes during
the transition to secondary school. We generally do not find any differential impacts of
targeting students versus parents directly, with the exception of changing students' reported
application priorities.
   Despite the importance of school choice in many education systems, relatively few studies
have looked at ways to improve students' interactions with existing centralized systems.
Information interventions have focused on improving student applications to schools in non-
centralized systems (e.g., Hoxby and Turner (2013) in US higher education; Allende et al.
(2019) for Chilean primary schools), student sorting to higher quality schools or pressuring
schools to improve in systems without formal applications (Banerjee et al., 2010; Mizala
and Urquiola, 2013; Andrabi et al., 2017), how to finance higher education (Dinkelman and
Martinez, 2014; Dynarski et al., 2018), the importance of peer networks (Dustan, 2018), the
returns to schooling (Jensen, 2010), and updating beliefs about one's own ability (Bobba
and Frisancho, 2019; Barrera-Osorio and Deming, 2020). Another avenue of research has
advocated for changes to existing systems (Abdulkadiroglu et al., 2006; Grenet et al., 2019;
Kapor et al., 2020).
   Information could be especially valuable in centralized systems where students have lim-
ited ability to sort ex post or to gain admission to multiple schools ex ante. More than
30 countries use centralized school choice systems for primary or secondary school and 46
countries use it for tertiary education (Neilson, 2019). Three existing studies focused di-
rectly on the effect of information provision on students' choices in such systems. Two of the
interventions focused on simplifying and amplifying information already available. Relative
to a control group that had access to a 100 page book on schools, Hastings and Weinstein



                                              3
(2008) found that providing simplified information to parents on the test score performance
of schools in Charlotte-Mecklenburg Public School District in North Carolina led to parents
choosing schools with higher test scores. Corcoran et al. (2018) provided students selecting
high schools in New York City with a one-page list of 30 geographically proximate schools
with higher than median graduation rates. This intervention caused students to be more
likely to match with higher-performing schools.1 In a much less information rich environ-
ment, Ajayi et al. (2017) found that directly targeting parents in Ashanti Region, Ghana
caused them to be more engaged in the school choice process using evidence from the same
experiment as the current study.
       Further, few studies have experimentally varied who receives the information. In the
above settings, information typically targeted the entire household or community through
mailings, newspapers, village meetings, or through banners advertising success at schools.2 In
Ghana, especially with low levels of parental literacy, students are often the primary conduit
of information for their parents. Informing only students and teachers is easier and less
expensive as they are accessible at school. Informing parents is more costly for parents and
information providers because parents must be mobilized to receive information. However,
targeting parents can magnify the effect of information provision. Parents generally pay for
education expenses and often intervene in school choice ex post even if they are not aware
of students' choices ex ante.
       Our findings have implications for the implementation and design of these school choice
systems, particularly with regard to ensuring equal opportunities for students from under-
privileged backgrounds. Additionally, we provide evidence that improving information, even
by offering the information respondents want, may not be sufficient to overcome other struc-
tural barriers to improved decision making.
   1
     Other arms of the intervention layered additional treatments in addition to this list, but in most cases
the authors are unable to reject equality with the basic treatment.
   2
     Most studies that have tried to estimate the role of parents in students' decision-making did not en-
gage parents directly, instead varying whether students were asked to pass along information to parents
(Dinkelman and Martinez, 2014) or varying the addressee on a mailing (Hoxby and Turner, 2013).




                                                     4
2         Schooling and School Choice in Ghana

2.1        Schooling System

Ghana's school year consists of three terms, with the academic year starting in September
and ending in July. The 6-3-3 system consists of 6 years of primary school (P1 through P6),
three years of junior high school (JHS1 through JHS3), and three years of secondary, i.e.
senior high, school (SHS1 through SHS3). Ghana has two types of secondary schools: an
academic track and a technical/vocational track. Students in both tracks attend a specific
program within their schools, e.g. General Science in academic track or welding in techni-
cal/vocational track.3 Almost all academic track schools offer boarding options, enabling
students from anywhere in the country to attend.
        Students take two nationally standardized exams during their pre-tertiary years of school-
ing. At the end of JHS3, students take the Basic Education Certificate Examination (BECE).
At the end of SHS3, students take the West African Senior School Certificate Examination
(WASSCE). Passing these exams is a requirement to earn the equivalent of a diploma, and
scores on the exams determine whether and what kind of additional schooling students can
pursue.
        During the period under study, both primary and junior high school were tuition-free,
but senior high schools still required fees. For the 2016-2017 school year, the period of study,
approved academic year fees at a government secondary school were GHC551.50 (USD$143)
for day students and GHC1494.50 (USD$387) for boarding students.4 Many government
schools unofficially charged additional fees such as parent teacher association dues, teacher
motivation fees, infrastructure improvement levies, and exam registration fees.5 Private
    3
     The seven academic programs are Agriculture, Business, General Arts, General Science, Home Eco-
nomics, Technical, and Visual Arts, and not all schools have all programs.
   4
     Charges varied by term. First term allowable charges were GHC405.50 (USD$105) for day students and
GHC724.50 (USD$187) for boarding students. For terms two and three, the per-term allowable charges were
GHC73 (USD$19) for day students and GHC385 (USD$100) for boarding students. Exchange rate based on
the September 1, 2016 exchange rate of 1 USD equal to 3.8665 GHC. Expressed in 2016 dollars.
   5
     Including all school-specific and approved feeds, Duflo et al. (2017) reported per year average annual
costs of secondary school of GHC 1921 for the cohort that graduated in 2012, about 30 percent higher than



                                                    5
schools were free to set their own fee schedule.


2.2     School Choice System

Students are admitted to at most one secondary school-program pair through a centralized
admissions process implemented by the Ghana Education Service Computerised School Se-
lection and Placement System (CSSPS). During the second term of JHS3, students register
for the Basic Education Certificate Examination (BECE) and submit the four secondary
school-program pairs to which they are applying to the CSSPS. Each student must list four
choices.
    Rules constrain students' choices. Students can only apply to one program at each
school. Each secondary school has an "Option" designation. Options 1 through 3 are
public, academic track, secondary schools, with option numbers approximately inversely
ranked by historic difficulty of admission.6 Students can list at most one Option 3 school
(the most competitive), two Option 2 schools, and four Option 1 schools. Public techni-
cal/vocational schools are Option 4. All private schools (including both academic track and
technical/vocational schools) are Option 5.7 Options 4 and 5 are typically not competitive to
enter and very few students list these schools as they can gain entry outside of the centralized
allocation system by applying directly to the schools for admission since these schools are
often undersubscribed.8
    A "catchment area option" adds additional complexity. Students who only select schools
within 16 km of their JHS can select this option, which can increase their odds of admissions,
the 2016 boarding allowable charges.
   6
     The options do not perfectly correspond to recent admissions cut-offs.
   7
     A separate, elite private school sector that provides an international curriculum and caters primarily
to wealthy households and foreign nationals operates outside the CSSPS system. Students in that system
typically come from international curriculum junior high schools and do not take the BECE or the WASSCE.
   8
     In our data only about 1 percent of students listed a private school as one of their choices. Of those
who do, they are most likely to list it as choice 4. Private schools are generally considered less desirable
than government schools as they are more expensive and have equivalent or worse exit exam scores. In the
CSSPS assignment, almost all students admitted to a private school are those with BECE scores below 250,
a level considered marginally passing. About 8 percent of students listed a technical/vocational school as
one of their four choices.



                                                     6
as each academic track school must set aside 30 percent of their seats in each program for
students who select this option. In our sample, 14 percent of students chose only secondary
schools within 16 km of their JHS, and this fraction does not vary by treatment group.
       After students have completed the BECE in June, the CSSPS admits each student to at
most one school. First, schools submit the number of seats available for first year students
in each program. Then, the CSSPS uses a deferred acceptance algorithm to generate a list
of students admitted to each school-program based on the number of seats available in each
school-program, students' test scores, and students' preferences.9 After all preferences have
been considered, students with the highest test scores who were not matched to one of their
preferred schools are arbitrarily allocated to schools with remaining seats. Students and
schools are told of the matches in September, shortly before the start of the academic year.
       Once the school year starts, schools assess how many admitted students failed to matric-
ulate and can fill these seats at their discretion with students who directly applied to the
school.10 This unofficial second round lasts throughout the first term of secondary school,
resulting in students starting school late as they and their parents visit different schools
trying to find an available match and this idiosyncratic process gives families no guarantee
of admission.
       A system of centralized school choice is not unique to Ghana. China, Kenya, Lesotho,
Liberia, Mexico, Romania, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, and Zambia use similar systems
combining students' stated preferences with test scores to determine secondary school as-
signments. More than 30 countries use a centralized school choice process for primary
or secondary school (Neilson, 2019). Further, an analogous system operates in some US
   9
      The CSSPS considers the first choices of all applicants. It conditionally admits the highest scoring
applicants up to each school-program's capacity in the first round. For students not admitted to their
first choice, it then considers their second choice. It compares students' scores relative to the scores of the
conditionally admitted applicants from the first round, and replaces any conditionally admitted applicants
from the previous round with students with higher test scores (i.e., through a deferred acceptance algorithm).
These displaced students' second choices are then considered. This process repeats for choices 3 and 4. This
algorithm yields an allocation equivalent to a serial dictatorship where students are ranked by descending
score and the preferences of higher scoring students have precedence. As students are limited in their choices,
this allocation mechanism is not strategy proof, but students should list their choices in order of preference.
   10
      Schools are supposed to report unfilled seats to the CSSPS secretariat for a centralized supplementary
allocation of students, but this does not happen in practice.


                                                      7
school districts for admissions to elementary, middle, and secondary schools with assignment
through preferences and a lottery. Even though in the US students are often ranked by a lot-
tery instead of a test score, issues of students and households having incomplete information
about schooling choices are similar.
    The centralized admissions process has some beneficial features for students. First, stu-
dents can apply to any secondary school in the country. Second, by design, admissions to
secondary school are based on expressed preferences and test scores, not subject to manip-
ulation based on wealth or family connections.
    Unfortunately, the process can be quite daunting for students. Previous research has
shown that many students--especially the most marginalized--make their choices with lim-
ited information about options, resulting in choice errors (Lucas and Mbiti, 2012).



3     Inefficiencies and Conceptual Framework

In this section we first describe the inefficiencies that are generated in the low-information
setting, then we outline a conceptual framework for how our improved information should
remedy some of these issues.


3.1    Inefficiencies

In Ghana, students submit their preferences often with limited knowledge about schools, their
admission likelihoods, or how to get the most out of their applications. This information
deficit can be more acute among the most marginalized (Lucas and Mbiti, 2012). Conditional
on their own scores, students from lower performing junior high schools apply to and are
admitted to less selective secondary schools than equally qualified students from higher
performing junior high schools (Ajayi, 2013). In addition to potentially worse matches for
students, this lack of information creates wasted resources on a number of margins for both
households and the schooling sector.



                                              8
   Once students receive their admission decisions, they can deviate from their officially ad-
mitted school if another school will admit them. The process through which these deviations
happens is very expensive to households in both time and money and in most cases the new
school is one to which the student could have been admitted had it been listed originally.
   To deviate from the official admission decision, parents have to travel to the school to
appeal directly, in person, to the school principal. School principals maintain waiting lists of
students to admit once other officially admitted students do not matriculate. Well into the
second month of school, schools do not know which students will matriculate. Some students
(4 percent) are forced into this option because they did not correctly complete their choice
forms and are not admitted to any school. Others opt into this method of ex post matching.
Of students who were admitted to a senior high school, 37 percent matriculated to a school
other than their CSSPS matched school. Based on conversations with students and parents,
they would prefer to forgo this ex post matching as it is both costly and risky--students might
not be admitted to another school. This ex post matching results in delayed matriculation--
only 45 percent of students who were attending secondary school by the second term of the
first year started in the first six weeks of school. Students then start school already behind
and households must pay the fees associated that first month regardless of when students
start. In conversations with secondary school officials, they lamented that students who
arrive late are often both behind their peers who started on time and arrive with an attitude
not conducive to learning because they delayed school entry to try to matriculate to another
school.
   Once students matriculate, about 7 percent attend schools where fewer than 25 percent
of students who attempt the WASSCE, the secondary school exit exam, pass. Passing the
WASSCE certifies senior high school completion and is used in employment as proof of school
completion. Students continue to select these low pass rate schools despite the availability of
schools with similar admissions criteria and higher pass rates. Failing the WASSCE means
the household wasted three years of school fees and the student incurred three years of



                                               9
opportunity costs without earning the equivalent of a secondary school diploma.
   At the sector level, the churn in students that happens in the first term leads to teachers
teaching to partially empty classrooms and wastes school administrator time that could be
better spent on the educational mission of the school. As the government partially subsidizes
school fees and pays teacher salaries, these are additional costs borne by the government.
Finally, the government also incurs costs in providing the years of schooling for those students
who attend schools in which very few students pass the WASSCE.
   In most school choice settings, admissions are a zero-sum game (i.e. when one student is
admitted, then another is not). In this setting, given the extensive ex post matching process,
students being admitted by the CSSPS to their eventual school would be pareto improving.
   Further, what one student perceives as a good match might not be a good match for
another student. Therefore, a student could have an improved match by learning more
about a school in advance without necessarily making another student worse off. Regardless
of quantitative assessments of school quality, students who are more pleased with their
matches put forth more effort (Hastings et al., 2012) and students who are better matches
with their college majors have higher labor market returns, even if the average return to
the major is low (Kirkeboen et al., 2016). Given the delays in matriculation and failure
to matriculate at all, substantial scope exists to improve the match between students and
schools without necessarily making some students worse off.


3.2    Conceptual Framework

A student's matriculation decision reflects match quality through revealed preference. Our
intervention sought to increase the match quality between students and schools, resulting in
more students starting secondary school on time in the school to which they were originally
admitted, reducing both household and sector inefficiencies and resulting in better longer
run student outcomes.
   From students considering their choices at the end of JHS3, a number of steps are nec-


                                              10
essary along the causal chain to ultimately affect their matriculation decision at the start of
SHS1. In this sub-section we outline the steps of the causal chain and in the next section we
explain how our intervention sought to improve each of these steps.
       All students in our study, both control and treatment, were enrolled in JHS3, the final
year of junior high school, at the start of the study.
       Step 1: Students receive information about school choices and how to correctly and
strategically apply to senior high schools. During their final year of junior high school, and
maybe even before, students receive information of varying quality from peers, siblings, par-
ents, teachers, and other sources. Our intervention increased both the quality and quantity
of this information.
       Step 2: Students use and internalize the information, potentially changing their prefer-
ences over school characteristics and enabling them to make more informed decisions about
the school-program pairs they might select.
       Step 3: Students register for the BECE and list their four school-program choices.
       Step 4: Students take the BECE. While not designed to impact BECE scores, informa-
tion about schools could have encouraged students to put forth more effort on the BECE.
       Step 5: The CSSPS combines students' BECE scores, stated preferences, and available
spaces in each school-program pair to admit each student to at most one school-program
pair.
       Step 6: Students matriculate to the school-program to which they were admitted, engage
in time intensive ex post sorting and matriculate to another school, or do not matriculate at
all.
       Our intervention occurred in Step 1--receiving information. We collected both adminis-
trative and survey data as appropriate for each of the subsequent steps. Figure 1 displays
this theory of change.


                                      [Figure 1 about here]




                                                11
4     The Intervention

Given the inefficiencies that inadequate information introduces into the secondary school
selection process, we sought to remedy the information deficit to increase the likelihood that
students matriculate on time and continue their education. To ensure that our intervention
was contextually relevant, we asked students their most important characteristics for school
selection. Figure 2 displays their responses. The most important characteristic was academic
performance followed by distance and cost. Other important characteristics were admission
chances, future success, teacher quality, and whether the school was single gender.

                                    [Figure 2 about here]

    The schooling decision often involves the whole household and could also involve school
personnel. We asked students who the most helpful person was in making their school
choices. Overwhelmingly, students responded their parent or guardian, followed by sibling,
head teacher (i.e. school principal), and classroom teacher (Figure 3). The importance of
parents was reinforced through focus group discussions with parents and students who stated
that one of the reasons students did not attend the school to which they were admitted was
because parents did not like it and were not aware that the student had applied until after
they were admitted.


                                    [Figure 3 about here]


    Based on the important characteristics and decision makers, we created a three-part
information campaign: a booklet, a video, and a workshop. We called the package GuIIDE--
Guidance and Information for Improved Decisions in Education.


GuIIDE Booklet. First, we created a booklet with information on the CSSPS process
and details about each secondary school. The booklet was in English, the official language of
instruction in JHS in Ghana. The booklet had two parts: information on application rules



                                             12
and strategies, and information about secondary schools in the Ashanti Region.11
       In the first part of the booklet, we provided students with the CSSPS rules about how
many choices of each Option they were allowed to list, two simple strategies (do not list more
competitive schools after less competitive schools and include a variety of schools in case the
student's BECE score is higher or lower than expected), details about the catchment area
option, and government approved secondary school fees for both day and boarding students.
The section also contained a worksheet for students to calculate their likely raw percentage
BECE score. This score is used for admissions, but we learned through piloting that students
typically do not think about raw BECE scores. Therefore, the first challenge for students
when confronted with historical admission scores is to alter their thinking about their ex-
pected score from a 9 (worst) to 1 (best) scale to a 0 (worst) to 100 (best) scale.12 Figure 4
is the first content page of the booklet, outlining the application process and recommended
strategies for selecting schools.


                                          [Figure 4 about here]


       The second part, and bulk of the booklet, was devoted to statistics about each secondary
school in the Ashanti Region.13 For each secondary school, we included both information
that was potentially available elsewhere, but in a more useful format, and information that
was not available elsewhere. We included the official school code that students submit on
the CSSPS form; the school name and nickname if relevant (e.g. Opoku Ware Senior High
  11
      We limited our intervention to JHS in Ashanti Region and only provided information on secondary schools
in Ashanti Region for two reasons. First, Ashanti was the largest of Ghana's 10 regions by population and
home to 20 percent of Ghana's population (subsequent to this study, the 10 regions were subdivided into
16 regions, Ashanti was not subdivided and remains the largest by population). Second, historically over
85 percent of students from Ashanti who attended secondary school did so in Ashanti. Students from other
regions were more likely to attend secondary school outside their local region.
   12
      The BECE consists of nine subject exams but a student's score is determined by the scores on the four
core subjects and two next best subjects. Most students think and talk about their aggregate BECE score
that appears on their BECE certificate--each subject graded on a scale from 9 to 1 with 1 being best.
Therefore, an aggregate score on the BECE of 6, i.e. six scores of 1, is the highest score possible. Admission
to secondary schools is instead based on the raw score in which each of the six subject scores is measured
from 0 to 100 with 100 being the best. This is equivalent to the percentage correct on each subject exam.
   13
      In 2016, Ashanti had 8 Option 3 schools (most competitive), 27 Option 2 schools, and 67 Option 1
schools.


                                                     13
School is more commonly known as OWASS); the school's district and town or neighborhood;
whether the school is single gender or mixed; whether the school is boarding, day, or mixed;
and the programs offered. Ghana Education Service (GES), an agency of the Ministry of
Education, produced a register of schools with most of this information, except the nickname.
One copy of this register was left at the District Education Office for each JHS. Based on
conversations with school leaders, many schools did not retrieve this register while others
did, but did not share the information with their students.
       We also provided information that was not available elsewhere. Based on administrative
data from the CSSPS over the last three years, we included two measures designed to capture
the competitiveness of admission to a particular school-program pair. First, we included the
average BECE score of students admitted to the pair. Second, we included the BECE score of
the 5th percentile admitted student­effectively the score threshold for admission.14 Finally,
we included a measure of school quality. At the school level, we provided the number of
students who took the WASSCE (the exam at the end of secondary school) and the overall
pass rate. Due to our data sharing agreement, we were unable to include any measures of
value added in the booklet. During the intervention school workshops (see more below),
facilitators encouraged students and parents to consider WASSCE pass rates relative to
average incoming BECE scores, effectively value added. The pass rate by program was not
available. Figure 5 explains the layout of the school information.


                                         [Figure 5 about here]


       The booklet presented data by Option and by district. The full data, including programs
and incoming BECE test scores, were organized alphabetically by school within each Option.
School level data (code, name, district, gender, boarding, WASSCE performance, and Op-
tion) without the programme information were presented in the back, organized by district,
  14
    Prior to our developing the GuIIDE booklet, no centralized source of information on admission scores
existed. The CSSPS displayed a printed list of admitted students at each secondary school, along with
admits' raw scores, but did not publish this information centrally. Prior to our booklet, students would need
to collect information directly from each secondary school to know all the admission criteria.


                                                     14
enabling students to quickly compare schools in the same district or to find a school's Option
(and additional data) knowing only the school's district and name.


GuIIDE Video. The second component of the intervention was a video. Following the
example of previous studies using videos to present information (e.g., Dupas, 2011; Dinkel-
man and Martinez, 2014; Banerjee et al., 2015) we wrote and produced a video on the school
choice process to make the booklet more salient and memorable to students.15 In our video,
a drama club from an Accra junior high school acted out a dramatized version of students
using, understanding, and benefiting from the booklet, leading them to make more informed
school choices.16 The video also modeled how to have a conversation with parents about
choices and priorities.
       We provided both an English and a Twi (the most common mother tongue in Ashanti)
dubbed version of the video. Facilitators asked each head teacher to select which video
should be screened in their school.


GuIIDE Workshop. The third component was a workshop. Facilitators distributed and
explained the booklet and screened the video during at-school workshops in January, near
the start of the second term of the school year. During these workshops, the facilitator also
answered students' questions and did any necessary spot translation into Twi.
       Because of the importance of parents in the decision making process, in some schools an
additional workshop was held for parents only, at a time and day that the school expected
parents to be available. Parents similarly watched the video and interacted with a facilitator.
They did not receive an additional booklet.
       By providing students, and sometimes parents, additional information and resources on
  15
     The CSSPS has a video available online that explains the history and purpose of the CSSPS process but
does not provide guidance on how to navigate it.
  16
     The plot focused on two students­Serwah and Krampah­and their school choice process, successes, and
missteps. Serwah was a diligent student who was not the top in her class but worked very hard and paid
attention to the importance of the CSSPS. Krampah had higher test scores on mock BECE exams but did
not take the CSSPS process seriously. After the BECE, Serwah was very happy being admitted to her second
choice school while Krampah was not sure what he would do for secondary school since he did not have a
high enough BECE score to get into his first choice school and had not paid attention to his other choices.


                                                    15
the school choice process, we hoped to assist students in making choices that would better
match their preferences, increasing match quality and reducing ex post sorting.



5     Methodology

5.1    Research Design

To test the impact of information on school choice, we conducted a 900-school randomized
controlled trial (RCT). We randomly assigned 900 junior high schools in Ashanti, Ghana to
one of three groups: T1) information to students and teachers, T2) information to students,
teachers, and parents, and T3) control. Students and teachers in T1 and T2 schools received
the full GuIIDE intervention­the booklet, video, and workshop during school hours. In
addition, in T2 schools, we held parent workshops, providing information directly to parents.
Students and parents in T3 schools continued with the status quo, receiving no additional
information.
    We overlaid this primary randomization with a secondary experiment on priming. Half
of each group participated in a baseline survey in January of 2016, prior to any workshops,
and half did not. This baseline survey (described in more detail in the Data section) may
have prompted students to think more about the application process and encouraged them
to seek out more information. By administering this survey in a random subset of schools
(T1a, T2a, and T3a), we can measure how this increase in the salience of the applications,
independent of the provision of additional information, changed students' knowledge and
subsequent decisions.


5.2    Empirical Strategy

The primary conceptual difficulty in ascertaining the effect of information on student choices
and subsequent outcomes is the typical non-random allocation of information. To overcome
this difficulty, we randomly provided information to students and parents in some schools


                                             16
and not others. The resulting empirical estimation strategy is straightforward:


         Yis =  + 1 Inf oStudentss + 2 Inf oStudentsP arentss + Wis  + is                 (1)


where Yis is the outcome for student i in school s, Inf oStudentss is an indicator for whether
school s was a school in which only students and teachers received information (Group T1),
Inf oStudentsP arentss is an indicator for whether school s was a school in which students,
teachers, and parents were targeted to receive information (Group T2), Wis is a vector of
binary variables representing the stratification bin from which school s is drawn and student
gender (see more details in the Data section), and is is the idiosyncratic error, assumed to
be independent across schools but allowed to be correlated within a school. Note that the
treatment variables are mutually exclusive and not nested.
   Our outcomes of interest trace the causal chain presented in Figure 1 above. We test
for the effect of the intervention on a student's self-reported receipt of information. Second
we test for changes in the selection process and self-reported priorities. Third, we test for
the impact on students' official application choices. Fourth, we test for any intervention
induced changes in students BECE scores. Fifth, we look for effects in the characteristics of
schools to which students were admitted. Finally, we test whether the intervention affected
secondary school matriculation outcomes. We measure these outcomes using a mix of self-
reported and administrative data. All self-reported data are from the half of study schools,
equally divided among treatment groups, in which we conducted a baseline survey to ensure
that we were not conflating priming students to think about their choices with providing
information. For estimates with administrative data, we use the entire sample, testing for
the differential impact of being surveyed.
   To address concerns about multiple hypothesis testing, in addition to testing individual
outcomes, we estimate the effects of the program on categories of outcome variables, following
the mean effects methodology of Kling et al. (2007). Each family of outcomes represents a
set of related measures following our theory of change (see more details in Subsection 6.4)


                                             17
5.3       Sample Selection

We selected our sample from the universe of government JHSs listed on the Ghana Education
Management Information System (EMIS) school roster. To be eligible for the sampling frame,
a school had to be located in Ashanti, include all junior high school grades (JHS1 through
JHS3), have at least one student qualify for secondary school admission in 2014, and be
between the fifth and ninety-fifth percentile of JHS3 cohort size in Ashanti. Out of the 30
districts in Ashanti, we excluded one where we piloted the intervention and another with
only 5 JHSs. We randomly selected 22 districts out of the remaining 28 for the study.17
These selected districts contained 1024 eligible JHSs.
      From this sampling frame, we randomly selected 900 schools to participate in the study.
We stratified our random assignment of treatment arms by district, ensuring that we had
at least one school assigned to each treatment arm in each district. Some schools had more
than one section, or stream as they are known in Ghana, of JHS3. For these schools, we
randomly selected a single stream to both survey and treat, returning to the same stream
for follow-up visits. We describe our survey-collected and administrative data in the next
two subsections.


5.4       Data

Our study relies on both hand collected survey data and administrative data. In this sub-
section we describe both.
      We collected data directly from students in two rounds of surveys, from parents or
guardians in another round, and from an informed member of the students' household in the
final round.
      In January 2016, near the start of term 2 of the 2016-2017 school year, we conducted
the baseline student and head teacher data collection in the 450 survey schools, 150 in each
treatment arm. The student survey asked questions about demographic characteristics of
 17
      We limited the study to 22 districts to reduce travel costs for the intervention.



                                                       18
the students and their families, their previous educational experiences, knowledge of the ap-
plication procedures and secondary schools, anticipated application choices, and educational
and career ambitions. We also asked for contact information for their parents, older siblings
with mobile phones, and other individuals who might know about their schooling outcomes
in the future.18
       After the baseline, enumeration teams administered the intervention to the students or
students and parents based on the school's treatment status.
       In March of 2016, near the end of term 2, after students had received the intervention
and submitted their choices to the CSSPS, we returned to the same schools to conduct the
JHS follow-up. We attempted to talk to the same students asking similar questions as the
baseline. We used our collected contact information to survey via phone a random sample
of 20 parents per school. The questions we asked were similar to those in the student JHS
follow-up.
       In April 2017, during what should have been the second term of secondary school for
students progressing through school on pace, we again contacted students' households based
on our collected contact information. In this round, the secondary school follow-up, we asked
questions about the student's current schooling or other activities if not enrolled and when
the student matriculated or dropped out of schooling. In contacting individuals for this
round, we sought to speak with a member of the student's household who knew about the
student's current schooling or working activities. This individual was most often the parent,
older sibling, or the student themselves.
       We used administrative data both to create the booklet and learn about student out-
comes. For the booklet, the CSSPS secretariat provided three prior years of admission scores
at the school-program level. The average of these three years appears in the booklet. The
West African Education Council provided data on WASSCE pass rates at the school level,
which we also included in the booklet.
  18
    Because of the high incidence of child fostering in Ghana, we asked for the contact information of parents
or guardians and treated them equivalently. For simplicity, we refer to them as parents throughout this paper.



                                                     19
       For student level outcomes, for all students in Ashanti who completed the CSSPS process
we have their name, JHS name, four selected school-program pairs, BECE identification
numbers, BECE scores, and the secondary school to which they were admitted. We use
their BECE identification numbers to match students across the CSSPS and survey data.
We match the remaining students using their names and JHS names, for those with errors
in self-reported BECE IDs. We further combined the historical BECE admissions data and
WASSCE pass rates to calculate a school-level value added measure. For each SHS, we use
the school's residual from a regression of the BECE mean and BECE 5th percentile on the
WASSCE pass rate.19
       To implement our multiple hypothesis testing robustness check, we rescale each of the
variables to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one. We then make all variables
go in the same expected direction by multiplying a subset by negative one when necessary.
Then within each category, we take the average and rescale this average to have a mean
of zero and a standard deviation of one. This second rescaling of the averge allows us to
interpret the magnitudes of the estimated effects in terms of standard deviations.
       Figure 6 displays a timeline of fieldwork and student activities. We use these multiple
collection rounds to measure changes in information, preferences, and beliefs and to assess
whether information changes choices and eventual outcomes.

                                        [Figure 6 about here]

       Table 1 contains selected summary statistics and demonstrates baseline balance across the
three arms. Of particular note in the summary statistics are parents' education levels­only
about 40 percent of fathers and 23 percent of mothers have education beyond JHS with about
12 percent of each not having any formal education. Therefore, most of our sample are first
generation secondary school students and cannot rely on previous parental experience with
secondary school admissions. Such households could find the process especially daunting.
  19
    On average, Option 3 schools have the highest value added, followed by Option 2, and Option 1. Private
schools (Option 5) on average have value added between Options 1 and 2. All four distributions have
substantial common support with the exception of some remarkably low value added estimates for some
private schools.


                                                   20
                                    [Table 1 about here]



6     Results

Recall the causal chain outlined in Section 3.2. We address each of these steps in turn­
receiving information, using and internalizing information, stating choices, taking the BECE,
CSSPS admissions, and matriculation. As we described in the previous section, some out-
comes rely on the survey sub-sample of 450 schools and others use administrative data over
the full 900 school sample. In Sections 6.1 through 6.6 we use the largest sample possible. In
Section 6.8 we show that the effects of the intervention on the administrative data outcomes
are not differential by whether students completed the baseline survey.


6.1    Receipt of Information

Students received our intervention based on implementation tracking sheets and students'
self-reports. At each treatment school an average of 30 students attended the workshop,
received the booklet, and watched the video. In the parent treatment arm, 16 parents on
average attended the parent workshop and watched the video.
    Table 2 contains results of Equation 1 as a linear probability model with whether, during
the first student follow-up, students reported having seen a booklet of school choices or a
video about the school choice process. Recall from Equation 1 that the two treatment arms
in which respondents received additional information are mutually exclusive and considered
as separate regressors. Being in either the treatment that targeted only the students, i.e.
Student Info, or the treatment that targeted both the students and parents, i.e. Parent Info,
increased the likelihood that a student reported having seen a booklet with information about
the school choices and the school choice process by about 14 percentage points (column 1).
Over 82 percent of the control group also reported having seen a booklet. This could have
been the GES booklet or our booklet borrowed from a friend. The video clearly left a very



                                             21
strong impression on students, increasing the likelihood that students reported having seen
a video with information on the school choice system by over 76 percentage points (column
2). Fourteen percent of the control group also reported having seen a video. This could be
a combination of being mistaken or having seen a previously produced CSSPS video that
explained why the CSSPS was used but did not provide guidance on navigating the process.
In both cases we fail to reject that the student only or student plus parents intervention had
similarly sized effects.20


                                         [Table 2 about here]


6.2     Use of Information

We next test whether students used the booklet as an information source. Students were
asked where they got information about the academic quality of secondary schools, selecting
as many information outlets as relevant. Based on the results in Table 3, in both treatment
arms, students increased the likelihood that they used a booklet for academic information by
about 17 percentage points (column 1). Even though 82 percent of the control group (Table
2) reported having seen a booklet, only 21 percent reported using a booklet for information,
and our intervention almost doubled this likelihood. Students in treatment schools were
less likely to report that they received information from traditional media (column 2), the
internet (column 3), other people (column 4), or another source (column 5). In all but one
case we fail to reject that the point estimates are the same across the two treatment arms
and in almost all cases the point estimates on each treatment are different from 0. We reject
equality at the 10 percent level for the decline in relying on other people (column 4).


                                         [Table 3 about here]
  20
     Based on data collected in the parent follow-up and analyzed in Ajayi, Friedman, and Lucas (2017),
parents in both treatment arms were about 11 percentage points more likely than the control group to
report having seen a booklet. Parents in the parent treatment were further about 10 percentage points more
likely than control parents to report having seen a video.




                                                   22
    In addition to information sources changing, parents were more likely to be involved in
the process, another aspect our intervention highlighted. Our booklet encouraged students
and parents to jointly consider options and our video modeled such a conversation. Over 75
percent of parents were already involved, and the intervention increased this likelihood by
about 5 percentage points (Table 3, column 6).
    The importance of parents in the process was echoed by parents themselves, but only
when they were engaged with information directly (Ajayi, Friedman, and Lucas 2017, Table
2). In contrast to the students' responses that parents in both arms were more likely to be
involved in the process, analysis presented in Ajayi, Friedman, and Lucas (2017) indicates
that parents were only statistically more likely to report being involved when they were
directly targeted for information­8 percentage points more likely to report providing help
in the selection process and 6 percentage points more likely to be able to report students'
selections.
    The next step we examine is whether this use of information and parental involvement
adjusted what students reported to value in schools. Table 4 shows that the treatment
shifted the attributes that students found important towards the information in the booklet.
Relative to the control group, students in the student information arm were more than twice
as likely (3 percentage point increase on a base of 3 percentage points) to say that admissions
chance was the most important (column 1). Students in treatment schools were also more
likely to say the most important factor to consider was distance from home (column 2).21
These changes represent increases of 77 to 83 percent relative to the control group. Students
in student only treatment schools were statistically less likely to consider how the school
might affect future success (column 3). Students in the parent treatment arm were less
likely to consider the overall reputation of the school (column 4). Students in both arms
decreased their consideration of the discipline features of the school (column 5). Neither
discipline nor reputation were covered in the booklet. The most important consideration for
  21
     We did not provide distance from each JHS to each secondary school, instead we included information
about the district and neighborhood of each secondary school, included a list of schools sorted by district,
and mentioned the catchment option for students interested in staying close to home.


                                                    23
all arms continued to be academic quality (column 6). We provided data on this margin,
but it did not affect students' prioritization of this school feature. Overall, students in the
treatment arms increased the likelihood that they selected schools based on an attribute we
included in the booklet.


                                            [Table 4 about here]


6.3       Application Choices

The changes in student's stated preferences were reflected in their choice behavior. For these
outcomes we have administrative data from the CSSPS.
       Table 5 contains estimates of the effect of treatment on various characteristics of students'
official choices. Consistent with distance being a primary consideration, students were 4
percentage points more likely to apply only to schools in Ashanti (column 1).22
       Recall in the analysis above that students in treatment schools were more likely to state
that they considered their admission chances in selecting schools. In columns 2 through 5, we
estimate the effect of our treatment on the reported mean BECE score of admitted students
from the booklet, for each listed choice. Consistent with being concerned with admissions
chances, all point values are negative­indicating schools with slightly lower admissions stan-
dards according to the booklet. We find these point values statistically different from 0 for
choices 2 through 4 for the parent arm (columns 3 through 5). For choices 2 and 4, students
applied to schools with 0.05 to 0.06 SD lower historical BECE mean scores.
       In columns 6 and 7, we test whether students on average applied to schools with higher
WASSCE pass rates or value added and find statistically insignificant point values across
both measures.23 While the intervention was designed to shift students away from schools
  22
     Students were also 1 percentage point more likely (off a base of 93 percent) to select at least one school
in Ashanti (results not presented).
  23
     This is similarly statistically insignificant for each choice separately (results not presented). Because of
an agreement with our data providers, the booklet did not present measures of value added. In workshops
we encouraged participants to think about WASSCE pass rates relative to incoming BECE scores. We
calculated value added using the WASSCE and BECE data from the booklet (see Data Section for more
details).


                                                       24
with bad WASSCE outcomes, these findings are consistent with students not changing (or
perhaps decreasing) their value of the school's contribution to their future success.24


                                           [Table 5 about here]


6.4       The BECE

A student's admission to secondary school depends on the combination of his BECE score
and his listed choices. The intervention was not designed to alter the likelihood that students
took the BECE or the effort they put into preparing for and taking the exam. Nevertheless,
the extra information we provided students could have changed this behavior. We test for
this behavior change in this subsection and present the results in Table 6.
       We find that the intervention did not change the likelihood that a student took the BECE
as scheduled (column 1). Further, the intervention did not change students' BECE scores
(column 2).25


                                           [Table 6 about here]


       Given the lack of effect on selection into the BECE or a student's BECE score, any
changes in admissions and matriculation are the result of changes in choices and not test
scores or selection into the test.
  24
      The Appendix contains additional choice outcomes. Students in the student information only arm were
1 percentage point more likely to list their choices in descending order of BECE booklet means (p-value<0.1,
the control group base was 10 percent). The treatment did not affect the likelihood that students listed choices
by descending booklet BECE 5th percentile or WASSCE pass rate (Table A1). By virtue of arbitrary page
breaks, some secondary schools may have been more salient than others. The treatment did not change the
number of choices that students listed that happened to appear at the top of a page (Table A2). Students
in the parent information treatment listed 0.06 more schools from the first page of the GuIIDE booklet, the
first 14 Option 1 (least selective) schools in alphabetical order. The average control group student listed 0.55
of these schools (Table A2).
   25
      Other observable and self-reported measures of effort or aspirations are similarly unchanged by the
intervention­reported absences, present on the day of the follow-up, aspire to at least complete secondary
school, or aspire to pursue a university degree (results not presented).




                                                      25
6.5       Admissions

As shown above, the intervention changed who participated in students' application pro-
cesses, what they valued in schools, and their application behaviors. In this sub-section we
test whether it changed their CSSPS admissions. Recall that the intervention did not affect
students' BECE scores, therefore the results that follow are due to changes in choices not
changes in test scores.
       Table 7 shows that the treatment did not change the likelihood that a student was ad-
mitted to secondary school (column 1) or admitted to a school from their choice list (column
2).26 The point values are small, 1 to 3 percentage points, and statistically insignificant.
About 53 percent of students were admitted to a school on their choice list with an addi-
tional 31 percent admitted to a school that they had not listed. Across both the treatment
and control group, about 20 percent of students were admitted to their top choice school, 14
percent to their second choice school, 11 percent to their third choice school, and 9 percent
to their fourth choice school. In column 3, we show that our intervention did not change
this probability for Choice 1, with similar statistically insignificant effects for other choices.


                                           [Table 7 about here]


       We next test whether the intervention changed the characteristics of the school-program
pairs or schools to which students were admitted (Table 8). Note this table is limited to
students who were admitted to a school, which as shown in Table 7 is not differential by
treatment status. Students were 4 percentage points more likely to be admitted to a school
in Ashanti in the intervention that included parents (column 1). We can additionally look at
the booklet-provided characteristics for students admitted to schools in Ashanti. Students
were admitted to less selective schools by about 0.05 to 0.07 standard deviations (SD), based
on the BECE mean presented in the booklet (column 2). Yet, these schools had equal value
  26
    Column 1 includes students with sufficiently high BECE scores for secondary school admission who were
placed arbitrarily by the CSSPS into a school with empty seats because all of their selected schools were full.




                                                      26
added in the student only arm and higher value added in the parent arm by 0.08 SD (column
3). We reject at the 10 percent level that these values are equal.27


                                          [Table 8 about here]


6.6     Matriculation

Despite indications above that the intervention might have improved match quality due to
students making more informed choices and being admitted to marginally higher value added
schools, their matriculation decisions were unchanged (Table 9). For these results, we rely
on outcomes as reported by informed household members during what should have been the
student's second term of secondary school. Sixty percent of control group students were at-
tending secondary school at that time. Students in both treatment arms were no more likely
to be attending secondary school (column 1).28 Further, conditional on attending school,
they were no more likely to have started within the first six weeks of school, approximately on
time in the Ghanaian context (column 2). Only 44 percent of students attending secondary
school in the control group started within the first six weeks. They were no more likely
to be attending the secondary school to which they were admitted by the CSSPS (column
3) or attending secondary school in Ashanti (column 4). Therefore, by revealed preference,
student matches did not appear to have improved.


                                          [Table 9 about here]
  27
     Students are admitted to school-program pairs, not simply schools. Our administrative data does not
contain the program for students who are admitted to a school-program outside of their choice list. For those
students admitted to a school in their choice list we can re-estimate columns 2 and 3 for the school-program.
The results are similar (the intervention caused a 0.07 to 0.09 SD decrease in the BECE of the admitted
school-program pair, p<0.1 and p<0.05 respectively, and a 0.10 SD increase in school-program value added
for the intervention that included parents, p<0.01.)
  28
     Some of the students who were not attending secondary school in this second term might still enroll and
complete school on a delayed schedule. Duflo et al. (2017) found that 47 percent of qualified students who
had not yet enrolled in secondary school as of January (early term 2) of what should have been their first
year completed secondary school within seven years. Secondary school typically lasts 3 years.




                                                     27
6.7    Multiple Hypothesis Testing

Given the richness of outcomes we collected via survey or from administrative data, one
concern could be erroneous discoveries due to testing multiple hypotheses. In Table 10, we
group our outcomes into families based on the steps in the causal chain appearing in Figure
1 above. The exact variables that make up each family of outcomes are listed in detail in
the table notes. In column 1, the student information treatment and the parent information
treatment interventions caused large, positive and significant effects of on a set of outcomes
representing reported exposure to the treatment. Each intervention increased reported ex-
posure by 1.8 SD. In column 2, the two interventions increased the information sources and
priorities index value by 0.3 to 0.4 SD, p<0.001. Next, in column 3, the intervention changed
the application choices by 0.1 SD. In column 4, as with Table 6 above, the intervention did
not affect the BECE index value. In Column 5, the parent intervention affected the admis-
sions outcome by 0.1 SD, p<0.001, and a smaller and not statistically significant coefficient
on the student-only information treatment. Finally, consistent with the findings in Table 9
above, in column 6 neither intervention affected matriculation. Therefore, Table 10 confirms
the results presented in the previous tables. We plot each of these coefficients in Figure 7.


                                    [Table 10 about here]


                                    [Figure 7 about here]


6.8    Heterogeneity

Even though mean effects can hide important distributional effects of the intervention, in
our intervention the effects appear to be largely homogeneous with a few exceptions noted
below. For parsimony, we provide estimates in the appendix on the heterogeneity by family
as presented in the previous section.
   For outcomes that relied on administrative data, we first test whether students in the
schools with the baseline survey, who could have been primed to think more carefully about

                                             28
their choices, have different outcomes than students in those schools without baseline sur-
veys. The intervention did not differentially affect the application, BECE test, or admissions
indices, the three outcomes that relied on administrative data (Appendix Table A3).
   We further test for heterogeneous effects by gender. Girls reported being about 0.10
SD less exposed to the intervention in the two treatment arms, changed their information
sources and priorities about 0.12 SD less in the intervention that included parents, and show
a marginal differential decrease (0.06 SD, p<0.10) in the BECE index (Appendix Table A4,
columns 1 through 4). Despite these changes along the causal chain, the interventions affect
boys and girls equivalently in admissions and matriculation (Appendix Table A4, columns 5
and 6).
   Households with more highly educated parents might have needed the intervention less
as they could have been more familiar with the system. Alternatively, those households
could have found a document written in English easier to navigate. Appendix Table A5
tests for differential effects based on whether at least one parent completed junior high
school. The results support the former hypothesis--households with more highly educated
parents reported lower levels of exposure (by about 0.15 SD, Appendix Table A5, column 1).
Across the other families of outcomes, the only other statistically significant difference is that
students in highly educated households in the intervention that included parents changed
their application decisions by 0.09 SD less (columns 2 through 6).
   We additionally test for heterogeneity by BECE score, as this intervention might have
had a different salience for students at different places in the test score distribution. Students
with higher BECE scores in the intervention that included parents were less likely to report
being exposed (-0.09 SD, p<0.1) and had a marginally higher value of the matriculation
index (0.06 SD, p<0.1) (Appendix Table A6).
   We finally test for differential effects by the number of secondary schools within 10 km of
a student's JHS. The average student had 13 schools within 10km of their secondary school.
For students in the intervention that only targeted students, both the exposure and BECE



                                               29
indices were decreasing in the number of schools (-0.007 SD, p<0.05, and -0.009 SD, p<0.05)
respectively (Appendix Table A7).



7     Discussion

The motivation for this research was to reduce inefficiencies and wasted resources at both
the household and education sector level that resulted from students ex post sorting. While
choice and admissions outcomes changed, the potentially more important matriculation out-
comes did not. Below we set out a number of potential hypotheses as to why improved
information did not affect those outcomes based on data previously discussed and in-depth
interviews with households approximately one year after the conclusion of the intervention.
    First, we can rule out the possibility that people did not receive or understand the
material or the process. We provided evidence above that intermediate outcomes (i.e., choices
and priorities) changed. In in-depth interviews, respondents mentioned that often "parents
are too naive" and blame others when "it was their own mistake." One mentioned that she
studied the booklet "so when it was time for selecting, I knew what I was doing." Students
also noted how important it was to "know your standard and academic performance and
compare it with the schools' acceptable grades."
    A second concern is that we saturated the geographic area with booklets--all students
were effectively treated because they had a friend or relative in a treatment school who let
them borrow a booklet. Our 22 study districts contained 1,138 JHSs, and 600 of them, 43
percent, received booklets. As with the prior concern, the possibility of saturation also seems
unlikely since we were able to discern differences by treatment status for the intermediate
outcomes.
    A third related concern is that all treated students applied to the same narrow set of
schools and thus increased the selectivity of these schools, leaving no room for improvements
in admission outcomes. We explore this possibility by analyzing whether students in treated
schools were more likely to apply to schools more prominently listed in the booklet or to the

                                              30
same schools as their classmates. Although students in the parent treatment arm were more
likely to apply to schools listed on the first page of the booklet, they were no more likely to
apply to the same schools as their classmates (Appendix Table A2). The estimated treatment
effects in regressions analyzing the number of classmates applying to the same choice are
small and negative, indicating that if anything, the intervention encouraged students to
apply to a slightly more diversified set of choices within schools.
   Fourth, our intervention may not have moved intermediate outcomes enough to change
matriculation decisions. Some students may not have been swayed by our intervention
because it was too late. Despite working with schools to time the workshops close enough
to the decision to be salient, but not too early, we may have provided information too late.
According to our in-depth interviews, several respondents reported "I saw the book but my
mind was already made up," "I chose the school I already had in mind," and "the schools
that were in my mind, I was determined to attend one of them."
   Fifth, while information was a constraint for some households, other considerations might
have been paramount for matriculation decisions. For students who either did not matric-
ulate or matriculated to a school to which they were admitted, fewer than 1% stated that
disliking the placement was the key consideration--the primary way in which information
might improve outcomes. For students not in school during what should have been the first
year of secondary school, 76 percent said that fees were the most important barrier. In the
qualitative work, students mentioned concerns about schools being "too expensive for you
to afford" as a reason for eventual non-matriculation. Even though all government schools
had the same official fee schedule, 39 percent of households whose student was attending a
school other than the one to which he was admitted cited cost as a factor. In the booklet, we
provided the officially approved fees for government schools, but schools often charged ad-
ditional fees, which were allowed as long as they were "reasonable." Therefore, even though
the booklet contained the official fee schedule, students could have encountered unantici-
pated costs at the school to which they were initially admitted, causing them to seek out



                                              31
an alternative. Alternatively, households could have listed their choices in February subject
to an existing budget constraint or a future expected windfall, but an unanticipated shock
or lack of windfall between February and October could have altered their realized budget
constraint.
       Beyond fees, distance from home could have been an important factor. Even though
distance was knowable and time invariant, the same unanticipated shocks to income could
have altered preferences over distance. For students who were attending a different school
than the one to which they were admitted, 24 percent cited distance as the reason for the
school change.29 This movement towards home also appears in the data. Figure 8 presents
the distribution of distances to admitted schools, attending schools (split by those to which
students were and were not admitted), and schools listed for each choice. Overall, students
attended schools closer to their JHSs than the ones to which they were admitted (grey dashed
line of attending relative to solid black line of admitted). For students who deviated from
their CSSPS admitted school, those schools were even closer to their JHS (the dotted blue
line, which is above both the "Attending (All)" grey dashed line and the "Admitted" solid
black line). Finally, students appear to be selecting schools of similar distances across all
choices--the densities of the four choice lines are quite similar to each other.


                                       [Figure 8 about here]


       The distance between a students' JHS and her admitted school does predict whether
she chose to attend that admitted school. Figure 9 shows the likelihood of attending the
admitted school (solid dark line with circles), the likelihood of attending a school to which the
student was not admitted (solid light line with squares), and the likelihood of not attending
any school (dashed line with diamonds), by distance between the student's JHS and the
admitted school. Each dot is the average within a 5km bin, e.g. the dot at 5km is for
secondary schools 0 to 5km away from the JHS. Those who were admitted to schools closer
  29
    Almost all of the academic track secondary schools in our data have both a boarding and day option,
therefore distance was not a strictly limiting factor when considering potential choices.



                                                  32
to their JHS are substantially more likely to be attending that school, but the relationship
is non-monotonic. Almost 70 percent of students admitted to a school within 5 km attend
that school. Over 50 percent of students admitted to a school 5-10km or 10-15km of their
JHS attend that school, as do students admitted to schools 25-30, 30-35, 80-85, and 85-
90 km away from their JHS.30 As tested in Section 6.8, the effects of the intervention on
admissions and matriculation do not vary by the density of available secondary schools. on
students with more schools within 10kms (reported in Appendix Table A7). Taken together,
it appears that while students are not consistently choosing only the closest schools, distance
is an important determinant of whether and where a student attends.
       In a low-resource setting with frequent unanticipated shocks, knowing school preferences
in advance may be impossible. Households may have completed the CSSPS forms intending
to adhere to the admissions, but an unanticipated shock could have prevented that realiza-
tion.



8        Conclusions

As the increase in primary school enrollment and completion since the mid-1990s moves into
the secondary school sector, and an increasing number of African countries move to make
secondary school free, efficiently using available resources is crucial. To improve the efficiency
in the transition between junior high and secondary school in Ghana, we provided students
and parents with information about the available secondary schools and the centralized sys-
tem that allocates students to schools. To test the effects of this information, we conducted
a 900-school RCT, enabling us to compare outcomes across three treatment groups. For
the 300 schools in treatment 1, students alone received information. In the 300 treatment
2 schools, students and parents received information. In a final 300 schools, neither stu-
dents nor parents received additional information. Based on both survey and administrative
  30
    When considering proximate schools, most students have multiple choices. Forty-two percent have at
least one school within 2km of their JHS, the average student has 13 Option 1-3 schools within 10km, and
52 percent of students had 5 or more Option 1-3 scools within 10km of their JHS.


                                                  33
data, we found that students and parents wanted and received our information. Further,
the characteristics of the schools to which students applied marginally changed, and they
were admitted to higher value-added schools. Nevertheless, the improved information did
not improve education outcomes--students were no more likely to start school on time or
enroll at all. Based on interviews with students after the intervention, many said that they
remembered the intervention, especially the video, but that they had either already made
up their minds or that they were constrained in their matriculation decisions by distance to
schools or lack of resources. The former suggests an intervention earlier in the school year,
while the latter points towards a larger issue in the school choice system. Therefore, while
allowing universal school choice can benefit students of all socioeconomic backgrounds, those
with fewer resources may continue to make constrained choices.




                                             34
References
Abdulkadiroglu, A., P. Pathak, A. Roth, and T. S¨
                                                onmez (2006). Changing the boston school
 choice mechanism. Working Paper 11965, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Ajayi, K. F. (2013). School choice and educational mobility: Lessons from secondary school
  applications in ghana. Institute for Economic Development Discussion Paper 259.

Ajayi, K. F., W. H. Friedman, and A. M. Lucas (2017). The importance of information
  targeting for school choice. American Economic Review 107 (5), 638­43.

Allende, C., F. Gallego, and C. Neilson (2019, July). Approximating the equilibrium effects
  of informed school choice. Working Paper 628, Industrial Relations Section.

Andrabi, T., J. Das, and A. I. Khwaja (2017, June). Report cards: The impact of providing
 school and child test scores on educational markets. American Economic Review 107 (6),
 1535­63.

Banerjee, A., S. Barnhardt, and E. Duflo (2015). Movies, margins, and marketing: En-
  couraging the adoption of iron-fortified salt. In Insights in the Economics of Aging, pp.
  285­306. University of Chicago Press.

Banerjee, A. V., R. Banerji, E. Duflo, R. Glennerster, and S. Khemani (2010). Pitfalls of
  participatory programs: Evidence from a randomized evaluation in education in india.
  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2 (1), 1­30.

Barrera-Osorio, F. and K. G. F. L. D. Deming (2020). Providing performance information
  in education: An experimental evaluation in colombia. Technical report, Mimeo.

Bobba, M. and V. Frisancho (2019). Perceived ability and school choices. TSE Working
  Papers 16-660, Toulouse School of Economics (TSE).

Corcoran, S. P., J. L. Jennings, S. R. Cohodes, and C. Sattin-Bajaj (2018, March). Leveling
  the playing field for high school choice: Results from a field experiment of informational
  interventions. Working Paper 24471, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Dinkelman, T. and C. A. Martinez (2014, MAY). Investing in Schooling in Chile: The
  Role of Information about Financial Aid for Higher Education. Review of Economics and
  Statistics 96 (2), 244­257.

Duflo, E., P. Dupas, and M. Kremer (2017). The impact of free secondary education: Ex-
 perimental evidence from ghana. Massachusetts Institute of Technology Working Paper
 Cambridge, MA.

Dupas, P. (2011). Do teenagers respond to hiv risk information? evidence from a field
 experiment in kenya. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3 (1), 1­34.

Dustan, A. (2018). Family networks and school choice. Journal of Development Eco-
 nomics 134, 372­391.


                                            35
Dynarski, S., C. Libassi, K. Michelmore, and S. Owen (2018, December). Closing the gap:
 The effect of a targeted, tuition-free promise on college choices of high-achieving, low-
 income students. Working Paper 25349, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Grenet, J., Y. He, and D. K¨
                           ubler (2019, May). Decentralizing Centralized Matching Markets:
  Implications From Early Offers in University Admissions. Rationality and Competition
  Discussion Paper Series 158, CRC TRR 190 Rationality and Competition.
Hastings, J. and J. Weinstein (2008, November). Information, school choice, and academic
  achievement: Evidence from two experiments. Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (4),
  1373­1414.
Hastings, J. S., C. A. Neilson, and S. D. Zimmerman (2012, August). The effect of school
  choice on intrinsic motivation and academic outcomes. Working Paper 18324, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.
Hoxby, C. M. and S. Turner (2013). Expanding college opportunities for low-income, high-
  achieving students. Working Paper 12-014, Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Re-
  search.
Jensen, R. (2010, May). The (perceived) returns to education and the demand for schooling.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (2), 515­548.
Kapor, A. J., C. A. Neilson, and S. D. Zimmerman (2020). Heterogeneous beliefs and school
 choice mechanisms. American Economic Review 110 (5), 1274­1315.
Kirkeboen, L. J., E. Leuven, and M. Mogstad (2016). Field of study, earnings, and self-
  selection. Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (3), 1057­1111.
Kling, J. R., J. B. Liebman, and L. F. Katz (2007). Experimental analysis of neighborhood
  effects. Econometrica 75 (1), 83­119.
Lai, F., E. Sadoulet, and A. de Janvry (2009, August). The adverse effects of parents' school
  selection errors on academic achievement: Evidence from the beijing open enrollment
  program. Economics of Education Review 28 (4), 485­496.
Lucas, A. M. and I. M. Mbiti (2012, May). The determinants and consequences of school
  choice errors in kenya. American Economic Review 102 (3), 283­88.
Mizala, A. and M. Urquiola (2013, JUL). School Markets: The Impact of Information
 Approximating Schools' Effectiveness. Journal of Development Economics 103, 313­335.
Neilson, C. (2019). The rise of centralized choice and assignment mechanisms in education
  markets around the world. Mimeo.
Ortega Hesles, M. E. (2015). School Choice and Educational Opportunities: The Upper-
  Secondary Student-Assignment Process in Mexico City. Ph. D. thesis.
Pathak, P. and T. S¨  onmez (2008, September). Leveling the playing field: Sincere and
  sophisticated players in the boston mechanism. American Economic Review 98 (4), 1636­
  52.

                                             36
                            Figure 1: Theory of Change




Academic performance


            Distance


                Cost


   Admission chances


      Future success


      Teacher quality


           Single sex


               Other



                        0         10            20             30         40
                                        Percentage of students



           Figure 2: Most important characteristic for school selection



                                       37
Parent or Guardian




  Brother or Sister




     Headteacher




    Other Teacher




             Other



                      0                20                   40       60
                                            Percentage of students



                          Figure 3: Most helpful decision maker




                                            38
                         SeniorHighSchool
                        InformationBooklet

Seniorhighschoolchoicesareimportantbutmanystudentschooseschoolstheydonotknowmuchabout
andarethendissatisfiedwiththeiradmissionsoutcomes.Makingcarefulchoicesisoneofthebestwaysto
haveagoodseniorhighschoolexperience.

How it works:
Youwillbeselectingfourchoicesfromsecondcycleschoolsofdifferentoptions.Each
optioncontainsadifferentsetofschools.

OPTIONS:
Options1,2&3:PublicSeniorHighSchools
     Option4: PublicTechnical/VocationalInstitutions
     Option5: PrivateSeniorHighSchools+PrivateTechnical/VocationalInstitutions

You must:
1. Choosefourdifferentschools.
2. Selectaprogrammeandanaccommodationforeachchoice.
3. Rememberthatyourchoices:
      ·   CanincludeuptofourOption1schools
      ·   CanincludeuptofourOption4or5schools
      ·   CanincludeuptotwoOption2schools
      ·   CanincludeuptooneOption3school
          
How to make good senior high school choices:
1. What is important to you and your family?
      ·   Stayingclosetohome?Onlyselectschoolsinyourregionordistrict.Ifyouwanttostaywithin
          16kmofyourJHS,usetheCATCHMENTAREAOPTION.
      ·   Singlesexormixed?Someschoolsaremixedandsomearegirlsorboysonly.
      ·   Boardingorday?Someschoolsofferbothoptionsbutsomeofferonlyone.
      ·   Programmetype?Besuretochooseschoolsthatofferyourprogrammeofinterest.
          
2. What was your raw BECE score (out of 600) on your mock exams?
   ·      Usetheworksheetinthisbooklettocalculateit.
   ·      Besuretochooseatleastoneschoolwhereyouhaveagoodchanceofbeingadmitted.
          
3. Pick schools you would actually like to attend!
   ·      Youcanonlylistfourchoices,andmoststudentsdonotgetplaced
          intheirfirstchoice,soeverychoiceisimportant.

4. List your choices in order of preference.
ii 




                                 Figure 4: Booklet Introduction



                                                   39
Howtousethisbooklet:
Thisbookletcontainsinformationonallseniorhighschoolsandtechnical/vocationalinstitutesinAshanti
region,toinformyouaboutyourlocaloptions.Youarefreetoselectotherschoolsoutsidethisregionif
youwouldlike.


Code:Official                         Gender:            Programme: LowBECEScore:      Candidates:
                      District:
schoolcode            Districtandtown Isschoolboys-only, Programmes Scoreexceededby95% Totalnumberof
                      orneighborhood girls-only,ormixed offered     ofadmittedstudents WASSCEcandidates





                                                                                                        
   SchoolName:Officialschool               Boarding:          AverageBECEScore: PassRate:Percentage
                                                                                                 
   nameandnickname(ifany)                  Isschoolday,       Averagescoreof    ofstudentswhopassed
                                           boarding,orboth    admittedstudents WASSCEcoresubjects



                                                             ANOTEONBECESCORES
                                                             Thesescoresfromstudentsadmittedinthelastthree
                                                             yearsgiveyouaroughguideofhowlikelyyouareto
                                                             beadmitted.IfyourBECEscoreisfarbelowthelow
                                                             score,youhaveasmallchance.Ifyourscoreisclose
                                                             toorabovetheaverage,youhaveahighchance.
                                                             Thesescoreschangeeveryyear,soevengettinga
                                                             BECEscoreabovelastyear'sscorescannotguarantee
                                                             youradmission,butgivesaguideofwhattoexpect.
                                                             
                                                             WASSCEPerformanceisalsobasedoncandidates
                                                             fromthelastthreeyears(2013to2015).




                                                                                                             
                                                                                                             




v 




                                  Figure 5: Sample Booklet Page



                                                       40
Figure 6: Study timeline




          41
                           Figure 7: Effects by Steps in the Causal Chain
Notes: Figure presents coefficients from mean effects estimates on families of outcomes. Family 1: whether
the student reported having seen the booklet and having seen the video (the outcomes in Table 2). Family
2: whether the student reported getting information from a booklet; whether they did not report getting
information from radio/TV/Newspaper, the internet, other people, or other; and whether the student prior-
itized information in the booklet (distance, academic quality, and admissions chances) and not those not in
the booklet (how affect future success, teacher quality or school reputation or facilities, discipline) (outcomes
in Tables 3 and 4). Family 3: whether the student applied to only Ashanti schools, the reverse of the mean
reported BECE scores in their 1st, 2nd, 3rd, and 4th choice schools, the mean WASSCE pass rate and
value-added at all the schools to which they applied (outcomes in Table 5). Family 4: whether the student
took the BECE and their BECE score (outcomes in Table 6). Family 5: whether they were admitted to any
school, admitted to any of their choices, admitted to their first choice, admitted to a school in Ashanti, the
reverse of the admitted SHS BECE mean, the admitted secondary school value-added, the reverse of the
assigned program BECE mean, and the assigned program value added (outcomes in Tables 7 and 8). Family
6: whether they are currently attending secondary school, whether they started on-time, whether they are
attending the school to which they were admitted, and whether they are attending a secondary school in
Ashanti (outcomes in Table 9). All estimates control for gender and strata fixed effects. Confidence intervals
adjust for clustering at the JHS level.




                                                       42
                     Figure 8: Distance Between JHS and Secondary School
Notes: Figure illustrates the distribution of distances between students' junior high schools and their admit-
ted secondary schools, the secondary schools they are currently attending (split by those to which students
were and were not admitted), and the secondary schools listed for each choice.




                                                     43
                               Figure 9: Matriculation and Distance
Notes: Figure shows the likelihood of students attending their admitted school, the likelihood of attending
a school to which the student was not admitted, and the likelihood of not attending any school, by distance
between a student's junior high school and their admitted secondary school.




                                                    44
                             Table 1: Baseline Balance

                                  Student    Parent               p-value diff   p-value diff
                                    Info      Info    Control      (1) vs (3)     (2) vs (3)
                                     (1)       (2)       (3)          (4)            (5)
Female                              0.43      0.43      0.44          0.65           0.63
                                   (0.50)    (0.50)    (0.50)
Age                                15.93     15.81     15.81         0.13           0.13
                                   (1.44)    (1.42)    (1.43)
Days Absent                         1.66      1.76      1.69         0.53           0.83
                                   (3.22)    (3.29)    (3.41)
Taken Mock BECE                     0.50      0.49      0.52         0.94           0.75
                                   (0.50)    (0.50)    (0.50)
Expected BECE                      11.60     11.55     11.57         0.87           0.91
                                   (4.77)    (4.82)    (4.82)
Believes CSSPS Fair                 0.61      0.60      0.58         0.79           0.43
                                   (0.49)    (0.49)    (0.49)
Low Income                          0.27      0.26      0.26         0.73           0.74
                                   (0.44)    (0.44)    (0.44)
Father Educated Beyond JHS          0.39      0.44      0.41         0.05           0.49
                                   (0.49)    (0.50)    (0.49)
Mother Educated Beyond JHS          0.23      0.24      0.23         0.39           0.84
                                   (0.42)    (0.43)    (0.42)
Father completed no school          0.12      0.10      0.12         0.29           0.87
                                   (0.32)    (0.30)    (0.32)
Mother completed no school          0.17      0.15      0.16         0.29           0.64
                                   (0.37)    (0.36)    (0.37)
Observations                        3631      3540      3617
Notes: Columns 1-3: Sample means with standard deviations in parenthesis. Columns
4 and 5: p-values of differences based on standard errors adjusted for clustering at the
JHS level.




                          Table 2: Receipt of Information

                              Seen Booklet                      Seen Video
                                    (1)                              (2)
 Student Info                   0.139***                         0.779***
                                 (0.017)                          (0.018)
 Parent Info                    0.153***                         0.764***
                                 (0.017)                          (0.020)
 Student = Parent p -value         0.08                             0.48
 Observations                     11466                            11456
 R2                                0.10                             0.59
 Control Group Mean                0.82                             0.14
 Note: All outcomes from the first follow-up survey. These outcomes are based on
 student self-reports of whether they had seen a booklet/video about the secondary
 school application process. Each column represents one regression, which controls for
 gender and includes strata fixed effects. Standard errors adjusted for clustering at the
 JHS level appear in parenthesis, *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.



                                             45
                                       Table 3: Use of Information and Selection Process

                                                     Self-reported source of information                   Reported Parent Would
                                 Booklet     Radio/TV/Newspaper Internet Other People            Other          Help Choose
                                     (1)                (2)               (3)           (4)        (5)               (6)
     Student Info                0.163***          -0.065***           -0.032*     -0.052***    -0.009*           0.045***
                                  (0.021)            (0.018)           (0.017)       (0.013)    (0.005)            (0.014)
     Parent Info                 0.171***           -0.041**            -0.011      -0.032**   -0.013***          0.054***
                                  (0.020)            (0.016)           (0.017)       (0.013)    (0.004)            (0.014)
     Student = Parent p -value      0.73               0.19              0.22          0.10       0.34               0.47




46
     Observations                  11472              11471             11471         11471      11472              11230
     R2                             0.05               0.02              0.03          0.03       0.00               0.02
     Control Group Mean             0.21               0.68              0.34          0.20       0.03               0.75
     Note: Outcomes from the first follow-up survey. Each column represents one regression,
     which controls for gender and includes strata fixed effects. Linear probability models.
     Standard errors adjusted for clustering at the JHS level appear in parenthesis. Columns
     1-5: Answers in response to a question regarding where they obtained information
     about the academic quality of secondary schools. Students could pick multiple. Column
     6: the outcome is an indicator variable equal to one if the student reported the parent
     would help them make their school choices. *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.
         Table 4: Stated Preferences--Most Important Factor in Selecting Schools

                                                       Teacher quality or
                            Admissions                    How Affect        School Reputation                Academic
                              Chance     Distance       Future Success         or Facilities    Discipline    Quality
                                 (1)         (2)               (3)                   (4)            (5)          (6)
Student Info                 0.031***    0.036***          -0.038***               -0.015        -0.009*       0.005
                              (0.009)     (0.007)           (0.010)               (0.009)        (0.005)      (0.021)
Parent Info                   0.009*     0.039***            -0.013              -0.020**       -0.011**       0.013
                              (0.005)     (0.007)           (0.011)               (0.009)        (0.005)      (0.019)
Student = Parent p -value       0.02        0.75              0.01                  0.52           0.72         0.65
Observations                   11454       11454             11454                 11454          11454        11454
R2                              0.01        0.01              0.01                  0.02           0.01         0.04
Control Group Mean              0.03        0.05              0.12                  0.09           0.04         0.54
Notes: Outcomes from the first follow-up survey. These are responses to: "What is the most important
factor you think about when selecting schools." The options were: Distance from home; Cost; Chances of
being admitted; Academic performance of the school; (any of) Teacher quality, Reputation of the school,
Facilities and resources; Boys or girls only; Religious affiliation; Family member attended; How it might
affect my future success; Discipline or behavior of past students. Each column represents one regression,
which controls for gender and includes strata fixed effects. Linear probability models. Standard errors
adjusted for clustering at the JHS level appear in parenthesis, *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.




                                                  47
                                           Table 5: Characteristics of Application Choices


                                 Applied only     1st Choice     2nd Choice      3rd Choice      4th Choice    Mean WASSCE         Value
                                   Ashanti       BECE mean       BECE mean      BECE mean       BECE mean        Pass Rate        Added
                                      (1)              (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)            (6)             (7)
     Student Info                 0.040***           -0.011         -0.028          -0.040          -0.050         -0.261          -0.001
                                   (0.014)          (0.030)        (0.026)         (0.028)         (0.031)        (0.787)         (0.036)
     Parent Info                  0.035***           -0.026       -0.055**        -0.061**         -0.051*         -0.468          -0.005
                                   (0.014)          (0.028)        (0.024)         (0.025)         (0.028)        (0.734)         (0.034)




48
     Student = Parent p -value       0.75             0.61           0.29            0.44            0.97           0.79            0.92
     Observations                   40739            37197          37467           37733           38036          42104           40152
     R2                              0.10             0.18           0.18            0.17            0.18           0.19            0.17
     Control Group Mean              0.71             0.71           0.56            0.47            0.37           58.92           0.00
     Notes: Each column represents one regression, which controls for gender and includes strata fixed effects. Standard errors adjusted
     for clustering at the JHS level appear in parenthesis. Column 1: the outcome is an indicator for whether all of the schools to
     which the student applied were in Ashanti. Linear probability model. Columns 2-5: the mean incoming BECE score reported in
     the booklet of their 1st-4th choice schools Column 6: the average WASSCE pass rate among all schools to which they applied
     measured 0 to 100. Column 7: the average value-added score across all schools to which they applied, standardized among schools
     to be mean 0 and SD of 1. *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.
          Table 6: Junior High School Exit Exam

                                    Took         BECE
                                  BECE            Score
                                     (1)            (2)
     Student Info                  -0.004         -0.012
                                  (0.008)        (0.080)
     Parent Info                   -0.007         -0.045
                                  (0.008)        (0.074)
     Student = Parent p -value      0.78           0.66
     Observations                  42228          41159
     R2                             0.04           0.12
     Control Group Mean             0.98           0.00
     Notes: Each column represents one regression, which
     controls for gender and includes strata fixed effects.
     Standard errors adjusted for clustering at the JHS level
     appear in parenthesis. Outcomes from CSSPS admin-
     istrative data. *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.




                      Table 7: Admissions

                              Admitted       Admitted      Admitted
                             Any School     Any Choice     1st Choice
                                  (1)            (2)            (3)
Student Info                    0.011          0.007          -0.001
                               (0.018)        (0.020)        (0.014)
Parent Info                     0.019          0.027          0.001
                               (0.015)        (0.021)        (0.014)
Student = Parent p -value        0.61           0.32           0.92
Observations                    42228          42228          42228
R2                               0.32           0.18           0.12
Control Group Mean               0.84           0.53           0.20
Notes: Each column represents one regression, which controls for
gender and includes strata fixed effects. Standard errors adjusted
for clustering at the JHS level appear in parenthesis. Outcomes
from the CSSPS administrative data. Each outcome is an in-
dicator variable. Linear probability models. *p<0.1, **p<0.05,
***p<0.01.




                                 49
                            Table 8: Admissions Characteristics

                                  Admitted     Admitted SHS            Admitted SHS
                                   Ashanti      BECE mean              Value Added
                                      (1)            (2)                     (3)
      Student Info                  0.028         -0.054*                  0.037
                                   (0.019)        (0.032)                 (0.025)
      Parent Info                 0.043***       -0.070**                0.080***
                                   (0.015)        (0.033)                 (0.024)
      Student = Parent p -value      0.35           0.60                    0.07
      Observations                  42228          28147                   27896
      R2                             0.22           0.05                    0.08
      Control Group Mean             0.75           0.02                   -0.00
      Notes: Each column represents one regression, which controls for gender and includes
      strata fixed effects. Standard errors adjusted for clustering at the JHS level appear
      in parenthesis. Column 1 is whether the student was assigned to a school in Ashanti,
      conditional on having been assigned anywhere. Column 2 is the average of all of
      the booklet-reported BECE scores in the booklet. Column 3 is the residual from a
      regression of the school's booklet-reported SSCE pass-rate on the booklet-reported
      incoming BECE means and 5th percentiles in each program. Missing incoming scores
      (for example, if a school does not offer a program) are included with the mean for that
      program across schools and an indicator for missing that variable. *p<0.1, **p<0.05,
      ***p<0.01.




                                    Table 9: Matriculation

                              Currently       Started on Time      Attending        Attending SHS
                            Attending SHS       if Attending      Admitted SHS        in Ashanti
                                   (1)                (2)              (3)                 (4)
Student Info                     -0.008             -0.018           -0.003              -0.008
                                (0.023)            (0.024)          (0.018)             (0.024)
Parent Info                      -0.024             -0.040           0.033               -0.015
                                (0.022)            (0.025)          (0.020)             (0.023)
Student = Parent p -value         0.52               0.40             0.09                0.76
Observations                      7654               3751             7087                7654
R2                                0.06               0.07             0.03                0.07
Control Group Mean                0.60               0.44             0.23                0.51
Notes: Each column represents one regression, which controls for gender and includes strata fixed
effects. Standard errors adjusted for clustering at the JHS level appear in parenthesis. Outcomes
from the secondary school follow-up survey. Linear probability models. Column 1: the outcome is
an indicator if the student was attending secondary school at the time of the follow-up. Column 2:
the outcome is an indicator for whether the student reported having started secondary school in
the first 6 weeks, conditional on attending at all. Column 3: outcome is an indicator for whether
the student reported that they were attending the school to which they were assigned. Column
4: outcome is an indicator for whether they are currently attending secondary school in Ashanti.
*p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.




                                                50
                                          Table 10: Effects By Steps in the Causal Chain

                                  Family 1:          Family 2:            Family 3:     Family 4:    Family 5:          Family 6:
                                  Exposed     Info Sources&Priorities    Application     BECE       Admissions         Matriculation
                                      (1)                (2)                  (3)           (4)          (5)                 (6)
     Student Info                 1.817***           0.405***             0.092***        -0.033       0.069              -0.022
                                   (0.050)            (0.035)              (0.029)       (0.065)      (0.043)            (0.044)
     Parent Info                  1.814***           0.328***             0.109***        -0.063     0.114***             -0.021
                                   (0.053)            (0.036)              (0.030)       (0.064)      (0.037)            (0.044)
     Student = Parent p -value       0.94               0.04                 0.57          0.68         0.24                0.98
     Observations                   11483              11483                42220         42228        42228               7654
     R2                              0.54               0.04                 0.16          0.04         0.28                0.05
     Control Group Mean              0.00               0.00                -0.00          0.00        -0.00               -0.00
     Notes: Each column represents one regression on the mean effect for a family of outcomes. Family 1: whether the student




51
     reported having seen the booklet and having seen the video (the outcomes in Table 2). Family 2: whether the student reported
     getting information from a booklet; whether they did not report getting information from radio/TV/Newspaper, the internet,
     other people, or other; and whether the student prioritized information in the booklet (distance, academic quality, and admissions
     chances) and not those not in the booklet (how affect future success, teacher quality or school reputation or facilities, discipline)
     (outcomes in Tables 3 and 4). Family 3: whether the student applied to only Ashanti schools, the reverse of the mean reported
     BECE scores in their 1st, 2nd, 3rd, and 4th choice schools, the mean WASSCE pass rate and value-added at all the schools to
     which they applied (outcomes in Table 5). Family 4: whether the student took the BECE and their BECE score (outcomes in
     Table 6). Family 5: whether they were admitted to any school, admitted to any of their choices, admitted to their first choice,
     admitted to a school in Ashanti, the reverse of the admitted SHS BECE mean, the admitted secondary school value-added, the
     reverse of the assigned program BECE mean, and the assigned program value added (outcomes in Tables 7 and 8). Family 6:
     whether they are currently attending secondary school, whether they started on-time, whether they are attending the school to
     which they were admitted, and whether they are attending a secondary school in Ashanti (outcomes in Table 9). All estimates
     control for gender and strata fixed effects. Standard errors adjust for clustering at the JHS level appear in parenthesis. *p<0.1,
     **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.
9    Appendix

In the tables that follow we provide additional outcomes and tests of heterogeneity.




                                            52
                                         Table A1: Choices in Order of Difficulty or Outcomes

                                 BECE means       1-3 BECE         5th Percentile    1-3 5th Percentile   WASSCE Pass      1-3 WASSCE Pass
                                   in order      means in order    BECE in order      BECE in order        rate in order      rate in order
                                       (1)             (2)               (3)                 (4)                 (5)                (6)
     Student Info                   0.011*           0.008             0.002               0.009               -0.005             -0.010
                                    (0.006)         (0.010)           (0.005)             (0.009)             (0.006)            (0.008)
     Parent Info                     0.001           0.005             0.007               0.011               -0.006             -0.000
                                    (0.006)         (0.010)           (0.005)             (0.008)             (0.006)            (0.008)
     Student = Parent p -value        0.12            0.77              0.37                0.84                0.79               0.16




53
     Observations                    39125           37876             39173               37931               41773              40853
     R2                               0.01            0.01              0.01                0.01                0.01               0.01
     Control Group Mean               0.10            0.27              0.08                0.24                0.09               0.23
     Note: Outcomes based on CSSPS administrative records and are binary indicators for whether a candidate ranked their choices
     in order. Each column represents one regression, which controls for gender and strata fixed effects. Linear probability models.
     Standard errors adjusted for clustering at the JHS level appear in parenthesis. Columns 1 and 2: outcome equal to one if a student
     listed their choices in descending BECE mean scores as appeared in the booklet. Columns 3 and 4: outcome similar to columns
     1 and 2, but for BECE 5th percentile. Columns 5 and 6: similar to columns 1 and 2 but for WASSCE pass rate. Columns 1, 3,
     and 5: whether all choices are in order. Columns 2, 4, and 6: whether just the first three choices are in order. *p<0.1, **p<0.05,
     ***p<0.01.
                   Table A2: Salience of Potential Choices

                             Number of Choices From:         Fraction of Classmates
                                                             Who Applied to Same:
                              Top of         1st page of        1st          4th
                            Booklet Page      Booklet         choice       choice
                                 (1)              (2)           (3)          (4)
Student Info                   -0.011           0.023         -0.002       -0.013
                              (0.022)          (0.019)       (0.011)      (0.010)
Parent Info                    -0.011         0.056***        -0.001      -0.018*
                              (0.020)          (0.020)       (0.010)      (0.010)
Student = Parent p -value       0.98             0.10          0.94         0.57
Observations                   42228            42228         42228        42228
R2                              0.11             0.06          0.20         0.13
Control Group Mean              0.46             0.55          0.25         0.28
Notes: Outcomes based on CSSPS administrative records. Each column repre-
sents one regression, which controls for gender and strata fixed effects. Standard
errors adjusted for clustering at the JHS level appear in parenthesis. Column 1:
the number of choices listed that appeared on the top of a page in the booklet.
Column 2: the number of choices listed that appeared on the first page of the
booklet (first 14 Option 1 schools by alphabetical order). Column 3: the fraction
of classmates, including the reference student, who applied to the candidate's
first choice school. Column 4: the fraction of classmates, including the reference
student, who applied to the candidate's 4th choice school. *p<0.1, **p<0.05,
***p<0.01.


Table A3: Heterogenous Effects by Completing the Baseline Survey

                                   Family 3:     Family 4:        Family 5:
                                  Application     BECE           Admissions
                                       (1)           (2)              (3)
     Student Info                  0.092***        -0.098           0.069
                                    (0.034)       (0.081)          (0.057)
     Parent Info                   0.111***       -0.107*         0.127***
                                    (0.035)       (0.065)          (0.046)
     Student                         0.000          0.195           0.002
     info*Surveyed                  (0.054)       (0.119)          (0.072)
     Parent info*Surveyed            -0.008         0.132           -0.038
                                    (0.054)       (0.112)          (0.065)
     Surveyed                         0.026        -0.089           0.054
                                    (0.040)       (0.077)          (0.048)
     Student = Parent p -value       0.567          0.917           0.242
     Observations                    42220         42228            42228
     R2                              0.155          0.037           0.276
     Control Group Mean              0.084         -0.082           0.051
     Notes: Each column represents one regression on the mean effect for
     a Family of outcomes. See Table 10 for additional details on Family
     construction. Survey status assigned at the school level. Each column
     represents one regression, which controls for gender and strata fixed
     effects. Standard errors adjusted for clustering at the JHS level appear
     in parenthesis. *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.



                                       54
                                              Table A4: Heterogeneous Effects by Gender

                                  Family 1:           Family 2:           Family 3:    Family 4:     Family 5:         Family 6:
                                  Exposed      Info Sources&Priorities   Application    BECE        Admissions        Matriculation
                                      (1)                 (2)                 (3)          (4)           (5)               (6)
     Student Info                 1.876***            0.428***            0.079***       -0.008        0.084             -0.020
                                   (0.054)             (0.043)             (0.031)      (0.070)       (0.068)           (0.051)
     Parent Info                  1.856***            0.382***            0.089***       -0.060       0.139**            -0.006
                                   (0.054)             (0.042)             (0.031)      (0.068)       (0.056)           (0.051)
     Student info*Female          -0.126**              -0.049               0.030      -0.058*        -0.032            -0.004
                                   (0.049)             (0.050)             (0.033)      (0.034)       (0.070)           (0.056)




55
     Parent info*Female            -0.089*            -0.116**               0.045       -0.006        -0.055            -0.032
                                   (0.052)             (0.049)             (0.034)      (0.035)       (0.057)           (0.058)
     Female                       0.131***            0.148***              -0.022       -0.030      0.188***            -0.010
                                   (0.040)             (0.034)             (0.025)      (0.026)       (0.051)           (0.039)
     Student = Parent p -value      0.680               0.310               0.737         0.482        0.323              0.792
     Observations                   11483               11483               42220        42228         42228              7654
     R2                              0.542               0.041               0.155        0.036        0.276              0.046
     Control Group Mean             -0.004              -0.004              0.084        -0.082        0.051              0.004
     Notes: Each column represents one regression on the mean effect for a Family of outcomes and includes controls for gender and
     strata fixed effects. See Table 10 for additional details on Family construction. Standard errors adjusted for clustering at the JHS
     level appear in parenthesis. *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.
                                     Table A5: Heterogeneous Effects by Parental Education

                                  Family 1:          Family 2:            Family 3:    Family 4:     Family 5:         Family 6:
                                   Exposed    Info Sources&Priorities    Application    BECE        Admissions        Matriculation
                                       (1)               (2)                  (3)          (4)           (5)               (6)
     Student Info                  1.906***          0.404***               0.101*        0.155       0.119**            0.009
                                    (0.060)           (0.047)              (0.060)      (0.104)       (0.057)           (0.054)
     Parent Info                   1.918***          0.346***              0.137**       -0.027       0.106*             -0.029
                                    (0.055)           (0.044)              (0.057)      (0.134)       (0.059)           (0.054)
     Student                      -0.153***            0.040                -0.072       -0.088        -0.076            -0.052
     info*Post-Primary Parent       (0.056)           (0.058)              (0.058)      (0.100)       (0.052)           (0.066)




56
     Parent                       -0.153***            -0.024              -0.094*        0.121        -0.038            0.004
     info*Post-Primary Parent       (0.053)           (0.057)              (0.053)      (0.092)       (0.050)           (0.061)
     Post-Primary Parent           0.143***            -0.014                0.044       0.057          0.027           0.120**
                                    (0.041)           (0.036)              (0.039)      (0.066)       (0.036)           (0.047)
     Student = Parent p -value       0.813              0.238               0.523         0.110        0.818             0.510
     Observations                     8551              8552                10558        10560         10560              6316
     R2                               0.568             0.045               0.160         0.063         0.279            0.053
     Control Group Mean              -0.000            -0.004               0.084        -0.083         0.051            0.013
     Notes: Each column represents one regression on the mean effect for a Family of outcomes and includes controls for gender and
     strata fixed effects. See Table 10 for additional details on Family construction. Standard errors adjusted for clustering at the JHS
     level appear in parenthesis. *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.
                                         Table A6: Heterogeneous Effects by BECE Score

                                  Family 1:          Family 2:            Family 3:    Family 4:     Family 5:         Family 6:
                                  Exposed     Info Sources&Priorities    Application    BECE        Admissions        Matriculation
                                      (1)                (2)                  (3)          (4)           (5)               (6)
     Student Info                 1.822***           0.411***              0.088***      -0.000       0.078*             -0.012
                                   (0.050)            (0.035)               (0.026)     (0.000)       (0.047)           (0.041)
     Parent Info                  1.837***           0.325***              0.102***      -0.000      0.133***            -0.046
                                   (0.051)            (0.036)               (0.027)     (0.000)       (0.038)           (0.041)
     Student                        -0.048              0.033                0.019       0.000         -0.047             0.058
     info*BECE Score               (0.048)            (0.040)               (0.023)     (0.000)       (0.071)           (0.038)




57
     Parent                        -0.092*              0.020                0.034       -0.000         0.010           0.061*
     info*BECE Score               (0.051)            (0.030)               (0.022)     (0.000)       (0.047)           (0.036)
     BECE Score                     0.068*            0.041*              -0.222***    0.452***      0.178***          0.307***
                                   (0.038)            (0.022)               (0.016)     (0.000)       (0.043)           (0.026)
     Student = Parent p -value      0.758              0.022                 0.607       0.272         0.167              0.407
     Observations                   11220              11219                 41151       41159         41159              7474
     R2                              0.550             0.043                 0.191        1.000        0.320              0.136
     Control Group Mean             -0.007             -0.004                0.065       0.116         0.053              0.008
     Notes: Each column represents one regression on the mean effect for a Family of outcomes and includes controls for gender and
     strata fixed effects. See Table 10 for additional details on Family construction. Standard errors adjusted for clustering at the JHS
     level appear in parenthesis. *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.
                                 Table A7: Heterogeneous Effects by Number of Local Schools

                                      Family 1:          Family 2:            Family 3:     Family 4:    Family 5:       Family 6:
                                      Exposed     Info Sources&Priorities    Application     BECE       Admissions      Matriculation
                                          (1)                (2)                  (3)           (4)          (5)             (6)
     Student Info                     1.910***           0.443***               0.113*       0.222**        0.094           0.008
                                       (0.061)            (0.044)              (0.059)       (0.110)      (0.063)         (0.055)
     Parent Info                      1.840***           0.353***              0.136**        -0.006        0.095          -0.069
                                       (0.065)            (0.043)              (0.056)       (0.155)      (0.067)         (0.053)
     Student                          -0.007**             -0.003               -0.002      -0.009**       -0.002          -0.002
     info*Number Schools in 10km       (0.003)            (0.002)              (0.002)       (0.005)      (0.003)         (0.002)




58
     Parent                             -0.002             -0.002               -0.002         0.000        0.000           0.003
     info*Number Schools in 10km       (0.003)            (0.002)              (0.002)       (0.005)      (0.003)         (0.002)
     Number Schools in 10km             -0.005             -0.001             -0.008***     0.015***       -0.003        0.012***
                                       (0.006)            (0.003)              (0.003)       (0.006)      (0.003)         (0.003)
     Student = Parent p -value          0.161              0.050                 0.682         0.099        0.989           0.172
     Observations                       11467              11467                20541         20545        20545            7636
     R2                                  0.546              0.042                0.155         0.047        0.277           0.054
     Control Group Mean                 -0.006             -0.005                0.083        -0.084       0.050            0.008
     Notes: Each column represents one regression on the mean effect for a Family of outcomes and includes controls for gender and
     strata fixed effects. See Table 10 for additional details on Family construction. Standard errors adjusted for clustering at the JHS
     level appear in parenthesis. *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.
