                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               FLEXIBLE WAGES, BARGAINING, AND THE GENDER GAP

                                         Barbara Biasi
                                        Heather Sarsons

                                      Working Paper 27894
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27894


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2020




We thank Jaime Arellano-Bover, Marianne Bertrand, Judy Chevalier, Nicole Fortin, Rob Jensen,
Matt Notowidigdo, Jessica Pan, Ben Polak, Fiona Scott Morton, and seminar and conference
participants at the 2020 ASSA Meetings, Yale, McGill, the Online Economics of Education
Seminar, the Online Economics of Discrimination Seminar, and the NBER Summer Institute
(Personnel) for useful comments. Rohan Angadi, Calvin Jahnke, Nidhaan Jain, Kate Kushner,
and Hayden Parsley and provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Barbara Biasi and Heather Sarsons. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Flexible Wages, Bargaining, and the Gender Gap
Barbara Biasi and Heather Sarsons
NBER Working Paper No. 27894
October 2020
JEL No. J01,J08,J16,J5

                                          ABSTRACT

Does flexible pay increase the gender wage gap? To answer this question we analyze the wages
of public-school teachers in Wisconsin, where a 2011 reform allowed school districts to set
teachers' pay more flexibly and engage in individual negotiations. Using quasi-exogenous
variation in the timing of the introduction of flexible pay driven by the expiration of pre-existing
collective-bargaining agreements, we show that flexible pay increased the gender pay gap among
teachers with the same credentials. This gap is larger for younger teachers and absent for teachers
working under a female principal or superintendent. Survey evidence suggests that the gap is
partly driven by women not engaging in negotiations over pay, especially when the counterpart is
a man. This gap is not driven by gender differences in job mobility, ability, or a higher demand
for male teachers. We conclude that environmental factors are an important determinant of the
gender wage gap in contexts where workers are required to negotiate.


Barbara Biasi
Yale School of Management
165 Whitney Avenue
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
barbara.biasi@yale.edu

Heather Sarsons
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
heather.sarsons@chicagobooth.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27894
1       Introduction

Women are often believed to be reluctant to negotiate for higher pay. This could give a work-

place advantage to men and exacerbate gender gaps in pay (Sandberg, 2013).1 A body of evi-

dence from laboratory settings generally supports this hypothesis, finding that women avoid sit-

uations in which they have to negotiate or bargain (Babcock and Laschever, 2003; Dittrich et al.,

2014; Exley et al., 2019). Whether the differences found in the lab translate to non-experimental

settings, however, has been difficult to study because workers can sort into jobs based on whether

negotiating is required.2 Yet, as individually based compensation becomes more prevalent even

in labor markets traditionally characterized by rigid pay schemes (such as the public sector), un-

derstanding whether flexible pay disadvantages women is important to close the gender wage

gap.

        In this paper we use the passage of Wisconsin's Act 10, a state bill which dramatically re-

defined the rules of collective bargaining for public sector employees, to test whether and how

individual pay negotiations affect the gender wage gap. We focus our analysis on public school

teachers, a class of workers whose pay before Act 10 was strictly based on seniority and aca-

demic credentials, using rigid schedules that school districts negotiated with the teachers' union.

After Act 10, unions lost the authority to bargain over these schedules. Instead, upon the expi-

ration of pre-existing collective bargaining agreements (CBAs), districts became free to adjust

teacher pay on an individual basis without union consent. Following the reform, some districts

adopted a flexible pay scheme, with salaries set differently for each teacher ("flexible-pay" dis-

tricts; Biasi, 2020).3 Others instead chose to keep a seniority-based pay schedule ("seniority-pay"

districts).

        Using variation in the timing of expiration of CBAs pre-dating Act 10, driven by long-

standing differences in districts' negotiation calendars, we estimate the effect of the introduc-

tion of flexible pay on the difference in salaries between observationally similar male and fe-
    1
      The "Lean In" movement advocated for women to promote themselves in the workplace and ask for promotions
and pay raises.
    2
      For example, Card et al. (2015) find that women are underrepresented in firms with a high bargaining surplus.
Studying US real estate transactions, Goldsmith-Pinkham and Shue (2020) find that women pay more for housing
properties and sell them for less than men. Using data from Denmark, Andersen et al. (2020) confirm that a gender
gap in real estate negotiation outcomes exists; however, they find it is due to differences in the types of property
men and women demand. In this paper, we are able to overcome some of the obstacles of measuring gender differ-
ences in negotiations by holding constant the employer-employee match (Wisconsin public schools) and testing for
differences in outside options.
    3
      Biasi (2020) shows that pay dispersion increased in flexible-pay districts among teachers with the same seniority
and credentials.




                                                          1
male teachers. While no gender pay gap existed before Act 10, the introduction of flexible pay

led to a 0.1 standard deviations decline in women's salaries relative to their male counterparts.

Although small (one percent) in absolute terms, this gap corresponds to 1.5 times the pre-Act 10

increase in pay associated with one additional year of seniority and 10 percent of the increase

associated with obtaining a Master's degree. The gap is also twice the post-Act 10 difference in

pay associated with a one-standard deviation higher value-added (Biasi, 2020).

   Our estimates of the gender wage gap are robust to controlling for teacher characteristics,

teaching assignment (school, grade, and subject), as well as district and time effects. In addition,

they are robust to accounting for changes in the composition of the teaching body across districts

(driven, for example, by the early retirement documented by Biasi, 2019) and for endogenous

assignment to the treatment (driven by teachers moving across districts to contrast the effects

of flexible pay). Perhaps surprisingly, the gap is present both in districts that explicitly adopt

flexible pay and in those that maintain a seniority-based schedule; in seniority-pay districts,

the gap is largely driven by male teachers being placed on higher steps of the salary schedule

compared to similar women.

   We also find that aggregate estimates of the gender wage gap mask substantial heterogeneity

across teachers, schools, and districts. First, flexible pay appears to penalize young and inexpe-

rienced teachers the most. While the gap is 0.7 percent for teachers with seniority in the top

quartile of the distribution, it is larger at 1.5 percent and more persistent over time for teachers

with seniority in the bottom quartile. Similarly, the gap is smaller for older teachers and larger

for younger ones. These estimates imply that, if the gap persisted over time, women would lose

an entire year's pay over the course of a 35-year career relative to men.

   Second, the gender wage gap is related to the gender composition of schools' and districts'

leadership. In schools with a male principal the gap is 0.4 percent, whereas it is zero in schools

with a female principal. Similarly, the gap is 0.6 percent in districts with a male superinten-

dent and zero in districts with a female superintendent. These findings are in line with recent

evidence on the link between the gender composition of management and women's careers

(Casarico and Lattanzio, 2019; Langan, 2019; Cullen and Perez-Truglia, 2020).

   The emergence of a gender wage gap following the introduction of flexible pay and its as-

sociation with the gender of the leadership suggests that gender differences in either teachers'

willingness to bargain or in their bargaining ability could be driving part of the observed pay

gap. To test this mechanism directly, we ran a survey with all current public school teachers in



                                                 2
Wisconsin. We asked respondents whether they have ever negotiated their pay or plan on doing

so in the future. We then asked teachers who opted out of bargaining why they chose to do so;

to those who did bargain, we asked whether the negotiation was successful. We also collected

information on teachers' knowledge about their colleagues' salaries (to measure beliefs on the

returns to bargaining) and measures of socio-emotional skills as proxies for their bargaining

ability. The survey allows us to test whether women avoid bargaining (in some contexts more

than others) or whether they bargain at the same rate as men, but obtain a lower payoff or are

punished when doing so.

   Survey responses indicate that women are between 12 and 23 percent less likely than men to

have negotiated their pay at various points in their careers and 13 percent less likely to antici-

pate negotiating in the future. These estimates suggest that the observed gender differences in

the likelihood of bargaining might be an important determinant of the gender wage gap. The

magnitude of the estimates is significant: An 8 percentage points difference in the likelihood of

negotiating, combined with an aggregate wage gap of one percent, suggests that differences in

bargaining could lead to a wage gap as large as 12 percent.

   Our findings also outline an important role for the bargaining environment on teachers' de-

cision to negotiate and, ultimately, on the gender wage gap. In line with our earlier results,

we find that gender differences in negotiating behavior are entirely driven by men being more

likely to bargain under a male superintendents, whereas men and women who work under a

female superintendent are equally likely to negotiate their salaries. Furthermore, women are 31

percent more likely than men to report that they do not feel comfortable negotiating their pay.

This in turn suggests that creating an environment in which all teachers feel comfortable dis-

cussing their pay could potentially close a significant part of the observed gender gap. Instead,

differences in the perceived returns to bargaining or a lower bargaining ability do not explain

our findings.

   One limitation of our setting is the inability to link survey answers to administrative records.

This prevents us from exactly estimating the portion of the post-Act 10 wage gap generated by

differences in bargaining. To make progress we test for a range of other possible determinants of

the gap. First, we study whether the gap is explained by gender differences in teaching quality. If

districts use their acquired flexibility to compensate teachers with higher value-added, a gender

gap in pay could arise if women are less effective than men at teaching. The data does not

support this hypothesis: Women have a slightly higher value-added both before and after Act



                                                3
10, and controlling for value-added leaves the estimate for the gender pay gap unchanged.4

Furthermore, the returns to having a high value-added become positive after the introduction

of flexible pay for men, but not for women. This suggests that women are not rewarded for their

teaching ability at the same rate as men are.

       A second explanation relates to differences in job mobility and the returns to moving.5 If

women are less likely than men to move or are more constrained in their location choice, they

might be unable to increase their pay by moving to a different school or district. They might also

garner fewer outside offers, which would lower their bargaining power in wage negotiations.

We find that, after the introduction of flexible pay, women are slightly less likely to move than

men across (but not within) commuting zones. Since movements are rare events, these differ-

ences play only a small role in explaining the total wage gap caused by flexible pay; the gap is

still large at 0.9 percent when restricting the sample to teachers who never move. To explore

whether the (unobserved) number of job offers might play a role in explaining the wage gap,

we proxy job offers with the number of schools in a teacher's commuting zone and find that

the wage gap is largest in areas with more schools. This suggests that men might be able to

use outside job offers to bid up their salary at their current school. Again, we believe that this

finding points to bargaining as a primary channel driving the observed gender wage gap.

       Finally, the gap could be driven by a higher demand for male teachers. To explore this

possibility we identify two instances in which this demand should be higher: (i) schools where

men are scarcer and (ii) schools enrolling a higher share of male students (where men could serve

as role models for boys). In fact, the gap is smaller in schools where men are scarcer. The gap is

larger among schools with a very high fraction of male students, but this share explains a very

small portion of the overall gap. While only suggestive, these findings contrast the hypothesis

that a higher demand for male teachers is a significant determinant for the gender wage gap.6

       Taken together, our results indicate that while flexible pay could be beneficial to incentivize

workers to exert more effort, it can be detrimental for the outcomes of some subgroups of the

workforce. Workplace environmental factors (rather than gender differences in bargaining abil-
   4
     This is in contrast with evidence from three performance pay programs for teachers in North Carolina (Hill and
Jones, 2020). There, female teachers' value-added declines with the introduction of performance pay, while men's
remains relatively flat. We do not find evidence of this and argue that this does not appear to drive the gender pay
gap in our setting.
   5
     Biasi (2020) shows that the introduction of flexible pay after Act 10 was followed by an increase in cross-district
movements, associated with an increase in pay.
   6
     It is possible that schools with a higher fraction of male teachers before Act 10 are those with higher demand
for male teachers after Act 10 and pay higher salaries to men to attract them. Yet, this higher demand would have
to be correlated with the gender of principals and superintendents to explain the observed gap across schools and
districts.


                                                           4
ity) are likely explanations for the observed disparities in negotiating outcomes between men

and women, even in a female-dominated occupation like public-school teaching. Our findings

also highlight how institutions, such as unions, can play a role in closing the gender wage gap.

   Our paper contributes to several literatures on gender inequality in the labor force. A mainly

experimental literature has shown that women are less likely than men to negotiate (Babcock

and Laschever, 2003; Leibbrandt and List, 2014; Dittrich et al., 2014). Similarly, evidence from

the tech industry, where workers are required to post an "ask" salary at the beginning of the em-

ployment relationship, indicates that women systematically ask for lower pay than men (Rous-

sille, 2020). These findings have given credence to the idea that women should bargain more.

One notable exception is Exley et al. (2019), who find a gender bargaining gap but also show

that women select into bargaining when the returns from doing so are positive. This implies

that forcing women to bargain can perpetuate, rather than close, gender gaps in pay. Our paper

confirms these findings by showing that a gap emerges when workers are required to negotiate

their pay, and it sheds light on the mechanisms at play.

   In addition, we contribute to a growing body of evidence on the impact of the gender compo-

sition of firms' leadership on women's career outcomes, which has so far found mixed results.

While studies of the effects of gender quotas for firm boards generally do not find any posi-

tive impact for women in other parts of the organization (Bertrand et al., 2019; Maida and We-

ber, 2019), other works have unveiled a positive impact of having a female non-board manager

on women's careers (Sato and Ando, 2017; Casarico and Lattanzio, 2019; Bhide, 2019; Langan,

2019). An advantage of our context is that we are able to look at different types of school leaders

who carry on different functions: School principals are responsible for evaluating and manag-

ing teachers, whereas district superintendents are involved in the negotiations and ultimately

decide over teachers' pay. We find that women lose the most when they negotiate with male

leaders, a result that points to female representation in leadership as a way to combat gender

inequality in the workplace (Matsa and Miller, 2011; Athey et al., 2000; Langan, 2019).

   Our paper also relates to the literature on the effects of changes in pay schemes on work-

ers' outcomes. Most of this literature (especially the one on teachers) has studied the effects of

various forms of performance pay on employees' selection and incentives (for example Lazear,

2000a,b; Bandiera et al., 2005; Neal et al., 2011). We focus instead on the gender wage gap as

a possibly unintended consequence of a new pay scheme, designed to allow employers to pay

higher salaries to more productive workers, which also rewards behaviors and actions (such as



                                                5
negotiating) that men and women might be differentially more likely to engage in.

    Lastly, our results speak to the literature on unionization and the gender pay gap.7 Existing

studies have explored the relationship between unionization and gender inequality in wages.

Comparing the US with other OECD countries, Blau and Kahn (1992, 1996) find that a lower

unionization rate explains why the US has a larger gender wage gap relative to other countries.

However, these works are generally unable to fully control for worker sorting and productivity

and lack a proper control group, which prevents them from establishing causal links.8 Following

teachers over several years allows us to account for sorting and differences in teacher ability and

to estimate a precise and negative impact of de-unionization on the gender gap in this setting.

    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the history of teacher

pay in Wisconsin and how Act 10 affected teacher salary rules. We describe the data used in

our analysis in section 3 and show the our main findings on the gender wage gap in section 4.

Section 5 describes our survey and its results. We explore alternative mechanisms for the gender

wage gap in section 6. Section 7 concludes.



2    Institutional Background: Teacher Pay and Act 10

Salaries of US public school teachers are generally determined using a salary schedule, which

specifies the pay of each employee based on their seniority and academic credentials. A schedule

is designed as a matrix: Increases in pay arise from movements along its rows or "steps," which

correspond to increases in seniority, and columns or "lanes," which correspond to obtaining

credentials such as Master's degree or a PhD.

    In states where teachers are authorized to collectively bargain with school districts, these

schedules are negotiated between each district and the teachers' union. CBAs typically do not

allow for individual pay adjustments; this implies that seniority and credentials (along with

"overtime" or extra-curricular activities, for example coaching a sports team) are the only deter-

minants of salaries and pay is not directly related to teacher effectiveness (Podgursky, 2006).
   7
     A large literature has documented a negative relationship between unionization and income inequality in the US
(Card, 1996; Dinardo et al., 1996; Farber et al., 2018). Fortin and Lemieux (1997) argue that deunionization impacted
pay inequality among men but that the minimum wage was more important for women's pay. See also Card et al.
(2020) for a comparison of Canada and the U.S.
   8
     Controlling for variables like sorting is especially important given the recent work by Farber et al. (2018) that
shows that sorting into unionized jobs has varied substantially over time. In this paper, we make use of the fact that
Act 10 was relatively unanticipated to look at the impact on individuals who have already sorted into teaching. In
addition, we can track individuals who leave teaching following Act 10.




                                                          6
2.1      Wisconsin's Act 10

Until 2011, salaries of all Wisconsin teachers were determined using a schedule, which districts

negotiated with the union.9 These schedules were a key part of the CBAs and were listed in

each district's employee handbook, a document that describes rights and duties of all district

employees.

       The rules disciplining teacher pay dramatically changed on June 29, 2011. In an attempt

to close a projected $3.6 billion budget deficit, the state legislature passed the Wisconsin Budget

Repair Bill, which became known as Act 10. The bill introduced a series of changes to the powers

and duties of all public sector unions, including teachers' unions. First and most importantly,

the Act limits the scope of collective bargaining: While before Act 10 unions could negotiate the

entire salary schedule, after the Act negotiations must be limited to base salaries. Second, Act 10

requires unions to recertify every year by obtaining the absolute majority of all members' votes.

Third, it limits the validity of newly stipulated CBAs to one year. Lastly, it prohibits automatic

collection of union dues from employees' paychecks.10

       The Act also contained a number of budget-cutting rules for public school districts. It re-

quired them to stop paying the employees' share of retirement contributions (amounting to 5.8

each employee's annual salaries) and to reduce health insurance premiums by increasing em-

ployees' contributions and by choosing cheaper plans. An amendment to Act 10 (Act 32 of July

2011) also reduced state aid to school districts and decreased their revenue limit.11


Implications For Teacher Pay             With the end of collective bargaining school districts became

free to set teachers' pay more flexibly. While until 2011 pay depended exclusively on seniority

and academic credentials, after Act 10 districts could reward teachers for other attributes with-

out union consent. Districts used this flexibility in a variety of ways ways: As of 2015, approxi-

mately half of all districts were still setting pay using a schedule exclusively based on experience

and education, whereas the remaining half had discontinued the use of such a schedule (Biasi,

2020).12 Even within these two groups the specific pay schemes adopted by the districts varied,
   9
      In 1959, Wisconsin became the first state to introduce CB for public sector employees (Moe, 2013). Since then,
teachers' unions have gained considerable power and have been involved in negotiations with school districts over
key aspects of a teaching job.
   10
      Union membership dropped by nearly 50 percent in Wisconsin in the 5 years after the passage of Act 10. See D.
Belkin and K. Maher, Wisconsin Unions See Ranks Drop Ahead of Recall Vote, The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved from
https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052702304821304577436462413999718.
   11
      Revenue limits are the maximum level of revenues a district can raise through state aid and local property taxes.
   12
      As a result of these changes, flexible-pay districts started paying high-quality, young teachers more and reduced
the growth in pay for some high-seniority teachers (Biasi, 2020).



                                                          7
with some districts linking pay to principal or peer evaluations and others seeking to attract or

retain employees by negotiating raises and bonuses with each individual teacher. Regardless

of how districts set up pay after Act 10, teachers in all districts could negotiate their salaries to

some degree; even in seniority-pay districts, some teachers were able to increase their pay by

negotiating for a higher place on the salary schedule (Kimball et al., 2016). In sum, individual

wage negotiations became the common denominator among districts' post-Act 10 pay schemes.


Differences In The Timing of The Introduction of Flexible Pay            The provisions of Act 10

had immediate effect on all school districts starting from the school year 2011-2012. Existing

CBAs stipulated between unions and school districts before 2011, however, remained binding

until their expiration. Since pre-Act 10 CBAs fully regulated teacher pay with a salary schedule,

however, districts could begin to use their freedom to flexibly set teacher pay only after the

expiration of these CBAs. In addition, after Act 10 some districts decided to unilaterally extend

the validity of their CBAs by one or two additional years (we discuss these instances in more

detail in Section 3).

    Due to differences in electoral cycles, the expiration dates of pre-existing CBAs and their

extensions varied across districts. Figure I summarizes these cross-district differences. While

76 percent of districts' CBAs expired in 2011 and were not extended, 18 percent expired in or

were extended until 2012 (including the school district of Madison) and an additional 7 per-

cent expired in or were extended until 2013 (including the school district of Milwaukee). Thus,

approximately half of all teachers were covered by districts with CBAs that expired or were

extended after 2011. Cross-district differences in expiration and extension dates introduce plau-

sibly random variation in the timing of the introduction of flexible pay across districts, which

we use in our empirical analysis.



3   Data

Our main data set includes individual-level information on the universe of Wisconsin public-

school employees. We combine these data with hand-collected information on the school dis-

tricts, including the expiration dates of their CBAs and their post-Act 10 salary regimes. We

also link teacher records with students' demographic characteristics and test scores in Math and

Reading, which we use to calculate teacher value-added. Data are reported by school year and

referenced using the calendar year of the spring semester (e.g. 2007 for 2006-07).


                                                 8
Personnel Data        We draw information on the population of Wisconsin teachers, district su-

perintendents, and school principals from the PI-1202 Fall Staff Report - All Staff Files of the

Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction (WDPI) for the years 2006-2016. These files con-

tain individual-level records of all individuals employed by the WDPI in each year and include

personal and demographic information, highest level of education, years of teaching experi-

ence in Wisconsin, and characteristics of job assignments (school identifiers, grades and subject

taught, and full-time equivalency (FTE) units). The data set also includes total salaries for each

worker.13 We restrict our teacher sample to non-substitute teachers and assign those employed

in multiple districts and schools in a given year to the district-school with the highest FTE.14 We

express salaries in FTE units, so that the salary of each teacher corresponds to a full-time position

regardless of her actual hours. The characteristics of male and female teachers are summarized

in Table I, separately for the years preceding and following Act 10.


Pre-Act 10 CBAs We collected information on districts' CBAs from multiple sources, includ-

ing districts' union contracts set to expire around 2011, local newspaper articles, and minutes

of school board meetings. Newspaper articles reported on the negotiations taking place and

offered enough information to discern when the CBA was slated to expire. Several articles also

mentioned that the uncertainty surrounding Act 10 influenced many districts to extend their

CBA for one or two years. School board meeting minutes describe whether the contract was

set to expire in 2011, whether an extension was granted, and for how long. When possible, we

prioritize data from union contracts, complementing it with the other two sources when un-

available. We were able to successfully find information on the expiration and extension dates

for 211 out of 428 school districts, enrolling 78 percent of all teachers. For the remaining 217 dis-

tricts with missing information, we assume the that the CBA expired in 2011 and no extension

was granted; our main results are robust to the exclusion of these districts.


Employee Handbooks and Salary Schedules                       To better understand how districts used their

flexibility in setting teacher pay after the expirations of their CBAs, we gathered information

on post-Act 10 pay schemes from employee handbooks, available on districts' websites for 224
  13
     Salary figures include pay for extra duties (such as serving in committees or acting as sports coaches), which we
do not observe in the WDPI staff data. We address this limitation in Section 4.7.
  14
     We exclude long- and short-term substitute teachers, teaching assistants and other support staff, and contracted
employees since salaries for these workers are calculated differently from those of permanent teachers. We were
notified by the WDPI of mistakes in salary reporting for teachers in the district of Kenosha for all years and for in
Milwaukee for 2015. We therefore discard these data.




                                                          9
out of 428 districts for the year 2015 (in total, these districts enroll 83 percent of all students).15

Following Biasi (2020), we classify a district as "seniority-pay" if its 2015 handbook contains a

salary schedule and does not mention rewards for performance or merit, and as "flexible-pay"

otherwise. If a handbook contains a schedule but mentions bonuses linked to performance, we

classify the district as flexible-pay.


Student Test Scores and Demographic Information Test scores data are available for for all

students in grades 3 to 8 and for the years 2006-2017, and include math and reading scores

from the Wisconsin Knowledge and Concepts Examination (WKCE, 2007-2014) and the Badger

test (2015-2016), together with demographic information including gender, race and ethnicity,

socio-economic (SES) status, migration status, English-learner status, and disability.16


3.1     Value-Added

We measure teachers' quality using value-added (VA), an estimate of a teacher's contribution to

the growth in achievement. We follow the canonical VA model of Kane and Staiger (2008):


                             Akt = Xkt + kt , where kt = µi(kt) + c(kt) + "kt                                       (1)


and where Akt is a standardized measure of test scores for student k in year t, Xkt is a vector

of student and school-specific controls, i(kt) denotes student k 's teacher in t, and c(kt) is a

classroom shock.17 Teacher VA is the estimate of µi(kt) , the teacher-specific component of test

score residuals.

      VA is usually estimated using datasets that contain classroom identifiers, in which teachers

can be linked to the students they taught. Until 2017, the WDPI did not record classroom iden-

tifiers. This implies that we cannot link a teacher to the actual students she taught, but only to

those in her school and grade. To estimate VA in the presence of this data limitation we use

the same measure as Biasi (2020), a modified version of the empirical Bayes estimator of Kane
   15
      Unclassified districts (i.e., those for which handbooks are not available) either do not have a website or do not
make their handbook public. Biasi (2020) shows that districts without a handbook are smaller, enroll more disadvan-
taged students, pay lower salaries, and are disproportionately located in rural areas.
   16
      The WKCE was administered in November of each school year, whereas the Badger test was administered in the
spring. For this reason, for the years 2007-2014 we assign each student a score equal to the average of the standardized
scores for the current and the following year.
   17
      The vector Xkt includes the following: school and grade-by-year fixed effects; cubic polynomials of past scores
interacted with grade fixed effects; cubic polynomials of grade average past scores, interacted with grade fixed ef-
fects; student k's demographic characteristics (gender, race and ethnicity, disability, English-language earner status,
and socioeconomic status); grade average demographic characteristics; and the student's socioeconomic status inter-
acted with the share of low-socioeconomic status students in her grade and school in t.



                                                          10
and Staiger (2008) adapted to reflect the structure of the data. This measure exploits teacher

turnover across grades and schools (rather than classrooms) over time.18 With multiple years

of data, turnover permits the identification of a single teacher's effect by comparing test score

residuals ¯gst of a grade g in school s and year t before and after her arrival in that grade and

school. Importantly, turnover helps identify not only the effect of a teacher who switches, but

also that of the teachers in her same grade and school at any point in time.19

         We allow a teacher's VA to differ before and after Act 10, to account for changes in effort in

response to the reform, and we standardize it to have mean zero and variance equal to one. VA

estimates are available for 23,581 teachers of Math and Reading in grades 4 to 8.



4        The Effect of Flexible Pay On The Gender Wage Gap

We begin our analysis studying the impact of flexible pay on the gender gap in teachers' salaries.

We then look at heterogeneity in the gap based on teachers' age and seniority, districts' salary

structures, and the gender composition of schools' and districts' leadership.


4.1        Empirical Strategy

To identify the effects of flexible pay on the differences in salaries between men and women we

take advantage of the fact that, following Act 10, districts were only allowed to use flexible pay

after the expiration of existing CBAs.

         The timing of these expirations varied across districts (Figure I), reflecting long-standing

misalignments in the negotiation calendars. For example, while most districts typically negoti-

ated agreements bi-yearly on odd years, the school district of Janesville negotiated contracts in

March 2008 and September 2010.20 Off-calendar districts (i.e., those with expiration dates after

2011) include both large, urban districts like Milwaukee and Madison, and smaller, suburban or

rural districts like Clintonville and South Milwaukee. On average, these districts are more likely

to be located in suburban areas and serve a larger share of Black students (Table II, columns 1-3);

the latter difference, however, is largely driven by the Milwaukee Public Schools district.

         After the CBAs expired, 100 school districts (23 percent) decided to extend the validity of
    18
      Rivkin et al. (2005), who face a similar challenge using data from Texas, also use teacher turnover to identify the
variance of teacher effects.
   19
      The Online Appendix of Biasi (2020) presents this estimator in details and shows that, although noisier than the
canonical estimator, the measure of teacher effectiveness it generates explains a substantial portion of the variance in
test scores and is a forecast-unbiased estimator of standard VA estimates and future student achievement.
   20
      See https://www.schoolinfosystem.org and https://www.tmcnet.com.



                                                           11
their agreements by one or two years, primarily to gain more time to design the new pay

schemes. While the timing of expiration of the CBAs can be considered as good as random,

the enactment of an extension was a deliberate choice of each district. Districts with an exten-

sion are larger, have lower revenues, and are more likely to be located in urban and suburban

areas (Table II, columns 4-6).

       In our analysis we make use of variation in the timing of the introduction of flexible pay

driven by the expiration of both the CBAs and their extensions. Although only the former

can be considered random, our strategy still allows us to estimate the effects of flexible pay

on the gender wage gap if the reasons that induced school districts to opt for an extension are

not directly related to the differences in salaries between men and women. Nevertheless, our

estimates are robust to ignoring the variation driven by the extension, as well as using the timing

of CBA expirations as an instrument for CBA extensions.


4.2      Evolution of Salaries for Men and Women Over Time

Before Act 10, teacher salaries were determined by attributes such as experience, academic cre-

dentials, and teaching assignment (i.e., grade and subject) and followed a strict pay schedule.21

Following the expiration of CBAs, districts acquired the freedom to pay different salaries to

teachers with the same experience, credentials, and teaching assignment. To understand the

implications of flexible pay for the gender wage gap, we start by studying the change in salaries

of observationally identical men and women after the expiration of CBAs or their extensions.22

We employ the following event study design:


                 0           0                           0           0
ln(wit ) =       1 Xit   +   2 Xit    postextj (it)t +   1 Tit   +   2 Tit    postextj (it)t + j (it)                   (2)
                                                                                       5
                                                                                       X
               +j (it)  postextj (it)t + t + t  Yjexp         ext
                                                  (it) + t  Yj (it) +
                                                                                             g g
                                                                                             s G i 1( t   Yjext
                                                                                                            (it) = s) + "it
                                                                                      s= 4


where ln(wit ) is the natural logarithm of the salary of teacher i working in district j (it) in year

t. The vector Xit contains indicators for teacher i's highest education degree and for years of

experience. Alone and interacted with an indicator for the years following a CBA expiration

or extension (postextjt ), these fixed effects allow us to account for compositional changes in
  21
      On average, women earned 0.9 percent less than men prior to Act 10 (Appendix Table AI, column 1). Accounting
for experience, credentials, and teaching assignment completely eliminates this difference (column 5).
   22
      Panel A of Appendix Figure AI shows the evolution of raw nominal salaries of male and female teachers between
2007 and 2016. Salaries of men and women are similar and increase at a steady rate until 2011. After Act 10, the
growth in salaries stops abruptly, and especially so for women. A similar pattern emerges if we plot raw salaries by
time-to-expiration of a CBA, instead of by year (Panel B).


                                                           12
the sample of teachers over time that could affect salaries. The vector Tit contains indicators

for i's grade level (elementary, middle, and high school) and subject (Math, Reading, English,

and Science); alone and interacted with postextjt , they allow us to account for the possibility

that districts used their flexibility to raise pay for teachers in certain subjects or grades. The

vector j contains district fixed effects, allowing us to account for district-specific components

of salaries that are fixed in the periods before (j ) and after a CBA expiration or extension (j 

postextjt ). Year fixed effects t , alone and interacted with expiration and extension year fixed

effects Yjexp and Yjext , control for time-specific factors that are common to all districts whose

CBAs and extensions expired in the same year. The variable Gg
                                                            i is a gender indicator (where

g denotes the gender), and it is interacted with indicators for years since the expiration of a
                                                                         g
CBA or its extension. In this equation, the coefficient                  s   gives the relative change in salaries of

people of gender g , conditional on all the other determinants of salaries, in a window around

the expiration of a CBA.
                     g
      Estimates of   s   are shown in Figure II, separately for men and women. In the years leading

to a CBA expiration the conditional salaries of men and women were on similar, flat trends.

Five years after the expiration, however, women's salaries had fallen by 0.3 percent relative

to the year prior to the expiration, whereas men's salaries had increased by 0.7 percent (both

estimates are significant at the 1 percent level). The pattern is similar when we only use CBA

expirations and ignore the extensions (Appendix Figure AII). While small in an absolute sense,

these changes are significant when compared with the limited variation in conditional salaries

among Wisconsin public school teachers prior to Act 10. In particular, a 0.7 percent increase

in salaries for men corresponds to 7 percent of a standard deviation of pre-Act 10 conditional

salaries and 6 percent of a standard deviation of post-Act 10 salaries, and it is equivalent to the

pre-Act 10 salary increase associated with an additional year of seniority.


4.3     The Gender Gap in Salaries

The differential trends in the salaries of men and women following the expiration of districts'

CBAs gave rise to a gender gap in pay. We quantify this gap with an event study of the form:


                0            0                           0           0
ln(wit ) =      1 Xit    +   2 Xit    postextj (it)t +   1 Tit   +   2 Tit    postextj (it)t + j (it)                         (3)
                                                                                          5
                                                                                          X
              +j (it)  postextj (it)t + t + t            Yjexp
                                                           (it)   + t        Yjext
                                                                               (it)   +          s Fi    1( t   Yjext
                                                                                                                  (it) = s) + "it
                                                                                          s= 4




                                                           13
where all variables are defined as before and the variable Fi equals one if the teacher is female.

In this equation, estimates of the coefficients      s   give the differential impact of flexible pay on the

salaries of women relative to men.

      Estimates of   s,   shown in Figure III, indicate that a significant gender pay gap appeared right

after the introduction of flexible pay. Two years after the expiration of a CBA or its extension,

women earned 0.4 percent less than men with equivalent years of experience and qualifications;

this gap widened over time time, reaching one percent five years after the expiration. This

estimate implies that women earned $540 per year less than men. While small in percentage

terms, this gap corresponds to 10 percent of a standard deviation of conditional salaries prior

to Act 10 (equal to $5,302), and to 57 percent of the overall increase in the standard deviation of

salaries that followed Act 10 (equal to $670).

      These results are summarized in Table III, where we re-estimate equation (3) pooling to-

gether the years before and after a CBA expiration. These estimates indicate that, prior to the

introduction of flexible pay, women and men earned similar salaries conditional on observables.

In the five years following the expiration of a CBA or its extension, however, salaries of women

became 0.3 percentage points lower than salaries of men (Table III, column 1, significant at 5

percent). Allowing the post-expiration gap to vary for each of the years following an exten-

sion indicates that the gap was largest five years after the expiration, at 0.8 percent (column 2).

The gap is robust to only using the variation from CBA expirations, to ignoring the extensions

(columns 3 and 4), and to instrumenting the dates of CBA extensions with the dates of CBA

expiration (columns 5 and 6).


4.4     The Gender Wage Gap Across Districts With Different Pay Schemes

While all districts became free to negotiate pay with individual teachers after the passage of

Act 10, some districts chose to continue to set pay using a schedule based on seniority and

academic credentials. If the use of a schedule prevents districts from using discretion in setting

teacher pay, we should not see any gender wage gaps in these seniority-pay districts. We test this

hypothesis in Appendix Figure AIII, which shows estimates of the coefficients in equation (3)

obtained separately for flexible-pay and seniority-pay districts. In contrast with the hypothesis,

the gender wage gap is similar in flexible-pay and in seniority-pay districts. The former see a

0.6 percent increase in the gap five years after a CBA extension (significant at 1 percent), while

the latter experience a 1.2 percent increase (the difference in these two estimates, however, is not


                                                         14
statistically different from zero, as shown in column 3 of Table IV).23

       What explains the rise of a gender wage gap in districts that continued to use a salary sched-

ule? Before Act 10, unions were fully involved in the negotiations on the schedules and guaran-

teed that no individual-level adjustments could take place. Act 10 prevented union involvement

in wage setting; even in seniority-pay districts, after the reform teachers could bargain for higher

wages through a placement on a higher "step" or "lane" of the salary schedule. If this is what

explains the gender wage gap for seniority-pay districts that emerges in Appendix Figure AIII,

we would observe the salary returns to (actual) seniority and education to be higher for men

compared with women after a CBA expiration. In line with this hypothesis, Appendix Figure

AIV shows that while in the years prior to an expiration men and women with the same experi-

ence earned the same, after Act 10 and the expiration of CBA extensions women in seniority-pay

districts earn less than men at almost all levels of experience.

       Next, we test whether the gap that arose in seniority-pay districts can be explained by men

obtaining a higher placement on the salary schedule compared with observationally similar

women. We do so by allowing for the returns to experience to differ between men and women

after Act 10, which boils down to estimating experience- and education-specific gender gaps.24

The results of this test are shown in the bottom panel of Appendix Figure AIII; for exposition, we

plot the gender gap for teachers with 3 or 4 years of experience and a Master's degree. Allowing

for gender-specific returns to experience and education completely closes the gender gap in

seniority-pay districts. In flexible-pay districts, however, the gap remains large at 1.2 percent

five years after an extension.25 This confirms that, even in seniority pay-districts, negotiations

play an important role in determining a teacher's pay in the aftermath of Act 10.


4.5      Differences by Age and Seniority

Existing works have shown that the gender wage gap tends to grow over time, arguably due

to child-bearing and family obligations which lead women to decrease their worked hours (see

Zeltzer, 2020, for a study of physicians). Unlike other jobs, teaching has fairly standard hours

and is thought to be a "family friendly" occupation since its work hours coincide with children's
  23
      In columns 1-3 of Table IV we re-estimate equation (3) pooling together years before and after a CBA extension,
separately for flexible-pay and seniority-pay districts. This exercise reveals an increase in the gender wage gap equal
to 0.3 percent in flexible-pay districts and 0.6 in seniority-pay districts; the difference in these two estimates, however,
is not statistically different from zero (column 3).
   24
      To do this we augment equation (3) to include fixed effects for the years of experience and for having a master's
or higher degree, interacted with an indicator for female and an indicator for years following a CBA expiration or
extension.
   25
       Columns 4-6 of Table IV summarize these findings.


                                                            15
school hours. Thus, findings from other occupations might not hold for public-school teachers.

Nevertheless, aggregate estimates of the gender wage gap might mask substantial heterogeneity

by age and seniority, if older or more experienced teachers have better negotiating skills.26

       We investigate this possibility in Figure IV, which shows estimates of                  s   in equation (3)

obtained separately for teachers with six or fewer years and more than 21 years of seniority

(the bottom and top quartiles of the seniority distribution, Panel A), and for those aged 32 and

younger and 51 and older (the bottom and top quartiles of the age distribution, Panel B). The

gender wage gap is larger and more persistent for less experienced teachers, and equal to 1.5 per-

cent five years after the expiration of a CBA or its extension (significant at 1 percent). For more

experienced teachers, the gap is smaller at 0.7 percent (significant at 1 percent). These estimates

correspond to 12 and 8 percent of the pre-Act 10 standard deviation in salaries, respectively. The

gender pay gap is also larger and more persistent among younger teachers compared with older

ones.

       These results suggest that young women might be more likely to opt out of bargaining or to

have lower returns to bargaining, possibly because they have a lower bargaining ability or there

is less information about them that can be used in the negotiations. A possible explanation for

the larger gender wage gap for younger teachers is that women in childbearing age might be

more likely to work fewer hours or be on maternity leave. However, all our estimates account

for FTE units by distinguishing between part-time and full-time teachers.27 In Section 4.7 we

also show that our estimates hold when we restrict the sample to teachers observed at least four

years before and after a CBA expiration, which implies that we exclude women who are on

maternity leave in a given year. It is thus unlikely that the results are driven by differences in

hours worked or maternity leave.


4.6      The Role of School and District Leadership

Studies of other workplaces have found a positive correlation between the presence of female

management and women's career outcomes (Casarico and Lattanzio, 2019; Langan, 2019). In

fact, Cullen and Perez-Truglia (2020) also show that women's career trajectories are slower com-

pared with men's when workers have a male manager. To explore whether the gender compo-
  26
      Gayle and Golan (2012) suggest that a weaker labor market attachment among women could account for the
gender earnings gap at early ages. We show later, however, that our results remain even when we restrict our sample
to teachers who never quit in our study period.
   27
      Since hours are set in K-12 teaching, all full-time teachers work the same number of hours. Part-time teachers
work 50 percent of a FTE.



                                                        16
sition of schools' and districts' leadership influences women's success in our context, we test

whether the gender wage gap is related to the gender of school principals and district superin-

tendents. Principals and superintendents serve distinct roles in the public school system. Super-

intendents are district administrators in charge of hiring all staff, and they ultimately decide on

employees' pay. Principals manage individual schools, have closer interactions with the teach-

ers relative to superintendents, and are responsible for assessing teachers through a combination

of objective and subjective evaluations (Kimball et al., 2016; Biasi, 2020).


Principals We first test whether the existence of a salary gap after Act 10 is correlated with

a school principal's gender. Panel A of Figure V shows results from estimating equation (3)

separately for teachers with male and female principals in the years preceding Act 10.28 The

change in the gender pay gap is larger in schools with a male principal, and equal to 0.7 percent

five years after the expiration (solid line, significant at 1 percent). In schools with a female

principal, the change in the gap is more contained and indistinguishable from zero (dashed line).

These results are summarized in columns 1-3 of Table V, and indicate that teachers in schools

with a male superintendent prior to a CBA expiration have a 0.4 percentage points larger gap

(significant at 10 percent). Because principals are largely responsible for evaluating teachers and

less involved in salary negotiations, a possible explanation for this result is that male principals

evaluate women more negatively than men.


Superintendents Next, we re-estimate equation (3) separately for teachers in districts with

male and female superintendents in the years before a CBA expiration. The estimates reveal

a larger gender gap for teachers in districts with a male superintendent (Figure V, Panel B).

Specifically, in districts managed by a man the gap is more than 0.8 percent larger five years after

a CBA expiration compared with before (solid line). In districts with a female superintendent,

on the other hand, the change in the gap is indistinguishable from zero (Figure V, dashed line).

These results are summarized in columns 4-6 of Table V, and indicate that teachers in districts

with male superintendents prior to a CBA expiration experience a 0.6 percentage point larger

gap (significant at 5 percent).

    This finding suggests that women are not just on average worse at bargaining than their

male counterparts; rather, the gender of the other negotiating party matters. In particular, the
  28
     We use the preceding years to estimate an ITT to avoid the possible endogenous moving of principals after Act
10. However, the results are robust to using principals in the current year.




                                                       17
fact that no salary gap exists when the superintendent is female suggests that women are either

better able to negotiate with other women (or men are worse at negotiating with women), or that

they experience backlash when they try to negotiate with men. We explore these possibilities in

Section 5.

       It is also possible that schools headed by female principals or districts headed by female

superintendents are different along a host of characteristics. If some of these are related to the

gender pay gap, they could be driving the observed relationship between the gap and the gender

of school and district leaders. In Figure V we control for observable teacher characteristics, such

as experience, credentials, grade, and subject, which implies that these estimates are not affected

by differences in workforce composition among schools and districts led by women relative to

men. Appendix Table AIII also shows that there are no differences in teacher quality or attrition

based on the gender of school leadership.


4.7      Additional Robustness Checks

Accounting for Compositional Changes Following Act 10, retirement rates spiked among

Wisconsin teachers (Biasi, 2019; Roth, 2017). To ensure that our results are not driven by changes

in the overall composition of the male and female teaching body across districts with different

CBA expiration dates, we conduct two additional checks.

       First, we restrict our analysis to a balanced panel of teachers in the eight years surrounding

each expiration. This allows us to only use, in estimation, teachers who do not retire nor leave

the sample.29 This restriction yields an estimate of the gender wage gap equal to 0.4 percent

(Appendix Table AII, column 1, significant at 1 percent). Second, we re-estimate equation (3)

controlling for teacher fixed effects. The corresponding estimate is robust at 0.4 percent (Ap-

pendix Table AII, column 2, significant at 1 percent).


Accounting for Endogenous Switches Across Districts Biasi (2020) shows that the passage of

Act 10 was followed by an increase in teacher movements across districts. If these movements

are driven (entirely or partly) by teachers' responses to the rise of a gender wage gap driven by

flexible pay, the assignment of teachers to the policy change would be endogenous. To gauge the

impact of endogenous assignment on our main estimates, we estimate the intent-to-treat (ITT)

by assigning teachers to the district they taught in the year prior to the passage of Act 10. A

teacher is then considered exposed to flexible pay the year their original district's CBA expires,
  29
       Results are unchanged (although noisier due to a much smaller sample size) if we use the full ten years.


                                                           18
regardless of whether they have moved from that district.30 ITT estimates, shown in column 3

of Appendix Table AII, are slightly larger than in our main specifications in Table III and equal

to 0.6 percent, suggesting that cross-district movements ­if anything­ lessen the impact of Act

10 on the gender wage gap. We study the role of teacher mobility for the gender wage gap in

Section 6.2.


Allowing for Different Salary Schedules Across Districts                  Next, we allow for the possibility

that the gender wage gap that followed the expiration of districts' CBAs reflected changes in the

salary schedules used by districts after Act 10. We do so by allowing the parameters                    1   and   2

in equation (3) to be district-specific. These results, shown in column 4 of Appendix Table AII,

indicate that a gender gap remains (and becomes larger at 0.7 percent) even when controlling

for district-specific schedules.


Controlling for Extra Duties         If flexible pay is associated with a higher compensation for extra

duties (such as coaching a sports team) and men are more likely to take on these duties, our esti-

mates of the gender wage gap might be affected by our inability to fully observe (and control for)

these duties. To partially account for this data limitation, we collected information on the names

of all sports coaches in Wisconsin schools as of 2017 from the Wisconsin Interscholastic Athletic

Association and linked this information to our teacher data.31 This allows us to control for one of

the most common and gender-skewed extra duties (only 34 percent of women serve as coaches

in our data). Our estimates of the gap are unchanged when we exclude coaches or control for an

interaction between indicators for coaches and for years after an expiration (Appendix Figure

AVII). This indicates that extra duties are unlikely to explain the gender differences in pay that

followed Act 10.



5        Avoiding Bargaining or Being Punished? A Survey

We have shown that a salary gap emerged between male and female Wisconsin teachers follow-

ing the introduction of flexible pay. The gap is concentrated among young and less experienced

teachers and in districts and schools with male principals and superintendents. This suggests
    30
      This strategy is similar to Yagan (2019), who estimates the effects of local unemployment rates on employment
during the Great Recession (2007-2009) assigning rates to workers based on workers' location in January 2007.
   31
      This information is available at https://www.wiaawi.org. We were able to link information on 5,170 coaches,
82 percent of whom teach in middle or high school. Since we observe this information only for 2017, we assume a
teacher was a coach for our entire study period if she was a coach in 2017.




                                                        19
that gender differences in bargaining might play an important a role in driving this gap. Ad-

ministrative staff and salary data, however, do not allow us to test directly whether women

chose not to bargain following Act 10 (and if so, why) or whether they bargained but were less

successful or penalized for doing so. Distinguishing between these explanations is crucial for

policy. For example, if women chose not to bargain because they underestimated the returns to

doing so, providing them with information on these returns could close part or all of the gender

pay gap.32 Alternatively, if women were less successful at bargaining because they tend to have

worse negotiating skills than men, a solution could be to provide them with the appropriate

training (Ashraf et al., 2020).

       To discern among these possible hypotheses we surveyed current Wisconsin public school

teachers. We asked teachers whether they had ever bargained their salary in their current and

past position and about their intention to bargain over pay and other aspects of their job in the

future. We asked the teachers who reported negotiating their salaries whether the negotiation

was successful. We asked the teachers who did not report negotiating their salaries why they

did not do so. To measure beliefs on the returns to bargaining, we also asked respondents

whether they have information on their colleagues' salaries and whether they know someone

who has negotiated their pay. Finally, we used questions from social psychology to create a

measure of negotiating skills and we measure teachers' confidence by asking them to rate their

own performance. Answers to these questions allow us to study the mechanisms underlying

the salary gap.


Survey Details and Sample Description                   The survey questionnaire is in Appendix B. We sent

an invitation to fill in the survey (shown in Appendix Figure BI) via email to 39,081 teachers em-

ployed in the 276 Wisconsin districts which make teachers' emails available on their websites.33

A total of 3,156 teachers responded to our survey, with a response rate of 13 percent. The gen-

der and age distributions of the respondents closely resemble those of the teacher population

(Appendix Figures AVIII and AIX).34
  32
      Roussille (2020) shows that while women in tech ask for a much lower initial salary compared with men, they
raise their bid when informed about the median salary for their position.
   33
      These include 212 districts with CBA or extension expiration dates in 2011, 43 in 2012, 20 in 2013, and one in 2014,
as well as 62 flexible-pay and 78 seniority-pay districts. We did not explicitly ask teachers to disclose their school
district; we obtained this information by sending out different surveys to teachers in different districts. The survey
was sent out on March 5, 2020; two reminder emails were sent in the following 14 days to the teachers who had not
responded. The survey was closed on May 7th, 2020.
   34
      Differences in the district characteristics for districts that had a respondent and those that did not are reported in
Appendix Table AIV.




                                                            20
5.1     Gender Differences in Negotiation Experiences and Attitudes

Table VI summarizes men and women's responses to the the survey questions. The main result

is that women are less likely to have negotiated their pay with previous and current employers.

For example, 37.9 percent of men and 29.5 percent of women report having negotiated with past

employers (a 21 percent difference). Women are also 8.3 percentage points less likely to have

negotiated at the start of their current job (a 27 percent difference, with 30.6 percent of men and

22.3 percent of women) and 4.0 percentage points less likely to have negotiated after the start of

their current job (16 percent).

      If a teacher reported having negotiated, we asked whether the negotiation was successful.

Conditional on having negotiated, women are 10.5 percentage points less likely than men to

state that the negotiation with the current employer at the start of the relationship was successful

(or 13 percent). If instead they did not negotiate, we asked for the reasons behind this choice.

Two answers stand out: Women are more likely than men to state that they were not comfortable

negotiating (with a gender difference of 10.5 percentage points or 83 percent), that they thought

it would be useless (2.2 percentage points or 35 percent), or that they were already satisfied with

their pay (3.6 percentage points or 24 percent).

      Most of our questions concern negotiations over salaries. It is possible, however, that women

are more inclined to negotiate other job aspects beyond pay. To explore this possibility we asked

teachers about the likelihood that they will negotiate salaries, classroom assignment, and non-

teaching duties in the future. The data confirm that gender differences in bargaining dispropor-

tionately affect wage negotiations. While women are 19 percent less likely to report that they

will negotiate their pay, they are only 5 percent less likely to plan on negotiating non-teaching

duties and slightly more likely to plan on negotiating their classroom assignment.

      We also collected information on other individual-level determinants of the likelihood to

negotiate, such as perceived returns to bargaining, bargaining ability, and self-confidence. In our

data women are 29 percent less likely than men to know their colleagues' salaries and 14 percent

less likely to know someone who negotiated their pay. This could lead women to underestimate

the returns to bargaining.35 No gender differences exist in measures of socio-emotional skills,

such as the ability to assess how people feel and to read subtle signals in other people's behavior,

which we use as proxy for bargaining ability (Sharma et al., 2013).36 Women are, however, 13
   35
      In our survey less than one-third of all teachers state that they know their colleagues' pay. This is in spite of the
fact that this information is publicly available on the WDPI's website (available at https://dpi.wi.gov).
   36
      These skills are drawn from the literature on individual differences in negotiating and negotiating outcomes. For


                                                            21
percent less likely to state that they are confident talking to people they don't know. Lastly,

women in our data tend to value themselves less than their male colleagues, and they are 12

percent less likely than men to report that their performance is above average.37


Controlling for Teachers' and Districts' Attributes A simple comparison of men's and women's

answers indicates that women are less likely than men to negotiate their pay. We now test

whether these differences remain once we control for teachers' and districts' observable char-

acteristics. Specifically, we control for district fixed effects to account for potential differences

in the negotiating environment across districts. We also control for a set of teachers' attributes

such as age, knowledge of colleagues' salaries, and measures of socio-emotional skills, to gauge

the extent to which the observed gaps in the propensity to negotiate is explained by teachers'

bargaining ability, confidence, or their expected returns to negotiating.38

      Table VII presents our main results. Panel A confirms that, even controlling for district fixed

effects and teacher attributes, women are 6.8 percentage points less likely to having negotiated

pay with their previous employer (column 1, 18 percent) and 7.1 percentage points less likely to

have negotiated at the start of their tenure with their current employer (column 2, 23 percent).

There is no significant difference between men and women's likelihood of negotiating after the

start of their tenure with their current employer.

      We also find that, among teachers who have negotiated in the past, the likelihood of success

is lower for women than for men. Controlling for district fixed effects and teacher attributes,

women are 8 percentage points less likely to report that salary negotiations with their current

employer at the start of the relationship were successful (9 percent, Table VII, panel B, column

3).

      In Panel C we test for gender differences in the reasons for the choice of not negotiating at

the beginning of their current employment relationship.39 Controlling for district effects and

teacher attributes, we find that women are 6.5 percentage points (31 percent) more likely than

men to say that they were not comfortable negotiating (column 2), but 4 percentage points less

likely to state that they are satisfied with their pay (column 5). Women are also slightly more

likely than men to claim that they thought negotiating was useless (2.4 percentage points or 11
an overview, see Sharma et al. (2013).
   37
      This finding is in line with Exley and Kessler (2019), who show that women are less likely to self-promote them-
selves in professional contexts, in part because they underestimate their performance.
   38
      Estimates obtained controlling for district fixed effects, but not for teacher attributes, are shown in Appendix
Table AV.
   39
      The results are similar if we instead look at reasons for not negotiating with a past employer.



                                                         22
percent, column 3), although this difference is not statistically different from zero.

       Lastly, in Panel D we explore the likelihood that women will negotiate in the future. Our

estimates confirm that women are 12 percent less likely than men to plan on negotiating their

pay in the future (with an estimate for Female equal to -0.475, column 1, significant at 1 percent).

Women are also slightly more likely to negotiate their teaching assignment (column 2) and as

likely as men to negotiate other non-teaching duties (column 3). These results indicate that the

reluctance of women to bargain is limited to negotiations over pay.


5.2      The Role of Superintendents' Gender

In Section 4.6 we have shown that the gender wage gap is larger among teachers who work un-

der a male principal or superintendent. We now investigate whether the propensity to negotiate

is related to the gender of the district's management.40 We find that the observed gender differ-

ences in bargaining are largely driven by teachers working under a male superintendent. Simple

comparisons of means indicate that women are 19 percent less likely to negotiate their pay in

the future under a male superintendent, but as likely as men to do so where the superintendent

is a woman (Table VI). Controlling for district and teacher attributes confirms that women who

work under a female superintendent are 8.3 percentage points more likely to have negotiated

with their current employer after the start of the employment relationship, relative to men and

women with a male superintendent (35 percent, Table VIII, column 2) and 7.5 percentage points

more likely to state that they will negotiate their pay in the future (column 3).

       Instead, we do not find evidence that women are more likely to report that their negotiations

were successful when negotiating with a female superintendent (Panel B). We also do not find

any association between the gender of the superintendent and the reasons teachers give for not

negotiating (Panel C). It should be noted, however, that the coefficients for Female  Female super

in these tables are estimated imprecisely, which prevents us from ruling out large positive or

negative values for the point estimates.


Additional Results        In Appendix Table AVI we also investigate whether individual attributes

(such as knowing the salaries of colleagues, measures of self-confidence, and socio-emotional

skills) mediate the gender gap in the propensity to negotiate. While we find that knowing other

people's pay and socio-emotional skills are positively (albeit imprecisely) related to the like-
  40
    We assign superintendents' genders to districts using information from 2016. To ensure confidentiality, we did
not collect information on respondents' schools. This prevents us from investigating the role of the gender of school
principals.


                                                         23
lihood of negotiating, we do not find strong evidence that this relationship varies by gender:

Estimates for the interaction coefficients in Appendix Table AVI (columns 1-3) are small and

statistically insignificant. We also investigate the role of these attributes on the likelihood of

reporting that past negotiations were successful and of stating not to feel comfortable negotiat-

ing (columns 4 and 5). Here, we find that measures of socio-emotional skills and self-confidence

(measured as the likelihood of claiming above-average performance) are associated with a lower

likelihood that women report feeling uncomfortable negotiating. Taken together, these results

do not show evidence that individual attributes related to beliefs on the returns to bargaining,

confidence, and bargaining ability have a large impact on the gender gap in the propensity to

negotiate. One caveat to this conclusion, however, is that these attributes could affect female

teachers' confidence in negotiating, which we are unable to observe.


5.3     Survey Results: Summing Up

The results from our survey indicate that women are less likely than men to have negotiated

their pay in the past and to plan on doing so in the future. This behavior cannot be explained

by a lower bargaining ability or different perceived returns to negotiating. Even if women who

negotiate are less likely than men to report that the negotiation was successful, the gender dif-

ference in the propensity to negotiate remains even when controlling for socio-emotional skills

as a proxy for bargaining ability. Similarly, the gap in the likelihood to negotiate does not ap-

pear to be driven by whether teachers know their colleagues' salaries or other people who have

negotiated their pay.

      Our results suggest that the bargaining environment might have an important role in deter-

mining whether teachers choose to negotiate or not. First, we find that women are significantly

more likely than men to report that they chose not to negotiate because they felt uncomfortable

doing so. Second, the gender gap in the likelihood of negotiating pay in the future is entirely

driven by teachers working under a male superintendent; male and female teachers who work

under a female superintendent are equally likely to negotiate.

      While our inability to link our survey answers to administrative records prevents us from

exactly estimating the portion of the post-Act 10 gender wage gap generated by the different

propensity to negotiate across genders, the results from the survey suggest that women's reluc-

tance to bargain, particularly with male superintendents, is likely an important driver of these

salary differences. Creating an environment in which all teachers feel comfortable discussing


                                                24
their pay could potentially close a significant part of the gender wage gap.



6     Alternative Explanations for the Gender Wage Gap

                                                                     ` vis other explanations
To obtain a better understanding of the importance of bargaining vis a

for the gender wage gap, we test here for three alternative mechanisms: 1) gender differences in

teaching quality, 2) differences in mobility, and 3) differences in the demand for male and female

teachers.


6.1     Gender Differences in Teaching Quality

A possible explanation for the observed wage gap is that districts used their post-Act 10 flexi-

bility to reward teachers for their quality, and men are better teachers than women. A simple

comparison of VA between men and women does not support this hypothesis: Women's aver-

age VA is equal to zero both before and after Act 10, whereas men's VA is equal to -0.002 before

Act 10 and -0.001 afterwards. The gender difference in VA is significant at 1 and 10 percent

before and after Act 10, respectively (Table I).

      Even if women appear to be better teachers on average, it is still possible that some men

have higher quality and are compensated more after the introduction of flexible pay. We check

for this possibility by testing whether the gender wage gap can be explained by differences in

VA across teachers. We do so by augmenting equation (3) to flexibly control for VA, and we

estimate:


                  0           0                           0            0                            0
    ln(wit ) =    1 Xit   +   2 Xit    postextj (it)t +   3V   Ait +   4V   Ait  postextj (it)t +   1 Tit   (4)
                   0
                 + 2 Tit  postextj (it)t + j (it) + j (it)  postextj (it)t + t + t  Yjexp         ext
                                                                                      (it) + t  Yj (it)

                 + 0 F emalei + F emalei  postextj (it)t + "it


where V Ait is the VA of teacher i in year t.

      Estimates of this equation are shown in Table IX. Because VA measures are available only for

teachers who teach Math and Reading in grades 4-8, we first re-estimate(3) on this subsample.

The results, shown in column 1, show that the post-extension gender wage gap remains robust at

0.4 percent, although we lose power due to the smaller sample size. Column 2 shows estimates

of equation (4). The gender wage gap remains stable at 0.4 percent controlling for VA. A positive

estimate on VA * Post Expiration (albeit imprecisely estimated) also confirms that districts pay


                                                          25
teachers with higher VA more (column 2, p-value equal to 0.27). In line with Biasi (2020), the

same result holds (and the estimate of the coefficient is larger) on the subsample of flexible-pay

districts (column 5).

       In columns 3, 6, and 9 Table IX we further explore whether the post-Act 10 returns to VA

are different among men and women by interacting VA * Post Expiration with a female teacher

dummy. The coefficient on this triple interaction captures the differential returns to VA for

women relative to men after the reform. At -0.078, the estimate for this coefficient completely

offsets the positive estimate for VA * Post Expiration, equal to 0.068 (column 3, significant at 5 and

10 percent respectively; the sum of VA * Post Expiration and VA * Female * Post Expiration is indis-

tinguishable from zero). Together, these estimates indicate that while men are compensated for

having a high VA, women are not. Importantly, however, in these equations the estimates for Fe-

male * Post Expiration are unchanged; this implies that even women with average VA experience

a wage penalty compared to men with the same VA.


Movements Between Tested and Non-Tested Positions In Section 4.7 we have shown that our

main results are not driven by compositional changes in the pool of male and female teachers

over time. In the same spirit we also test whether our findings on the role of VA are driven

by changes in the composition of teachers in "tested" positions (for whom VA measures can

be obtained). The data show that neither the likelihood of changing teaching assignment (i.e.,

grade, subject, or school) nor that of switching from a tested to a non-tested position differed

between men and women after a CBA expiration relative to before (Appendix Figure AXII). This

indicates that compositional changes are unlikely to explain our VA results.


       Taken together, these results suggest that differences in teaching quality do not explain the

gender wage gap that followed the introduction of flexible pay. It is of course possible that VA is

not the measure of quality that school and district leaders want to reward. Even this possibility,

however, would not explain why we observe a larger gap in schools and districts run by men.


6.2      Gender Differences in Job Mobility

Gender differences in cross-district mobility could influence the gap in several ways. First, fe-

male teachers might be less likely to relocate than men. In this case, they would not be able to

take advantage of higher salaries offered in other districts.41 Second, if employers know that
  41
    Research has shown that women have a lower willingness-to-commute than men, possibly because of family
obligations (LeBarbanchon et al., 2020; Caldwell and Danieli, 2018; Manning, 2003). A similar argument can be


                                                     26
women are unlikely to move, women may receive fewer outside offers which would decrease

their bargaining power in negotiations with their current district or with any prospective em-

ployer (Caldwell and Danieli, 2018).

    To check whether differences in job mobility explain the gender pay gap, we start by testing

whether women are less likely to move than men before and after the introduction of flexible

pay. A simple plot of the share of male and female teachers who change district in each year,

by time-to-expiration of each district's CBA, indicates that women are only slightly less likely

to move throughout the period of analysis (Appendix Figure AX). To more rigorously test for

differences in mobility, we estimate


 M ovesit =     1 F emalei   +   2 postextj (it)t   +   3 F emalei    postextj (it) + Xit + j (it) + t + "it (5)


where M ovesit is a dummy indicating that teacher i moved to a different school district in year t.

In column 1 of Table X we estimate this equation without teacher controls (Xit ) and fixed effects

(j (it) , and t ). The estimate for Female  post-CBA extension is equal to 0.2 percent; compared

with an average moving rate of 2.4 percent for men, this indicates that women are 9 percent less

likely than men to change district after the introduction of flexible pay. Estimates remain robust

when we control for district and year fixed effects (column 2) and for teachers' observables, such

as experience and education (column 3).42 In column 4 we redefine our dependent variable

to only capture movements across districts located in the same commuting zone (CZ), which

are less likely to require a relocation. A small and insignificant estimate of Female  post-CBA

extension does not show any gender differences in this type of mobility. We also do not find

strong evidence of gender differences in propensity to move when splitting our sample by (i)

the type of district of origin or destination (flexible-pay or seniority-pay), or (ii) teacher VA

(Appendix Table AVII). Taken together, these results indicate that women are slightly less likely

than men to move under flexible pay, but only if the move involves changing CZ.

    To test whether these small differences in mobility rates contribute to the gender wage gap,

we estimate event studies of the gender wage gap around a CBA expiration separately for three

groups of teachers: (i) those who never move, (ii) those who move at least once between 2007

and 2016, and (iii) those who move at least once after a CBA expiration. The results are shown in
applied when thinking about moving. Using survey data from a set of European countries, Hospido (2009) finds
no gender differences in moving rates. Although they find no differences in moving rates across gender, Keith and
McWilliams (1999) show that women are less likely to quit or change jobs for family reasons.
  42
     The district fixed effect is the district the teacher is currently working in.



                                                          27
Panel A of Figure VI. The gap is largest for teachers who move post-expiration (1.4 percent five

years after an expiration), which is not what we would expect if women who move are those

who are able to take advantage of higher salaries elsewhere. The gap is also still significant at

0.9 percent for teachers who never move. These results suggest that observed mobility plays at

most a small role in explaining the gender gap.43

       It is still possible, however, that unobserved mobility plays a role and that men receive more

outside offers than women because they can more credibly threaten to move. Our data does not

allow us to observe outside offers that teachers do not accept. To make progress, we test whether

the salary gap is larger in CZs with more schools, where a teacher should in principle have more

options. We estimate equation 2 separately for teachers in CZs in the top and bottom quartile of

the distribution of the number of schools. These results, shown in Panel B of Figure VI, indicate

that the salary gap is larger for teachers living in CZs with a large number of schools, suggesting

that outside options may play a role in determining men and women's bargaining power. We

interpret these results as being in support of our main hypothesis that differences in bargaining

influence the gender wage gap once flexible pay is adopted. Differences in mobility could be an

additional driver of differences in bargaining outcomes.


6.3      Higher Demand for Male Teachers

Men are underrepresented in the teaching profession, especially in elementary schools. A high

demand for male teachers could have bid up their salaries once Act 10 allowed for individual

negotiations. If this explanation holds, we would expect the gender wage gap to be larger in

schools or districts with a higher demand for men. Since we are unable to observe the demand

for male and female teachers, we conjecture two instances in which the demand for men could

be higher and test whether the gender wage gap is larger in these cases.

       The first instance are schools enrolling a higher share of boys. If male teachers act as role

models for male students, these schools should have a higher demand for men and a larger gap.

Our data confirm this hypothesis: The gap is significantly larger at 2.3 percent in schools with

54 percent or more male students (the top 5 percent of the distribution) compared with those

with 48 percent or fewer males (the bottom 5 percent, Appendix Figure AXV).44 Because the
  43
      In Appendix Figure AXI we also test whether the returns to moving differ for men and women who actually
move. Specifically, we estimate an event study of conditional salaries around each move, separately for men and
women who move at least once, and focusing on moves that happen after a CBA expiration in the destination district.
The estimates indicate that the returns from moving are larger for men: Immediately following a move, salaries of
men increase by 4.2 percent whereas salaries of women only increase by 2.8 percent.
  44
     This result holds and the difference becomes more pronounced using schools in the top and bottom 1 percent of


                                                        28
variation in the share of male students is rather limited, however, controlling for this variable

leaves our main estimate of the gender wage gap unchanged at one percent five years after a

CBA expiration (Appendix Figure AXVI).

    The second instance consists in schools and grades where men are scarcer, such as elemen-

tary schools (where men are only 20 percent of the teacher population, compared with 40 percent

for middle and high schools). In contrast with the hypothesis, the gap is significantly smaller

for teachers in elementary schools (0.4 percent after five years) compared with those in high

schools (1.1 percent after five years, Appendix Figure AXIII). The gap is also smaller in districts

with a share of men in the top quartile of the distribution, relative to the bottom three quartiles

(Appendix Figure AXIV).45

    These results provide suggestive evidence that the demand for male teachers is unlikely to

be driving the pay gap. It is however possible that this demand is not evenly distributed across

schools and it is higher among those with an already larger share of male teachers before Act 10.

A larger salary gap in schools with more men could also indicate that men are more successful

than women at bargaining and able to secure a larger share of school resources, or that being in

an environment with more men affects women's willingness or ability to bargain.



7    Conclusion

Bargaining has been discussed as one of the reasons for the gender wage gap. This paper uses

data from a large public-sector employer, the Wisconsin public school system, to shed light on

this debate. Wisconsin's Act 10 replaced the traditional bargaining system in which teacher

unions bargain with the school district with a system that involves individual bargaining be-

tween teachers and school districts. The staggered timing of the introduction of the bill's provi-

sions allows us to quantify the impact of flexible pay on the gender wage gap as teachers became

"forced" to bargain over their salaries.

    In line with previous experimental work, we find that women lose relative to men when

they are required to bargain. When school districts adopted flexible pay, a gap emerged in the

salaries of men and women. The gap is largest among new, inexperienced teachers, and among
the distribution of the share of male students. Thirty-nine percent of schools with more than 54 percent male students
are high schools.
   45
      Appendix Figure AXIV shows an event study of the gender wage gap for schools where the share of male
teachers was above and below 30 percent pre-Act 10. These estimates indicate that the gap is large at 1.1 percent
five years after a CBA expiration in schools where more than 30 percent of teachers are men (solid line), and it is
indistinguishable from zero for teachers in schools with less than 30 percent male teachers (dashed line).



                                                         29
teachers working in schools or districts run by men. These results suggest that bargaining might

play an important role in shaping the gender wage gap.

   Responses to a survey administered to all Wisconsin teachers confirm this hypothesis. Women

are less likely to have negotiated their salary or to expect to do so in the future, especially if they

work in a district with a male superintendent. Survey responses further suggests that women

chose not to negotiate because they felt uncomfortable doing so, rather than because they un-

derestimate the returns to it or are worse at bargaining. We also explore possible alternative

explanations to the gap, unrelated to bargaining. The gap is not explained by gender differences

in teacher ability or job mobility, and is unlikely to be driven by a higher demand for men in

certain schools.

   Taken together, our results support the hypothesis that forcing women to bargain could per-

petuate the wage gap. We also bring causal evidence to questions on unionization and wage

inequality, corroborating earlier work showing that unionization is negatively correlated with

the gender wage gap (Blau and Kahn, 1996).

   Our results call for further exploration into policies that might prove successful in reducing

the gender wage gap when flexible pay is adopted. The evaluation of policies that train women

to negotiate, that have women negotiate with other women, or that improve salary transparency

(Baker et al., 2019) or transparency regarding salary gaps represent important topics for further

research.



References

Andersen, S., J. Marx, K. M. Nielsen, and L. Vesterlund (2020). Gender differences in negotiation:

  Evidence from real estate transactions. Technical report, NBER working paper n. 27318.

Ashraf, N., N. Bau, C. Low, and K. McGinn (2020). Negotiating a better future: How interper-

  sonal skills facilitate intergenerational investment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 135(2),

  1095­1151.

Athey, S., C. Avery, and P. Zemsky (2000). Mentoring and diversity. American Economic Re-

  view 90(4), 765­786.

Babcock, L. and S. Laschever (2003). Women don't ask: negotation and the gender divide. Princeton

  University Press.


                                                  30
Baker, M., Y. Halberstam, K. Kroft, A. Mas, and D. Messacar (2019). Pay transparency and the

  gender gap. NBER Working Paper No. 25834.

Bandiera, O., I. Barankay, and I. Rasul (2005). Social preferences and the response to incentives:

  Evidence from personnel data. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(3), 917­962.

Bertrand, M., S. E. Black, S. Jensen, and A. Lleras-Muney (2019). Breaking the glass ceiling? the

  effect of board quotas on female labour market outcomes in norway. The Review of Economic

  Studies 86(1), 191­239.

Bhide, A. (2019). Do female executives reduce gender gaps?

Biasi, B. (2019). Higher salaries or higher pensions? inferring preferences from teachers' retire-

  ment behavior.

Biasi, B. (2020). The labor market for teachers under different pay schemes. American Economic

  Journal: Economic Policy (forthcoming).

Blau, F. D. and L. M. Kahn (1992). The gender earnings gap: Learning from international com-

  parisons. The American Economic Review 82(2), 533­538.

Blau, F. D. and L. M. Kahn (1996). Wage structure and gender earnings differentials: An inter-

  national comparison. Economica 63(250), S29­S62.

Caldwell, S. and O. Danieli (2018). Outside options in the labor market. Technical report, Work-

  ing paper.

Card, D. (1996, July). The effects of unions on the structure of wages: A longitudinal analysis.

  Econometrica 64(4), 957­979.

Card, D., A. R. Cardoso, and P. Kline (2015). Bargaining, sorting, and the gender wage gap:

  Quantifying the impact of firms on the relative pay of women. The Quarterly Journal of Eco-

  nomics 131(2), 633­686.

Card, D., T. Lemieux, and W. C. Riddell (2020). Unions and wage inequality: The roles of gender,

  skill and public sector employment. Canadian Journal of Economics 53(1), 140­173.

Casarico, A. and S. Lattanzio (2019). What firms do: Gender inequality in linked employer-

  employee data.



                                               31
Cullen, Z. and R. Perez-Truglia (2020). The old boys' club: Schmoozing and the gender gap.

  NBER Working Paper 26530.

Dinardo, J., N. Fortin, and T. Lemieux (1996). Labor market institutions and the distribution of

  wages, 1973-1992: A semiparametric approach. Econometrica 64(5), 1001­1044.

Dittrich, M., A. Knabe, and K. Leipold (2014). Gender differences in experimental wage negoti-

  ations. Economic Inquiry 52(2), 862­873.

Exley, C. L. and J. B. Kessler (2019). The gender gap in self-promotion. Technical report, National

  Bureau of Economic Research.

Exley, C. L., M. Niederle, and L. Vesterlund (2019). Knowing when to ask: The cost of leaning

  in. Journal of Political Economy.

Farber, H., D. Herbst, I. Kuziemko, and S. Naidu (2018). Unions and inequality over the twenti-

  eth century: New evidence from survey data. NBER Working Paper 24587.

Fortin, N. M. and T. Lemieux (1997, May). Institutional changes and rising wage inequality: Is

  there a linkage? Journal of Economic Perspectives 11(2), 75­96.

Gayle, G.-L. and L. Golan (2012). Estimating a dynamic adverse-selection model: Labour-force

  experience and the changing gender earnings gap 1968­1997. The Review of Economic Stud-

  ies 79(1), 227­267.

Goldsmith-Pinkham, P. and K. Shue (2020). The gender gap in housing returns. Technical report,

  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hill, A. and D. B. Jones (2020). The impacts of performance pay on teacher effectiveness and

  retention: Does teacher gender matter? Journal of Human Resources 55(1), 349­385.

Hospido, L. (2009). Gender differences in wage growth and job mobility of young workers in

  spain. investigaciones econ´
                             omicas 33(1), 5­36.

Kane, T. J. and D. O. Staiger (2008). Estimating teacher impacts on student achievement: An

  experimental evaluation. Technical report, NBER working paper n. 14607.

Keith, K. and A. McWilliams (1999). The returns to mobility and job search by gender. ILR

  Review 52(3), 460­477.



                                                   32
Kimball, S. M., H. G. Heneman III, R. Worth, J. Arrigoni, and D. Marlin (2016). Teacher compen-

  sation: Standard practices and changes in wisconsin. wcer working paper no. 2016-5. Wiscon-

  sin Center for Education Research.

Langan, A. (2019). Female managers and gender disparities: The case of academic department

  chairs. Technical report.

Lazear, E. P. (2000a). Performance pay and productivity. American Economic Review, 1346­1361.

Lazear, E. P. (2000b). The power of incentives. American Economic Review 90(2), 410­414.

LeBarbanchon, T., R. Rathelot, and A. Roulet (2020). Gender differences in job search: Trading

  off commute against wage. Working Paper.

Leibbrandt, A. and J. A. List (2014). Do women avoid salary negotiations? evidence from a

  large-scale natural field experiment. Management Science 61(9), 2016­2024.

Maida, A. and A. Weber (2019). Female leadership and gender gap within firms: Evidence from

  an italian board reform.

Manning, A. (2003). The real thin theory: monopsony in modern labour markets. Labour Eco-

  nomics 10, 105­131.

Matsa, D. A. and A. R. Miller (2011). Chipping away at the glass ceiling: Gender spillovers in

  corporate leadership. American Economic Review 101(3), 635­639.

Moe, T. M. (2013). A primer on America's schools, Volume 486. Hoover Institution Press.

Neal, D. et al. (2011). The design of performance pay in education. Handbook of the Economics of

  Education 4, 495­550.

Podgursky, M. (2006). Teams versus bureaucracies: Personnel policy, wage-setting, and teacher

  quality in traditional public, charter, and private schools. Education Working Paper Archive.

Rivkin, S. G., E. A. Hanushek, and J. F. Kain (2005). Teachers, schools, and academic achieve-

  ment. Econometrica 73(2), 417­458.

Roth, J. (2017). Union reform and teacher turnover: Evidence from wisconsin's act 10. Harvard

  Kennedy School.

Roussille, N. (2020). The central role of the ask gap in gender pay inequality.

                                                33
Sandberg, S. (2013). Lean In: Women, Work, and the Will to Lead. Knopf.

Sato, Y. and M. Ando (2017). Does assigning more women to managerial positions enhance firm

  productivity? evidence from sweden. SSRN.

Sharma, S., W. P. Bottom, and H. A. Elfenbein (2013). On the role of personality, cognitive ability,

  and emotional intelligence in predicting negotiation outcomes: A meta-analysis. Organization

  Psychology Review 3(4), 293­336.

Yagan, D. (2019). Employment hysteresis from the great recession. Journal of Political Econ-

  omy 127(5), 2505­2558.

Zeltzer, D. (2020, Apr). Gender homophily in referral networks: Consequences for the medicare

  physician earnings gap. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 12(2), 169­197.




                                                34
Tables

              Table I: Male and female teachers: Mean observable characteristics

                                          2007-2011                             2012-2016
                                Males     Females             Diff.   Males      Females        Diff.
    Experience (years)          14.9        14.3             0.6      14.2         13.9        0.3
                                                             (0.04)                            (0.04)
    Age                          43.0        43.3           -0.3       42.4        42.4      -0.0010
                                                             (0.04)                            (0.04)
    Highest ed = BA               0.5         0.5            -0.003     0.5        0.5         0.001
                                                            (0.002)                           (0.002)
    Highest ed = Master           0.5         0.5           0.0006      0.5        0.5        -0.004
                                                            (0.002)                           (0.002)
    Highest ed = PhD            0.003        0.001        0.002        0.004      0.001      0.003
                                                           (0.0002)                          (0.0002)
    Salary ($)                 51213.2     51019.6        193.5       54201.7    53765.4     436.3
                                                             (48.2)                            (53.0)
    Value-added                 -0.002     -0.00005       -0.002      -0.001    -0.00008     -0.001
                                                           (0.0007)                          (0.0005)
    Ever moves                    0.1         0.1           0.01        0.2        0.1        0.01
                                                            (0.001)                           (0.002)
    Leaves sample                0.07        0.06         0.003        0.08        0.08      -0.0005
                                                            (0.001)                           (0.001)
    Elementary T                  0.2         0.5           -0.3        0.2        0.5        -0.3
                                                            (0.002)                           (0.002)
    Middle school T               0.2         0.2           0.05        0.2        0.2        0.05
                                                            (0.002)                           (0.002)
    High school T                 0.6         0.2            0.3        0.5        0.2         0.3
                                                            (0.002)                           (0.002)
    Math T                        0.1        0.06           0.06        0.1        0.06       0.06
                                                            (0.001)                           (0.001)
   Note: The table shows mean characteristics of males and female teachers, and the differences in means
   (standard errors in parentheses) for the years 2007­2011 (columns 1-3) and 2012­2016 (columns 4­6).  
   0.1,   0.05,   0.01.




                                                     35
         Table II: District characteristics, CBA expiration dates, and extensions: Differences

                                         Expiration post 2011 vs in 2011            W/ extension vs w/out
                                             (1)        (2)        (3)               (4)        (5)     (6)
 District chars.                         Difference     SE      P-value          Difference     SE   P-value
 Enrollment                               13116.29 8153.50        0.11            2618.90    791.06    0.00
 N teachers                                957.31     569.04      0.09             177.26     54.38    0.00
 Per pupil expenditure                      0.08       0.88       0.92              -1.42      0.38    0.00
 Share black students                       0.14       0.06       0.03              0.01       0.01    0.07
 Share disadvantaged students               0.06       0.06       0.36              -0.03      0.02    0.05
 In urban area                              0.23       0.17       0.19              0.09       0.05    0.05
 In suburban area                           0.34       0.17       0.05              0.07       0.03    0.02
Note: The table shows the estimates ("Differences"), robust standard errors, and p-values from OLS regressions of each
district characteristic listed in the first column (measured in 2011) on a dummy variable indicating that a CBA expira-
tion occurred after 2011 (columns 1-3) and a dummy variable indicating that a district received an extension (columns
4-6). Each observation is a school district.




                                                        36
                           Table III: Gender salary gap after CBA expirations and extensions (OLS and 2SLS)

                                                                     Expirations                   Extensions                   2SLS, Extensions
                                                                   (1)            (2)            (3)          (4)                (5)           (6)
      Female                                                   -0.0024       -0.0024         -0.0024      -0.0024            -0.0024      -0.0024
                                                                (0.0012)      (0.0012)        (0.0011)     (0.0011)           (0.0011)     (0.0011)
      Female  Post Extension                                  -0.0033                                                       -0.0031
                                                                (0.0009)                                                      (0.0010)
      Female  1 Year(s) Post                                                   -0.0006                         0.0005                        0.0006
                                                                              (0.0011)                        (0.0010)                     (0.0019)
      Female  2 Year(s) Post                                                  -0.0030                         -0.0018                      -0.0038
                                                                              (0.0015)                        (0.0013)                     (0.0020)
      Female  3 Year(s) Post                                                   -0.0012                         -0.0016                      -0.0012
                                                                              (0.0012)                        (0.0014)                     (0.0019)
      Female  4 Year(s) Post                                                -0.0062                          -0.0036                        -0.0050
                                                                              (0.0017)                        (0.0015)                     (0.0031)
                                                                            -0.0091                         -0.0078                      -0.0105




37
      Female  5 Year(s) Post
                                                                              (0.0020)                        (0.0017)                     (0.0033)
      Female  Post Expiration                                                                -0.0027
                                                                                              (0.0009)
      Distr  Post exp                                            Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
      Educ, Exper, Teaching Assign  Post exp                     Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
      Yr  Exp yr                                                 Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
      N                                                        579596          579596          579596         579596          579596         579596
      # districts                                                428             428             428           428              428            428
     Note: The dependent variable is the natural logarithm of salary per year, in full-time equivalency units. The variable Female equals one for fe-
     male workers, the variable Post Expiration equals one for years following the expiration of a CBA, and the variable Post Extension equals one for
     years following the expiration of a CBA or its extension. The variables X Year(s) Post equal one for observations X years after an extension (in
     columns 1, 2, 5, and 6) or after an expiration (columns 3 and 4). Columns 1-4 estimate OLS; columns 5 and 6 estimates 2SLS, with Post expira-
     tion as an instrument for Post extension. All specifications include fixed effects for the district, number of years of experience, highest education
     degree, grade level (elementary, middle, high), and subject (math, reading, and others), alone and interacted with an indicator for years after
     the extension of a CBA. All specifications also include year fixed effects interacted with CBA expiration and extension year effects. Standard
     errors in parentheses are clustered at the district level.   0.1,   0.05,   0.01.
                                        Table IV: Gender salary gap after CBA expirations and extensions, by district type

                                                                             Baseline                      W/ gender-specific schedule, 3-4 yrs seniority, master's
                                                                 (1)            (2)             (3)           (4)      (5)                       (6)
                                                                 FP             SP         Difference         FP       SP                  Difference
      Female                                                 -0.0031         -0.0015         -0.0019        0.0064   0.0006                    0.0005
                                                              (0.0015)      (0.0018)        (0.0019)       (0.0047) (0.0033)                 (0.0035)
      Female  Post Extension                                  -0.0028      -0.0048         -0.0046         -0.0088 0.0018                     0.0044
                                                              (0.0014)      (0.0013)        (0.0013)       (0.0045) (0.0058)                 (0.0063)
      Female  FP                                                                             -0.0014                                          -0.0011
                                                                                            (0.0024)                                         (0.0023)
      Female  FP  Post Extension                                                              0.0020                                          -0.0084
                                                                                            (0.0019)                                         (0.0104)
      Distr  Post exp                                           Yes            Yes              Yes           Yes      Yes                       Yes
      Educ, Exper, Teaching Assign  Post exp                    Yes            Yes              Yes           Yes      Yes                       Yes
      Exper * Female * Post Ext                                 No             No               No            Yes      Yes                       Yes
      N                                                       203157         259956          463255         203157   259816                   462973




38
      # districts                                               102           122               224           102      122                      224
     Note: The dependent variable is the natural logarithm of salary per year, in full-time equivalency units. The variable Female equals one for female workers, the variable
     Post Extension equals one for years following the expiration of a CBA or its extension. Columns 1 and 4 are estimated on teachers in flexible-pay districts, and columns 2
     and 5 are estimated on teachers working in seniority-pay districts. All specifications include fixed effects for the district, number of years of seniority, highest education
     degree, grade level (elementary, middle, high), and subject (math, reading, and others), alone and interacted with an indicator for years after the extension of a CBA.
     Columns 4-6 include years of experience fixed effects, interacted with Female and for Post Extension. All specifications also include year fixed effects interacted with CBA
     expiration and extension year effects. All columns present OLS estimates. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the district level.   0.1,   0.05,   0.01.
     Table V: Gender salary gap after CBA extension, by principal and superintendent gender and by share of men in the
     district or school

                                                                                    Principal                            Superintendent
                                                                          (1)            (2)          (3)            (4)        (5)       (6)
                                                                         Male        Female                         Male     Female
      Female                                                          -0.0022         -0.0021      -0.0026        -0.0025    -0.0014   -0.0036
                                                                       (0.0011)      (0.0018)      (0.0019)       (0.0013)  (0.0023) (0.0026)
      Female  Post Extension                                         -0.0042          0.0003        -0.0002      -0.0033 -0.0008        0.0028
                                                                       (0.0011)      (0.0017)      (0.0015)       (0.0011)  (0.0022) (0.0028)
      Female  Male princ                                                                           -0.0002
                                                                                                   (0.0017)
      Female  Male princ  Post                                                                    -0.0035
                                                                                                   (0.0015)
      Female  Male super                                                                                                                        0.0011
                                                                                                                                               (0.0029)
                                                                                                                                              -0.0063




39
      Female  Male super  Post
                                                                                                                                               (0.0031)
      Distr, Educ, Exper, Teaching Assign  Post exp                      Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes
      Yr  Exp yr                                                         Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes
      N                                                                338326         199904        538434         471419         68870         540533
      # districts                                                        427           402           428            426            340            428
     Note: The dependent variable is the natural logarithm of salary per year, in full-time equivalency units. The variable Female equals one for fe-
     male workers, the variable Post Extension equals one for years following the expiration of a CBA or its extension. The variables Male princ and
     Male super equal one for teachers in schools with at least one male principal and districts with at least one male superintendent in the years
     prior to the CBA expiration or extension, respectively. All specifications include fixed effects for the district, number of years of seniority, high-
     est education degree, grade level (elementary, middle, high), and subject (math, reading, and others), alone and interacted with an indicator for
     years after the extension of a CBA. Specifications also include year fixed effects interacted with extension year effects. All columns present OLS
     estimates. Column 1 is estimated on schools with a male principal, column 2 on schools with a female principal, column 4 on districts with a
     male superintendent, and column 5 on districts with a female superintendent. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the district level.
     
        0.1,   0.05,   0.01.
     Table VI: Survey answers: Means, women vs men, and differences in means

                                                      Women       Men     Difference    Std. Error

 Have you ever negotiatied...
 w/prev employer                                       0.295     0.379     -0.084         (0.019)
 w/current employer, at start                          0.223     0.306     -0.083         (0.018)
 w/current employer, after start                       0.205     0.245      -0.040        (0.017)

 If yes, negotiation was successful
 w/prev employer                                       0.819     0.904     -0.085         (0.025)
 w/current employer, at start                          0.709     0.814     -0.105         (0.034)
 w/current employer, after start                       0.455     0.572     -0.117         (0.042)

 Why did you not negotiate? (current employer, at start)
 it was not possible                                  0.419      0.451      -0.032        (0.020)
 I was not comfortable doing so                       0.233      0.128     0.105          (0.016)
 It was useless                                       0.084      0.063     0.022          (0.011)
 I feared backlash                                    0.065      0.055       0.011        (0.010)
 I was satisfied w/pay                                0.186      0.149     0.036          (0.015)
 I didn't know it was possible                        0.000      0.000       0.000        (0.000)

 Average likelihood that you will negotiate...
 salary                                                3.365     3.889     -0.524         (0.121)
 classroom assignment                                  4.752     4.539       0.213        (0.130)
 non-teaching duties                                   4.347     4.579      -0.232        (0.124)

 Average likelihood that you will negotiate, male superintendent
 salary                                                 3.233    3.996     -0.764         (0.143)
 classroom assignment                                   4.652    4.449        0.202       (0.157)
 non-teaching duties                                    4.215    4.509      -0.293        (0.148)

 Average likelihood that you will negotiate, female superintendent
 salary                                                 3.556    3.667      -0.110        (0.229)
 classroom assignment                                   4.922    4.714      0.209         (0.237)
 non-teaching duties                                    4.581    4.724      -0.143        (0.231)

 Share agreeing w/statements
 I worked in other industries                          0.476     0.503       -0.027       (0.020)
 I know someone who negotiated their pay               0.505     0.590     -0.085         (0.020)
 I know my colleagues' pay                             0.275     0.387     -0.111         (0.019)
 I am confident talking to people I don't know         0.728     0.839     -0.110         (0.017)
 I can read subtle signals                             0.890     0.884        0.006       (0.013)
 I can read people's feelings                          0.871     0.861        0.010       (0.014)
 I have good people's skills                           0.888     0.883        0.006       (0.013)
 My performance is above the mean                      0.321     0.364      -0.044        (0.019)

 N (teachers)                                           2190      843
Note: This table presents the average shares of female and male teachers answering "yes" to a given
survey question, as well as the differences in means and standard deviations (in parentheses).   0.1,

   0.05,   0.01.




                                                 40
                       Table VII: Survey answers: Likelihood of negotiating

                                 Panel A) Ever negotiated with:
                       Previous employer Current empl., at start                  Current empl, after start
 Female                       0.068                        0.071                                 0.028
                               (0.020)                      (0.022)                             (0.018)
 Controls                         Yes                          Yes                               Yes
 N                              2836                        2836                                2836
 Y mean, males                  0.295                       0.223                               0.205

               Panel B) Negotiated successfully conditional on negotiating, with:
                     Previous employer Current empl., at start Current empl., after start
 Female                       0.080                        0.132                                0.107
                               (0.029)                     (0.052)                              (0.062)
 Controls                         Yes                          Yes                                Yes
 N                               902                         700                                  614
 Y mean, males                  0.819                       0.709                                0.455

                    Panel C) Reasons for not negotiating (current employer, at start)
                      Not possible Not comfortable Useless Fear backlash Satisfied w/pay
 Female                    0.023               -0.065                 -0.024           -0.005             0.040
                          (0.028)               (0.029)              (0.025)          (0.019)             (0.022)
 Controls                   Yes                   Yes                 Yes                Yes               Yes
 N                         2222                  2222                2222             2222                2222
 Y mean, males             0.525                 0.280               0.233            0.132               0.147

             Panel D) Likelihood of negotiating in the future, over:
                    Salary Classroom assignment Non-teaching duties
 Female                0.475                  -0.273                            0.135
                        (0.162)               (0.139)                          (0.133)
 Controls                Yes                    Yes                             Yes
 N                      2836                   2836                            2836
 Y mean, males          3.365                  4.752                           4.347
Note: In panel A the dependent variable equals one if a teacher negotiated their salary with the previous employer
(column 1), with the current employer at the start of the work relationship (column 2) or after the start (column 3).
In panel B the dependent variable equals one if a teacher believed the negotiation with either the previous employer
(column 1), her current employer at the start of the work relationship (column 2), or the current employer after the
start of the work relationship (column 3) was successful, conditional on negotiating. In panel C the dependent vari-
able equals one if a teacher gives the corresponding reason as a motive for not negotiating (conditional on not doing
so). In panel D the dependent variable equals one if the teacher plans on negotiating either salaries (column 1), class-
room assignment (column 2), or non-teaching duties (column 3) in the future. Female is an indicator for female teach-
ers. All specifications include controls for age class, self-reported job performance (above/below average), measures
of people skills, an indicator for whether the respondent knows someone who negotiated his/her salary, an indicator
for whether the respondent knows his/her colleagues' salaries, and district fixed effects. Standard errors in paren-
theses are clustered at the district level.   0.1,   0.05,   0.01.




                                                          41
                   Table VIII: Survey answers, by superintendent's gender

                                 Panel A) Ever negotiated with:
                            Current empl.                     In the future
                         At start After start Salary Class assgn Non-teach. duties
 Female                  0.083           0.057         0.718          -0.272                  0.186
                          (0.025)         (0.020)       (0.151)       (0.161)                (0.151)
 Female * F super         -0.038         -0.086        -0.746         -0.009                 -0.156
                          (0.046)         (0.035)       (0.354)       (0.334)                (0.278)
 Controls                   Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes                   Yes
 N                         2784           2784          2784           2784                   2784
 Y mean, males             0.223          0.205         3.365          4.752                  4.347

        Panel B) Negotiated successfully conditional on negotiating, with:
                     Current employer, at start Current employer, after start
 Female                                 0.087                               0.082
                                       (0.057)                             (0.069)
 Female * F super                       0.134                               0.119
                                       (0.119)                             (0.139)
 Controls                               Yes                                    Yes
 N                                      682                                   601
 Y mean, males                         0.709                                 0.455

                                  Panel C) Reasons for not negotiating:
                         Not possible Not comfortable Useless Fear backlash                            Satisfied w/pay
 Female                       0.001                 -0.074            -0.024          0.004                0.059
                             (0.033)                (0.035)          (0.030)         (0.023)               (0.023)
 Female * F super             0.070                  0.024           -0.017           -0.034                -0.061
                             (0.057)                (0.058)          (0.054)         (0.042)               (0.048)
 Controls                      Yes                   Yes               Yes             Yes                   Yes
 N                            2183                   2183             2183            2183                  2183
 Y mean, males                0.525                  0.280            0.233           0.132                 0.147
Note: In panel A the dependent variable equals one if a teacher negotiated their salary with the current employer at
the start of the work relationship (column 1) or after the start (column 2), and if the teacher plans on negotiating ei-
ther salaries (column 3), classroom assignment (column 4), or non-teaching duties (column 5) in the future. In panel
B the dependent variable equals one if a teacher believed the negotiation with their current employer at the start of
the work relationship (column 1) or after the start of the work relationship (column 2) was successful, conditional on
negotiating. In panel C the dependent variable equals one if a teacher gives the corresponding reason as a motive
for not negotiating (conditional on not doing so). Female is an indicator for female teachers. F super equals one if a
teacher currently works in district with a female superintendent. All regressions include controls for age class, self-
reported job performance (above/below average), measures of people skills, an indicator for whether the respondent
knows someone who negotiated his/her salary, an indicator for whether the respondent knows his/her colleagues'
salaries, and district fixed effects. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the district level.   0.1,   0.05,

     0.01.




                                                             42
                                                              Table IX: Gender salary gap and teacher value-added

                                                                       All districts                                       FP                                         SP
                                                                  (1)      (2)           (3)                (4)            (5)             (6)           (7)          (8)          (9)
      Female                                                    0.0022   0.0022        0.0022            0.0052         0.0052         0.0052          0.0013       0.0013       0.0013
                                                               (0.0016) (0.0016) (0.0016)                (0.0030)       (0.0030)       (0.0030)       (0.0021)    (0.0021)     (0.0021)
      Female  Post Extension                                   -0.0036  -0.0036 -0.0036                 -0.0103        -0.0102        -0.0102         -0.0007      -0.0007      -0.0009
                                                               (0.0021) (0.0021) (0.0021)                (0.0032)       (0.0032)       (0.0032)       (0.0026)    (0.0026)     (0.0026)
      VA                                                                 0.0148        0.0148                            0.0110          0.0110                    0.0080        0.0080
                                                                        (0.0093) (0.0093)                               (0.0172)       (0.0172)                   (0.0123)     (0.0123)
      VA  Post Extension                                                 0.0025       0.0677                             0.0344          0.1093                    -0.0107       0.0521
                                                                        (0.0175) (0.0368)                               (0.0312)       (0.0689)                   (0.0225)     (0.0497)
      Female  VA  Post Extension                                                     -0.0780                                            -0.0879                                 -0.0751
                                                                                      (0.0367)                                         (0.0717)                                (0.0493)
      Distr, Educ, Exper, Teach Assgn  Post exp                   Yes      Yes           Yes               Yes            Yes              Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
      Yr  Exp yr                                                  Yes      Yes           Yes               Yes            Yes              Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
      N                                                         134620   134620        134620             47288          47288           47288         60007        60007        60007




43
      # districts                                                 425      425           425               102            102              102          121          121           121
     Note: The dependent variable is the natural logarithm of salary per year, in full-time equivalency units. The variable Female equals one for female workers, the variable Post Ex-
     tension equals one for years following the expiration of a CBA or its extension. The variable V  A is teacher value-added. Columns 4-6 are estimated on teachers in flexible-pay
     districts, and columns 7-9 are estimated on teachers in seniority-pay districts. All columns present OLS estimates. All specifications include fixed effects for the district, number
     of years of seniority, and highest education degree, alone and interacted with an indicator for years after the extension of a CBA. All specifications also include year fixed effects
     interacted with CBA expiration and extension year effects. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the district level.   0.1,   0.05,   0.01.
                            Table X: Gender differences in job mobility

                                                 All moves                     Within CZ       Across CZ
                                        (1)           (2)       (3)                 (4)             (5)
 Female                             -0.0011        -0.0006   -0.0004            0.0007           -0.0008
                                     (0.0005)     (0.0005)  (0.0006)            (0.0003)         (0.0004)
 Post Extension                     0.0180          0.0008 -0.0048               0.0001         -0.0033
                                     (0.0011)     (0.0020)  (0.0019)            (0.0010)         (0.0013)
 Female  Post Extension             -0.0022      -0.0022 -0.0024                 -0.0008       -0.0019
                                     (0.0010)     (0.0011)  (0.0010)            (0.0007)         (0.0007)
 District FE                            No            Yes      Yes                  Yes             Yes
 Year FE                                No            Yes      Yes                  Yes             Yes
 Experience, education FE               No            No       Yes                  Yes             Yes
 N                                    540074       540074    539906              546376           539012
 # districts                            428          428       428                  428             428
 Mean of dep. var.                    0.0237       0.0237    0.0237               0.0101          0.0117
Note: The dependent variable is an indicator for a teacher changing district (columns 1-3), changing district
within the same CZ (column 4), and changing district and CZ in a given year (column 5). The variable Female
equals one for female teachers and the variable Post Extension equals one for years following the expiration
of a CBA or its extension. Columns 2-5 include district and year fixed effects; columns 3-5 also include fixed
effects for years of experience and for the highest education degree. Standard errors in parentheses are clus-
tered at the district level.   0.1,   0.05,   0.01.




                                                     44
Figures

               Figure I: Share of teachers, by expiration and extension dates of CBAs




Note: The figure shows the share of teachers covered by collective bargaining agreements (CBAs) with different
expiration dates. The darker bars show the share of teachers covered by a CBA that was originally supposed to
expire in 2011, 2012, and 2013. The lighter bars show the share of teachers covered by a CBA whose validity was
extended until 2011, 2012, 2013, or 2014 (for districts that did not extend the validity of the CBA, we refer to the
expiration date).




                                                        45
         Figure II: Salaries of men and women, by time-to-expiration/extension of CBAs




Note: The figure shows how the conditional salaries of male and female teachers evolved after Act 10. We plot the
OLS point estimates and 90% confidence intervals of the coefficients s g
                                                                         in equation (2), for g =female (solid line) and
g =male (dashed line). All coefficients are plotted relative to the average salary of male and female teachers in the
year before a CBA or its extension expired (t = 0). Standard errors are clustered at the district level.




            Figure III: Gender gap in salaries, by time-to-expiration/extension of CBAs




Note: The figure shows OLS point estimates and 90% confidence intervals of the coefficients s in equation (3). All
coefficients are plotted relative to the year a CBA or its extension expired (t = 0). Standard errors are clustered at the
district level.




                                                           46
                         Figure IV: Gender gap in salaries, by seniority and age

                                        Panel A: Pay Gap by Seniority




                                           Panel B: Pay Gap by Age




Note: Panel A shows OLS point estimates and 90% confidence intervals of the coefficients s in equation (3), estimated
separately for teachers with six or fewer (solid line) and 21 and more years of experience (dashed line). Panel B
shows OLS point estimates and 90% confidence intervals of the coefficients s in equation (3), estimated separately
for teachers aged 34 and younger (solid line) and 52 and older (dashed line). All coefficients are plotted relative to
the year a CBA or its extension expired (t = 0). Standard errors are clustered at the district level.




                                                         47
       Figure V: Gender gap in salaries and the gender of school and district management

                                    Panel A: Gender of school principals




                                 Panel B: Gender of district superintedents




Note: The figure shows OLS point estimates and 90% confidence intervals of the coefficients s in equation (3),
estimated separately for teachers who are at least once in a school with a female principal and teachers always in
schools with a male principal in the years before a CBA expiration or its extension (Panel A), and for teachers who
are at least once in a district with a female superintendent and teachers always in district with a male superintendent
in the years before a CBA expiration or its extension (Panel B). All coefficients are plotted relative to the year a CBA
or its extension expired (t = 0). Standard errors are clustered at the district level.




                                                          48
                                Figure VI: The Gender gap and job mobility

                       Panel A: Gender gap in salaries for movers vs non-movers




                           Panel B: Gender gap in salaries and outside options




Note: Panel A shows OLS point estimates and 90% confidence intervals of the coefficients s in equation (??), es-
timated separately for teachers who never move between 2007 and 2016 ("non-movers"), those who move at least
once ("movers (ever)"), and those who move at least once after a CBA expiration ("movers (post-extension)"). OLS
point estimates and 90% confidence intervals of the coefficients s in equation (2), estimated separately for teachers in
commuting zones with a small number of schools (below the 25th percentile of the distribution) and a large number
of schools (above the 75th percentile). All coefficients are plotted relative to the year a CBA or its extension expired
(t = 0). Standard errors are clustered at the district level.




                                                          49
