                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            RULES VS. DISCRETION:
               TREATMENT OF MENTAL ILLNESS IN U.S. ADOLESCENTS

                                          Emily Cuddy
                                          Janet Currie

                                      Working Paper 27890
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27890


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2020




The authors thank Armin Falk, John List, James Heckman and seminar participants at the
University of Chicago, the University of Pennsylvania, and the University of Lyon, as well as the
BCBS Alliance for Health network for helpful comments. Financial support from the NOMIS
Foundation and Princeton's Center for Health and Wellbeing is gratefully acknowledged. We are
grateful to Pankti Pathak of BCBS and Allen Campbell at IQVIA for assistance accessing data.
All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Emily Cuddy and Janet Currie. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Rules vs. Discretion: Treatment of Mental Illness in U.S. Adolescents
Emily Cuddy and Janet Currie
NBER Working Paper No. 27890
October 2020
JEL No. I1,I11

                                          ABSTRACT

Mental health disorders are a leading cause of disability worldwide. Many mental health
disorders start in adolescence and appropriate treatment at the outset may improve trajectories.
We use a large national data base of insurance claims to examine the impact of initial mental
health treatment on the outcomes of adolescent children over the next two years. We find that
receiving follow up mental health treatment in the first three months after an initial mental health
claim increases the total cost of care over the next 24 months. These higher costs are entirely
accounted for by children who receive treatment that is not consistent with practice guidelines.
Our estimates imply that, within 24 months, children who initially received a red-flag drug have
205% higher costs than those of the average treated child and are 131% more likely to have used
an emergency room or experienced a hospitalization. These results show that large numbers of
U.S. children are receiving mental health care that falls outside of accepted guidelines and poses
risks to their health. In doing so, they provide support for the guidelines themselves, and
demonstrate that analyses of large-scale claims data can provide a useful complement to clinical
research studies in identifying best practices.


Emily Cuddy
Department of Economics
Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540
ecuddy@princeton.edu

Janet Currie
Department of Economics
Center for Health and Wellbeing
185A Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
jcurrie@princeton.edu
           I.      Introduction

   Beginning with influential work by James Heckman (See Heckman (2000), Heckman,

Stixrud, Urzua, 2006) economists have increasingly focused on non-cognitive skills as a

determinant of children's future outcomes. This attention on non-cognitive skills suggests that

closely related mental health measures deserve further attention. Borghans et al. (2008) point out

that many youths face psychological problems that form a real constraint on their educational

and vocational choices.

   Many mental health disorders first manifest in adolescence. Mental health disorders are

often more debilitating and harmful for a child's future than common physical health problems,

increasing health care costs and the likelihood of being disabled while decreasing educational

attainment and employment prospects (Currie et al., 2010, Smith and Smith, 2010).        Clearly,

initial treatment offers an important opportunity to intervene. Yet there is little information

available on how U.S. adolescents are typically treated, or how variation in treatment impacts

their outcomes.

   There are however, widely agreed upon guidelines about what is appropriate for the initial

treatment of children with common mental health problems. First, it is important that follow-up

treatment begins promptly once a mental health problem is identified. Second, in most cases,

one would expect to see a child receive therapy either with or without drug treatment (Birmaher

et al., 2007; Connolly et al., 2007, McClellan et al., 2013). If medication is needed, finding a

drug that works is often a matter of trial and error, but there are clear guidelines suggesting

specific medications as a starting point and providing "red flags" suggesting that other

medications be used cautiously if at all.




                                                  3
   The use of guidelines in medicine is controversial, especially in psychiatry. Meehl (1954),

Grove et al. (2000) and Kahneman and Klein (2009) argue that in general an algorithm could do

as least as well as a psychiatrist in the treatment of mental illness. In the case of the many

people who are treated for mental illness by family physicians with little specialized knowledge,

the argument in favor of guidelines becomes even stronger. On the other hand, Frank and

Zeckhauser (2007) argue that guidelines could result in care that is not sufficiently

individualized. Again, this argument may be especially relevant in psychiatry given that optimal

treatment for mental illness is known to involve trial and error.

   This study focuses on the care that adolescent patients receive when they are first treated for

mental illness, and how this care affects their health care trajectory over the next two years. We

study a large national sample of 97,306 children who were covered by private health insurance

for at least one year between 2012 and 2018, had their first mental illness claim between the ages

of 10 and 17, and can be followed for at least two years after their initial mental health claim.

We examine the effect of initial treatment on total health care costs, costs for mental health care,

and the use of hospitals and emergency rooms over the next two years.

   Clearly, the initial treatment received is not randomly assigned and is likely to be correlated

with both observed and unobserved patient characteristics such as age, gender, and parental

preferences. Supply-side variables offer a potentially exogenous source of variation in treatment.

For example, shortages of child psychiatrists are an important factor limiting treatment in many

areas (Thomas and Holzer, 2006; McBain et al., 2019; Findling and Stepanova, 2008). However,

Cuddy and Currie (2020) show that several supply side factors of this kind collectively explain

little of the overall variation in treatment probabilities across areas. Hence, they may prove to be

weak potential instruments.




                                                  4
      In this study, we use measures of practice style in the local health care market and their

interactions with patient characteristics as instruments. This procedure generates a large set of

potential instruments, raising concerns about weak instruments. That said, given this setting of

"big data" and many potential weak instruments, we turn to the post-Lasso procedure proposed

by Bellini et al. (2012) to guide our choice of instruments and assist in causal inference.

         We find that receiving follow-up mental health treatment in the first three months after an

initial claim increases total health care costs over the next 24 months. These higher costs are

entirely accounted for by children who receive treatment that is not consistent with practice

guidelines, and especially by those who receive "red-flag" drugs such as benzodiazepines,

tricyclic anti-depressants, or other drugs which are not approved for use in children of their age.

Our estimates imply that, within 24 months, children who initially received a red-flag drug have

205% higher costs than those of the average treated child and are 131% more likely to have used

an emergency room or experienced a hospitalization. These results suggest that large numbers of

U.S. children are receiving mental health care that falls outside of accepted guidelines and poses

risks to their health. In doing so, they provide support for the guidelines themselves and

demonstrate that analyses of large-scale claims data can serve as a useful complement to clinical

research studies in identifying best practices.

          The rest of this paper proceeds as follows. Section II provides background about

treatment guidelines for children and about supply-side variations in the supply of physicians and

in practice style. Section III describes our data. Section IV provides an overview of methods,

and Section V presents our results. We conclude with a discussion and conclusions in Section

VI.




                                                   5
II. Background

  A. Guidelines for Initial Treatment of Children

   As noted above, therapy is a first-line treatment for children. If warranted, medication is, of

course, specific to the mental illness being treated. For depression, guidelines suggest a trial of

Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors (SSRIs) (American Academy of Child and Adolescent

Psychiatry (Birmaher et al. 2007). The American Psychiatric Association is even more specific

and recommends Fluoxetine (generic for Prozac) as the first line treatment for depression in

children since it has been the most studied (McQuaid et al., 2019).

   These drugs are recommended because they have fewer side effects than older tricyclic

antidepressants (TCAs), which can cause heart problems and are more likely to be fatal in

overdose. Side effects of psychiatric medications appear to be common in children, though it is

difficult to obtain reliable data. Hilt et al. (2014) conducted a large mail survey of parents of

pediatric patients and found that 84% reported experiencing side effects.

   SSRIs are also the first-line treatment for anxiety disorders, the most common class of

disorders in our sample. While benzodiazepines are frequently prescribed for anxiety in adults,

they are potentially addictive and the American Academy of Adolescent Psychiatrist's guidelines

note that "benzodiazepines have not shown efficacy in controlled trials in childhood anxiety

disorders...Clinicians should use benzodiazepines cautiously because of the possibility of

developing dependence" (Connolly et al., 2007).

   In addition to these guidelines, one can look at whether a drug has been approved for use in

children by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). The FDA has approved a wide

variety of psychiatric drugs for children, depending on the indication. For example, while only

two SSRIs are FDA-approved for depression (Fluoxetine and Escitalopram), several others are




                                                  6
approved for the treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) and anxiety. The FDA has

approved one TCA, Clomipramine, for OCD, and six atypical anti-psychotics.

    Based on these guidelines, we examine the following measures of treatment: 1) Did the child

receive follow-up treatment in the three months following the initial mental health claim? 2) If

the child received treatment in that window, did they receive drugs? Treated children who did

not receive drugs received therapy only. 3) If the child received drugs in the three-month

window, did they receive TCAs, benzodiazepines, or drugs which are not FDA approved for

children in their age group?   Collectively, we refer to prescriptions that violate these guidelines

as "red flag" drugs.1 There may be some rare circumstances where their use is warranted, but

given the available guidelines, one would expect most children with depression or anxiety to be

prescribed an SSRI, and that children with other conditions would start with a trial of an FDA

approved drug.

    In a study of depression treatment for adults, Currie and MacLeod (2020) find that doctors

who violate practice guidelines for adult patients tend to have patients with poorer outcomes.

However, the available guidelines for adults are looser than for children and typically focus on

transitions from one drug to another. There are several reasons for this. First, given the high

costs of switching molecules (in terms of side effects and having to taper off and on), people tend

to stick to the same drug they have been taking for long periods of time. Second, adults often

have significant medical histories that can be used by their physicians to personalize treatment.




1
  We also considered poly-pharmacy as a candidate "red-flag" prescribing practice but found that
it often consisted of a child receiving an SSRI with an adjutant atypical anti-psychotic in our
sample. This variation seems to be an accepted practice, the theory being that the anti-psychotic
helps the SSRI to work better. That said, Hilt et al. (2014) report that the number of children
with side effects increased with multiple drug taking and that large numbers of children taking
SSRIs with an atypical anti-psychotic experience side effects.

                                                 7
It would make little sense to recommend a drug that a patient had already tried and found

ineffective, for instance.

    Focusing on a child's initial treatment offers a setting in which more proscriptive guidelines

could be useful since there will be little history available to guide the physician's treatment

decision. And, given the persistence in treatment choices over time, the choice of initial

treatment is likely to have long-term effects.



   B. Supply-Side Variation in Access to Mental Health Treatment

    "Small area variations" in medical care, the idea that observably similar patients receive quite

different treatment in different places, have been extensively documented (c.f. Fisher et al.,

2003a,b). Recently, several studies have argued that much of this variation is coming from the

supply side of the market for medical care and not from differences in patient demand for

medical services (Currie and MacLeod, 2017; Currie et al. 2016; Cutler et al., 2019).

    For example, Finkelstein, Gentzkow and Williams (2015) show that half of the variation in

treatment is associated with the location rather than the patient in a sample of elderly Medicare

patients who change health service areas (HSAs). Moreover, because HSAs are quite large, 50%

represents a lower bound on the amount of variation coming from the supply side--as Currie and

MacLeod (2017) show, there is typically a great deal of variation in treatments offered within

areas and even among doctors working in the same hospital or practice location.

    As noted above, many observers blame shortages of child psychiatrists for variations in

treatment of mental illness in children. According to the American Academy of Child and

Adolescent Psychiatry, there are 8,300 practicing child and adolescent psychiatrists and




                                                  8
approximately 15 million children in the U.S. who need their specialized knowledge.2 There are

also shortages of therapists trained to treat children. The National Institute of Health's Health

Resources and Services Administration (2015) estimates that there is a shortage of more than

10,000 full-time equivalent mental health counselors, including school psychologists and

counselors. Moreover, the available workforce tends to be concentrated in larger urban areas.

      In the absence of sufficient mental health professionals, primary care physicians (PCPs) often

end up prescribing psychiatric drugs. However, many report that they do not feel comfortable in

this role--the majority feel that PCPs ideally should refer children with mental health problems

to specialists for treatment but cite long waiting periods to see mental health professionals as a

significant barrier to treatment (Heneghan, 2008; Fremont et al., 2008). These considerations

suggest that some variation in treatment could be a function of what type of professionals are

available to treat the child. However, Currie and Cuddy (2020) find that relatively little of the

variation in treatment across areas can be explained by counts of different types of local

providers.

      There is also a large literature documenting variation in individual doctor's prescribing

styles. Frank and Zeckhauser (2007) cite survey data showing that the most prescribed

medication for a specific condition is responsible for about 60% of a doctor's prescriptions for

that condition, and that different doctors have different favorite drugs. Patient demographics

have little explanatory power. Berndt et al. (2015) use data on prescriptions of anti-psychotics.

They show that most doctors have a favorite drug and that on average 66% of their prescriptions

are for this drug. Again, different doctors have different favorites. Doctors also differ in terms

of their diagnostic skill such that different doctors might diagnose the same symptoms



2
    See https://www.aacap.org/AACAP/Resources_for_Primary_Care/Workforce_Issues.aspx.


                                                   9
differently, leading to different treatments (Chan et al. 2019; Currie and MacLeod, 2017; Currie

et al., 2016).

    These differences in diagnostic skill and practice style could be due to differences in ability

or training. They mean that treatments could vary across small areas just because the doctors

working in those areas make systematically different decisions for similar patients. For example,

if most of the doctors in an area prescribe benzodiazepines for adolescents, then a given

adolescent seeking care in that area will be more likely to receive a benzodiazepine. Taken

altogether, the literature suggests that small area variations in practice style are a possible

instrument for individual treatment choices.



III. Data

        We use administrative insurance claims data from the Blue Cross Blue Shield Alliance

for Health Research (BCBS), a collaborative effort involving most of the regional BCBS plans.3

These data have many strengths. The most obvious is the large sample size and detailed

information about treatments. Previous large-scale analyses of mental health treatment for

adolescents rely on parent/caregiver reports which may be subject to recall bias or bias

introduced by survey non-response. Moreover, the questions asked about treatment of mental

illness in national surveys are very general (i.e. whether the child has ever been treated) and do

not include information about the setting or type of treatment. This lack of specificity makes it




3
  This limited data set is made available through a secure data portal and is drawn from Blue
Cross Blue Shield (BCBS) Axis®, the largest source of commercial insurance claims data in the
U.S. Accessing insurance claims data often requires extended negotiations with individual
insurance carriers, or with government entities. Further information about the BCBS Health of
American Initiative, including information about their Axis® data base and contact information
is available at: https://www.bcbs.com/the-health-of-america/about.

                                                  10
impossible to say whether any treatment received is broadly consistent with evidence-based

treatment guidelines.

       While the lack of insurance coverage may be an important driver of overall differences in

treatment, our focus on children with health insurance allows us to consider other determinants

of variation, such as differences in practice style.4 Although some mental health providers may

be out of network, families can still file claims to BCBS and can usually be at least partially

reimbursed. Hence, we would expect to see these cases appear in the claims data.

    We select children who are observed before age 11 (typically from age 7 or 8) who had their

first insurance claim for mental illness between the ages of 10 and 17. The mean age of these

children at the time of the first mental health claim is 12, with most first claims at ages 10 to 14.

We focus on first episodes because there are relatively clear guidelines about how these children

should be treated.

    The BCBS data include 4,356,831children who have a master member ID (which means that

they can be followed over time); have claims dates consistent with their coverage period; and

meet the age criteria for our study: They must be observed before the age of 11 and for at least

one year between the ages of 10 and 18. In addition, they have drug coverage that has never

been "carved out" over the time period that we observe them (N=2,223,930). If drug coverage

was carved out of the BCBS plan, then they could have claims for psychiatric drugs under a

separate drug plan, and we would not observe these claims. Children must also have valid

geographic information, and consistent demographic information (age and sex) over the period

that we observe them (N=2,201,566).



4
 Most U.S. children have health insurance either as dependents on their parent's employer-
provided health insurance or through various publicly provided plans. However, one critique of
public health insurance is that people often face difficulties accessing specialist care.


                                                 11
    In our initial sample of 2,201,566 BCBS covered children, there are 202,066 with at least one

claim related to mental illness, for an overall mental illness rate of 9.18%. This rate is

comparable to estimates from the 2016 National Survey of Child Health, in which parents

reported that 6.1% of 12 to 17 year old children had been diagnosed with depression, and 10.5%

had been diagnosed with anxiety (Ghandour et al., 2019).

    Restricting the sample further to those with non-missing provider information, a first mental

health claim between the ages of 10 and 18, and a follow-up period of at least 24 months, yields

a sample of 97,306. We would have liked to follow children for a longer period of time, ideally

for many years, but longer time periods drastically reduced the sample size. In particular, we lose

39 percent of our current sample with an additional 12 months of follow-up (36 months total),

and we lose nearly all (97 percent) with an additional 48 months (72 months total).6

    Figure 1 is a map of the U.S. illustrating where the BCBS sample is located and the

prevalence of child mental illness. The extent of the shaded area confirms BCBS's broad

national coverage, although there are some areas of the country with less penetration. As shown

in Appendix Table A1, the average child with BCBS coverage lives in an area which tends to be

relatively younger, less diverse, and of higher socioeconomic status than the average American.

The fraction of children with mental illness varies from zero to 5% in the first vingtile to 12 to

22% in the top vingtile. As we shall see, this is a relatively narrow band compared to variations

in treatment.




6
 The maximum follow-up length in our sample is 77 months. This length is a function of both
the date of diagnosis and the length of the current data extract, i.e., children who have a first
claim later on in our data mechanically have a shorter potential follow-up period. Of the 97306
children in our final sample, we retain 59169 (60.8%) with a 36-month follow-up, 33240
(34.2%) with a 48-month follow-up, 15830 (16.3%) with a 60-month follow-up, and 3833
(3.9%) with a 72-month follow-up.

                                                 12
    A. Children's Characteristics, Treatment, and Outcomes

    In order to identify claims related to mental illness, we include claims with a diagnosis code

F10-F69, F93, or F98 in the ICD10 (or equivalent codes in the ICD9); a procedure code

indicating a mental health service, such as therapy; or the prescription of a psychiatric drug.7

The categories F10-F19, F20-F29 ... to F60-69 cover substance use, psychotic disorders, mood

disorders, anxiety, behavioral syndromes (including eating disorders), and personality and

behavioral disorders. F93 and F98 are somewhat vague "disorders of childhood." Children with

neurodevelopmental conditions are identified using ICD10 codes F80-89, F90-92, F94-F97 and

F99, which include developmental disorders, ADHD, conduct disorders, Autism spectrum

disorder, and Tic disorders.8 Seventy-five percent of these children have Attention Deficit

Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD). We treat neurodevelopmental conditions as an important

control but not as emerging mental illnesses per se. These neurodevelopmental conditions are

generally present very early in life, much before the mental illnesses that are our focus here.

    The outcomes we examine are: the total costs of medical care, the costs for mental health

treatment, whether the child ever visited the emergency room or was hospitalized, and the

number of days that they spent overnight in the hospital. An advantage of using the claims data

is that we see the actual costs of care; we use the contracted reimbursable amount, which is the

total combined cost to the insurer and patient. We look at both total costs and mental health

treatment because mental illness can cause physical health problems like injuries as well as



7
  In our sample, 65.7% initially receive a mental health diagnosis, while 20.7% receive drug
treatment without a diagnosis on the claim, and 13.6% receive a mental health procedure without
a diagnosis on the claim. By the time children in our mental illness sample reach the end of our
available sample in Dec. 2018, 79.4% of them have received a mental health diagnosis.
8
  We are excluding F70-79, intellectual disability, from consideration here.


                                                 13
requiring expenditures for mental health care itself. Visits to the hospital or the emergency

room are an important outcome because people having a mental health crisis are universally

advised to go to the nearest emergency room (ER), and once there, they may have to be

hospitalized. Hence, these visits represent children who are not being successfully stabilized by

mental health treatment or who may be having serious negative reactions to a medication.

However, there is a large difference in the implications of an ER visit that ends in discharge, and

one that ends in hospitalization both in terms of financial cost and in terms of disruption to the

patient and family's life. Hence, we also look at the number of nights the patient is hospitalized

as an indicator of the severity of any crisis. We examine all these measures at a three-month,

12-month, and 24-month time horizon.

   Table 1 provides an overview of our sample. The first two columns in the first panel

compare the children with mental health conditions to the full sample of BCBS children meeting

our other sample inclusion criteria. Relative to this sample, the children who have a first claim

for a mental health issue during our sample period are more than twice as likely to be

hospitalized, more likely to visit the ER, and have average monthly costs over the sample period

that are double those of the average BCBS child. They are about three times more likely to have

an underlying neurodevelopmental condition, which is usually ADHD, confirming that these

children are at higher risk of future mental health conditions such as depression and anxiety.

     Turning to the type of first claim, about 1.2% have a first mental illness claim that resulted

from a hospitalization, 3.3% have a first claim stemming from an ER visit, and 42.1% have a

first mental health claim stemming from a formal evaluation. This latter number is interesting

because it shows that less than half of the children are receiving a formal mental health

evaluations even when they go on to be diagnosed and treated. While it is possible for an




                                                 14
evaluation to show that a child does not have a mental illness, the majority of these evaluated

children (83.3%) go on to be treated for mental illness by the end of our observation window.

   Column 3 shows the further effect of limiting our sample to children who can be followed for

two years. This sample is a little younger and may be somewhat sicker given its higher overall

utilization of medical care. It is possible that parents who have a sick child are less likely to exit

the sample by changing jobs (Bansak and Raphael, 2008).

   Columns 4 through 8 show how the children's characteristics are related to the type of

treatment that they receive. Looking first at the number of observations in each category, 73%

receive some form of follow-up treatment in the next three months after an initial claim. The

most common type of treatment received was therapy alone, accounting for 59.6% of treatment.

Another 40.4% receive drugs only. Only a small share of treated children, 7.6% receive both

drugs and therapy which is surprising in view of guidelines suggesting that most children should

receive therapy. And of children receiving drugs, just under half, 45.7% receive a red-flag drug

treatment.

   Column 4 shows that 27% of children receive no treatment in the three months following an

initial claim. For comparison, in the 2016 National Survey of Child Health, parents reported that

79.0% of 12 to 17 year old children with depression diagnoses and 63.7% of children with

anxiety diagnoses had been treated (Ghandour et al., 2019). The treated children are actually

very similar to our overall sample of children so that there are no obvious differences that might

explain why some children are treated and others are not.

   Turning to the types of treatment, girls, and children whose first claim resulted from a

hospitalization or ER visit, are over-represented in the small group treated with both therapy and

drugs. Children who first received an evaluation are over-represented in the group receiving




                                                  15
therapy alone, and under-represented in the group who receive any drugs, including red-flag

drugs. On average, children who receive drugs have higher costs than those who receive therapy

alone, as well as more visits to the ER and hospitalizations. While this may be counter-intuitive

since therapy may involve more visits, therapy is often delivered by providers such as social

workers who are less expensive per visit than psychiatrists. The highest average costs are

incurred by children who get red-flag drugs in the first three months after their initial claim.

   Given the guidelines discussed above, we would have expected most children in our sample

to be initially prescribed an SSRI, and one that was specifically FDA approved for use in

children. Of the children receiving drug treatment in our sample, 45.3% receive an

antidepressant (32.5% get SSRIs), 55.9% get anti-anxiety medications, 2.3% get a mood

stabilizer, and 4.2% get anti-psychotic medications (recall that 1.2% of sample children have a

diagnosis of a psychotic disorder). Of the children receiving anti-psychotics, 40.4% take them

with an SSRI, which is a common combination treatment for depression. Of children with a red-

flag prescription, 50.7% get benzodiazepines, 23.2% get TCAs, and 58.3% get a drug that is not

FDA approved for a child of their age. Nearly 15% of children who receive drug treatment face

prescribing that raises more than one red flag.

    The second panel of Table 1 breaks the sample down by diagnosis code. In what follows,

children may have more than one diagnosis. By far the largest category is anxiety, which affects

over half of the children in our sample. These children are disproportionately more likely to get

therapy and less likely to get drugs or red-flag drugs. Mood disorders such as depression are the

second most important category, affecting 13.6% of sample children. These children are over

represented in the therapy plus drugs category, though that is quite a small slice of the treatment

pie. The other diagnostic categories are quite small.




                                                  16
   Not every child has a diagnosis code in the data--in our sample, almost a third are initially

missing diagnosis codes even though they are being treated with therapy or psychiatric drugs. In

some cases this may be because the diagnosis code will not affect the provider's reimbursement.

For example, if PCPs prescribe anti-depressants during a routine visit, then they may only bill for

the routine visit and not include any diagnostic codes on the insurance reimbursement claim.

Another possibility is that the doctor is worried about stigmatizing the child with a mental health

diagnosis if the condition might prove to be short-lived, or if the doctor is uncertain about the

child's diagnosis. We include these children in our main models but also present robustness

checks excluding them from the analysis.



   B. Supply-Side Measures

   Following Kessler and McClellan (2000) and Currie and MacLeod (2017), we define the

market facing people who live in a particular zip code using information about where children in

that zip code actually go to receive mental health care each year. For all children who live in a

given Census Zip Code Tabulation Area (ZCTA), we examine up to the 10 most common

ZCTAs visited by BCBS children in order to receive mental health treatment over the entire

sample period. For example, Figure 2 illustrates the definition of the market area for the ZCTA

that includes Princeton, New Jersey.

   This procedure has several advantages relative to defining a small area based on an arbitrary

geographical definition such as a county or HSA. First, only providers who are actually

available to treat BCBS children at some point over the sample period are included. Second, the

measure scales naturally. In a rural setting, where people drive long distances to get to a grocery

store, for example, it may not be unusual to drive a long distance to see a psychiatrist. Third,




                                                 17
providers can serve clients from more than one ZCTA and do not have to be arbitrarily assigned

to one market or another. Fourth, the market definition is specific to psychiatric treatment. On

average, in ZCTAs that have at least 20 BCBS children, there are 8.6% BCBS children with a

first mental health spell per ZCTA.

   Because rates for small cells may be noisy, we also turn to an additional source of possible

supply-side measures: National data on prescriptions of anti-depressants and anti-anxiety

medications from retail pharmacies. These data come from IQVIA's LRx data base.9 An

advantage of using the IQVIA data to supplement information from BCBS is that we can see

prescriptions from all of the providers treating children in a particular area, even those who do

not treat BCBS children.

   In order to identify the types of mental health professionals who treat BCBS children, we

first tag any providers who provided mental health treatment to at least one child in the BCBS

claims data. We merged provider records from the claims data with data from the National Plan

and Provider Enumeration System using the provider's National Provider ID. We then use the

NPPES taxonomy codes to recover the provider type.10 The supply measure is then calculated

by dividing the total number of providers within each specialty in the ZCTA market and year by

the number of BCBS children present in the ZCTA regardless of mental health status.




   9
     IQVIA (formerly known as IMSQuintiles) is a public company specializing in
pharmaceutical market intelligence The IQVIA data is available for purchase to qualified
researchers. For further information, contact Allen.Campbell@iqvia.com.
10
   Psychiatrists include NPPES codes 2084P0800X and 2084P0804X. Primary care physicians
providing mental health services are largely pediatricians, but may also include doctors in family
medicine, general practice, adolescent medicine, or developmental/behavioral pediatrics (NPPES
codes 208000000X, 2080A0000X, 2080P0006X, 207Q00000X, 208D00000X). Therapists
include psychologists, social workers, and mental health counselors (NPPES codes
1041C0700X, 101YM0800X, 101YP2500X, 103TC0700X, 103T00000X, 106H00000X,
101Y00000X, 104100000X, 103TC2200X).

                                                18
       By examining only psychiatrists and therapists who actually treat any BCBS children, we

ensure that we are focusing on the relevant group of mental health professionals for the children

in our sample. For example, we rule out psychiatrists who only treat adults, or who are not

actively practicing. It would not be possible to focus on this more relevant group of clinicians

using other sources such as the National Plan and Provider Enumeration System (NPPES).

       The area-level measures that we use as possible instrumental variables can be thought of

as measures of practice style and include the following six measures:

       (1) Of the BCBS providers providing mental health treatment to children, what share are

psychiatrists?

       (2) Of the BCBS providers providing mental health treatment to children, what share are

primary care physicians?

       (3) For all of the available primary care physicians treating BCBS children, what share of

each physician's child caseload receives a psychiatric drug (averaged over all the physicians11)?

       (4) For all of the available prescribers of psychiatric drugs to BCBS children, what is the

share of "red-flag" drugs in each prescriber's portfolio of psychiatric prescriptions (averaged

over all physicians12)?

       (5) Of all of the IQVIA prescribers of first psychiatric drug prescriptions for children in

the child's ZCTA, what fraction were psychiatrists?




11
   When calculating this average, we weight shares by the physician's caseload, i.e., the number
of patients that the physician sees. We also experimented with weighting by the number of
prescriptions written by the physician, but results were very similar.
12
   Here, we use a physician's psychiatric caseload to weight shares.


                                                19
       (6) For all of the IQVIA prescribers of first psychiatric drug prescriptions for children in

the child's ZCTA, what was the share of "red-flag" drugs in each prescriber's portfolio of anti-

depressant and anti-anxiety drugs (averaged over all physicians)?

       Measures (1) and (2) capture the composition of the supply of providers serving BCBS

children. Note that the total number of BCBS providers providing mental health treatment

includes therapists. Measure (5) is also likely to be affected by the supply of psychiatrists

available to treat children. It includes all prescribers, not only those seeing BCBS children, but

captures only prescribing behavior. Measure (3) looks at whether PCPs who serve BCBS

children with mental illness seem to specialize in mental health treatment. Even if there are few

PCPs available to serve children with mental health needs, if each of them has a large share of

such children in their practice, then they might develop more expertise than a PCP who treats

few such patients. Measures (4) and (6) focus on whether the BCBS physicians or the larger set

of prescribers follow the prescribing guidelines, or whether they use prescriptions that raise a red

flag in terms of violating guidelines.

   While Table 1 provided a child-level overview of the data, Table 2 provides an area-level

perspective.   The first panel explores variability in treatment across areas. If we focus on the

interquartile range, which is less likely to be affected by small cell sizes, we can see that the

fraction of children who receive follow up treatment within 3 months varies from 56% to 100%.

There is an even larger range in the fraction of children who receive therapy alone (29% -

100%). One can also see that in most areas, no children receive drugs and therapy together. It is

only when one gets up to the 75th percentile of the distribution that one starts to see any children

with combination therapy. The fraction of children treated with drugs alone varies from zero at

the 25th percentile to 57% at the 75th percentile. The inter-quartile range in the fraction of




                                                  20
children receiving any red-flag drug treatment varies from 0 to 1. Most of this variation is

coming from different probabilities of receiving benzodiazepines and drugs which are not FDA

approved for children of a given age.

   The second panel of Table 2 shows that there is also a great deal of variation in the

availability of different types of mental health providers across areas. The number of

psychiatrists treating BCBS children per 1,000 BCBS children ranges from 4.91 at the 25th

percentile to 11.97 at the 75th percentile. The number of therapists is higher ranging from 19.60

to 37.71 over that range, and the number of PCPs providing mental health care is larger still,

ranging from 26.6 at the 25th percentile to 60.07 at the 75th percentile. One issue with these

conventional measures of supply side characteristics is that they do not exhibit very much

variation within market areas over time--most of the variation is between markets. In practice,

this means, for example, that many rural areas are chronically short of child psychiatrists.

   In what follows, we do not include these measures in our instrument list. We think that it is

important to include market-area level fixed effects in our regression models to control for time

invariant or slowly moving factors that may affect both treatment and our outcome measures.

But in models with area fixed effects, the lack of within-area variation is problematic. A

robustness check discussed further below demonstrates that when these variables are included in

the list of potential instruments, they are never selected by the Lasso procedure discussed below.

   The third panel of Table 2 focuses on measures of physician practice style, which have

greater promise as instruments because several of them show considerable variation within

markets over time in addition to variation between markets. These are the six instruments listed

above. It is striking that the share of mental health providers who are psychiatrists is low, only

reaching 18% at the 90th percentile of the area-level distribution. The share who are PCPs is also




                                                 21
quite low, reaching 24% at the 90th percentile. These figures indicate that in most places, it is

therapists (psychologists, social workers, and licensed clinical therapists) who make up the bulk

of the mental-health workforce. These two variables show the least within-area variation of the

six, yet they and their interactions are sometimes chosen in the Lasso procedure, so we continue

to include them in our list.

   Since PCPs are an important source of mental health care, we also look at the share of each

PCP's patients who receive a mental health drug, which has an interquartile range between 5 and

9%. Hence, while many PCPs are doing some prescribing, each one is doing relatively little,

suggesting that they may not develop a lot of expertise in providing mental health treatments.

   Since we are especially concerned with the question of whether treatment follows guidelines,

we look at the share of each mental health provider's prescriptions that are for red-flag drugs.

This share is remarkably high, and shows less variation across areas than some of the other

measures, ranging from 47% at the 25th percentile to 54% at the 75th percentile. However, 52%

of the variation in this measure is within areas, making it a good candidate instrument in our area

fixed effects models.

   As discussed above, we compute two supplementary measures of practice style using the

IQVIA prescriptions data. A nice feature of these data is that it is possible to identify the first

prescription that a child received. Table 2 shows that the share of new prescriptions by

psychiatrists is remarkably small, consistent with the small share of mental health providers who

are psychiatrists. The interquartile range is from 5 to 9%. The IQVIA data on the share of new

prescriptions that are for red-flag drugs is consistent with the BCBS data in that it is also quite

high: At the 25th percentile, 32% of new prescriptions are for red-flag drugs, rising to 40% at the

75th percentile and 44% at the 90th percentile. Half of the variation in this measure is within area.




                                                  22
IV. Methods

        Our goal is to investigate the effect of initial choices about the treatment of adolescents

with emerging mental illness on their medical trajectory over the next two years. We are

particularly interested in whether treatment that follows widely accepted guidelines is better than

treatment that does not.

        The baseline linear probability/OLS models take the form:

        (1) Outcomeymzi = b0 + b1*Treatmentymzi + b2*Femaleymzi + b3*Ageymzi + b4*(1st claim

             is hospitalization)ymzi + b5*(1st claim is an ER visit) ymzi + b6*(1st claim is an

             evaluation) ymzi + b7*(Any ER or hospital visit last 6 months) ymzi + b8*(Diagnosis

             codes) ymzi + b9*(Neurodevelopmental) ymzi + µm + gy + zz + eymzi.

Treatment is one of the four outcome variables discussed above. The first six variables are all

zero-one indicators. Age is entered linearly, because estimation using single year of age

indicators showed that treatment modalities do change in quite a linear way with age. Diagnoses

are captured with eight categories corresponding to F10-F19, F20-F29, ... F60-69, F93/F99, and

a "no diagnosis" category.13 Measures of whether the first claim was for an evaluation, an ER

visit, or a hospitalization are included as indicators of the severity of the child's condition.

Whether the child was hospitalized for any reason over the past six months can be viewed as a

measure of physical health status (since we are dealing with first claims for mental health, they

would not have been hospitalized for a mental health condition in the past six months).

Neurodevelopmental indicates that the child had an existing neurodevelopmental condition prior




13
 The diagnosis brackets are not mutually exclusive. Some children receive multiple diagnoses, which span the
main ICD-10 categories.


                                                       23
to this episode such as ADHD or autism spectrum disorder. The indicators µm + gy + zz are

month, year, and ZCTA fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the level of the ZCTA to

allow for correlations between children facing similar supply-side measures.

       The month and year fixed effects capture possible seasonal effects (such as those induced

by the school calendar) and time trends in outcomes and treatment propensities. The ZCTA

fixed effects control for relatively fixed differences across small areas such as urbanicity, racial

composition, and median income. They will also capture the mean numbers of mental health

professionals per capita over the sample period as well as area-level variables such as the

average distance to a hospital or emergency room.

       Establishing causality in such a model is difficult because even conditional on variables

like diagnosis, age, gender, and the measures of initial severity that we can see in the claims data,

there are likely to be omitted unobserved variables that affect treatment choices. One possibility

is that children who are sicker in an unobserved way will be more likely to be treated, and will be

treated more aggressively (i.e. with drugs, and perhaps with red-flag drugs). Alternatively, it is

possible that high SES parents demand prompter and more aggressive treatment for their

children, even if their children are on average less sick. It is even possible that some parents

demand certain drugs for their children, though that seems unlikely to be a widespread reason for

treatment choice in these cases of initial mental health treatment where parents may not have a

lot of experience with the condition and available treatments.

       While we will estimate linear probability or ordinary least squares models as a baseline,

causal inference will require identifying instruments that affect treatment decisions but are

uncorrelated with these omitted variables. Area-level measures of practice style offer a possible

solution to this problem. If most prescribers of psychiatric drugs in the market area prescribe




                                                 24
benzodiazepines to children, then a child should be more likely to receive them than if the child

was living in an area where no one prescribed them.

       That said, by controlling for ZCTA fixed effects, we control for cross-sectional

differences in supply-side variables that might be correlated with omitted characteristics of local

areas that impact both treatment and supply. This means that only variations in the practice style

measures within small areas over time are left to identify the effects of the supply-side

instruments on treatment choices.

       The simplest version of a first stage model that we could estimate with our six potential

instruments is:

       (2) Treatmentymzi = b0 + b1*Femaleymzi + b2*Ageymzi + b3*(1st claim is

           hospitalization)ymzi + b4*(1st claim is an ER visit) ymzi + b5*(1st claim is an

           evaluation) ymzi + b6*(Any ER or hospital visit last 6 months) ymzi + b7*(Diagnosis

           codes) ymzi + b8*(Neurodevelopmental) ymzi + µm + gy + zz + eymzi,

which includes the same controls as equation (1) but with the addition of the six candidate

instruments discussed above and their squared terms.

       However, these instruments collectively explain little of the variation in treatment. One

potential solution to this problem is to interact the instrumental variables with measures of

individual demographics, severity, and diagnosis. Substantively, this procedure is justified if for

example, in areas with many prescribers of benzodiazepines, children who first present in a

hospital or ER are more likely to receive them.

       Interacting the instruments and the controls leads to a very large set of potential

instruments, raising concerns about bias from weak instruments in a two-stage least squares

(TSLS) setting. Hence, we use the "post-Lasso" TSLS estimator discussed in Bellini et al.



                                                  25
(2012, 2014) and implemented in different contexts by Bellini et al. (2012) and Sands and

Gilchrist (2016). This method involves using Lasso to select the instruments to be included in

the first stage and then re-estimating OLS on the first stage with the Lasso-selected instruments

(hence, "post"-Lasso).

        Given our confidence in the need for patient controls such as age and gender in our

models in both the first and second stage, we require Lasso to select the individual controls that

are to be included in the second stage.14 The exogenous variables that we require Lasso to select

in the first stage include: Female, Age, 1st claim is hospitalization, 1st claim is an ER visit, 1st

claim is an evaluation, Any ER or hospital visit last 6 months, Diagnosis codes,

Neurodevelopmental, µm,gy, and zz.

        As potential instruments, we include a second degree polynomial of the original vector of

six instruments as well as interactions of the six instruments variables with Age, 1st claim is

hospitalization, 1st claim is an ER visit, 1st claim is an evaluation, Any ER or hospital visit last 6

months, Diagnosis codes, and Neurodevelopmental. Since including all of the possible diagnosis

codes results in a very large instrument set and many of the codes apply to few children, we

group diagnoses into four large groups for the purposes of the interactions: Anxiety or

depression, adjustment disorders (F43.2, adjustment disorders, the largest single diagnostic

category in our data), no diagnosis, and other. In the end, these interactions result in an

instrument vector with 87 potential instruments.15 We use the efficient F-statistic discussed by




14
  Alternatively, we could have partialled-out each control beforehand.
15
  The full potential instrument vector includes a second-degree polynomial of the six
instruments (N=27) and interactions with age (N=6), four severity measures (N=24), and five
diagnosis indicators (N=30).


                                                  26
Montiel Olea and Plueger (2013) to check that the instruments selected by Lasso pass a test for

weak instruments.

        Once Lasso selects the first-stage instruments, we estimate the effect of treatment on a

child's health outcomes in the second stage. This estimation is similar to the baseline model in

equation (1) replacing the child's actual treatment status with predicted treatment from the first-

stage regression. Our main results are based on the set of instruments chosen using a refined

data-driven penalty, as described in Bellini et al. (2012). In our application, this procedure

selects between two and eight instruments.16 We also present a variety of robustness checks

using different subsets of potential instrument vector (e.g. the "top 3" instruments selected by

Lasso in the first stage).



V. Estimation Results

      A. First stage estimates

We begin with an analysis of the factors that influence the treatment received in the three months

following an initial claim for mental illness. An initial set of first stage estimates including only

the six original instruments and their squared terms is shown in Table 3. They show that the

probability of any treatment, drug treatment, and "red-flag" drug treatments all increase with age,

and are higher for girls than for boys. Children whose first claim resulted from a hospitalization

are less likely to be treated in the next three months but more likely to be treated with drugs and

more likely to receive red-flag drug treatments. Children whose first mental health claim

resulted from an ER visit are also less likely to receive any follow-up treatment in the next three




16
  See Appendix Table A2 for the full list of instruments chosen by Lasso in each model
discussed in the paper.


                                                 27
months. This might reflect a lack of access to care, which may be one reason they were first

seen in an ER (or hospital) setting. Children who were hospitalized at all in the past six months

for other reasons are more likely to be treated, more likely to receive drug treatment, and more

likely to receive red-flag drug treatment than other children.

          Turning to the practice style instruments, we can see that some are individually

statistically significant in a first stage regression model. Column (1) shows that the share of

BCBS mental health providers who are psychiatrists is negatively associated with getting follow

up treatment within three months at low levels and positively associated with treatment

probabilities at high levels. Column (2) indicates that conditional on receiving any treatment

within three months of the initial claim, the BCBS share of mental health providers who are

primary care physicians is positively associated with drug treatment at low levels, turning

negative at higher levels. The share of new prescriptions in the IQVIA data that are written by

psychiatrists is inversely related to the probability that treatment involves drugs at low levels, but

becomes positive at higher levels.

          Columns (3) and (4) both look at the probability of receiving red-flag drug treatments,

where column (3) is conditional on any treatment, and column (4) is conditional on any drug

treatment. None of the supply-side instruments are individually statistically significant in

column (3), while in column (4) the BCBS mean share of provider prescriptions that are for red-

flag drugs has a positive effect on red-flag treatment at high levels, and the IQVIA share of new

prescriptions by psychiatrists has a positive effect at low levels, and a negative effect at high

levels.

          The key issue, however, is not whether any of these variables are individually statistically

significant, but whether they jointly explain much of the treatment variables. This question is




                                                  28
addressed in Table 4, which summarizes the R-squared and the Montiel Olea and Plueger

effective F statistics (FEFF). The first column shows the R-squared for the OLS regression

without any instruments as a baseline. Column (2) repeats the R-squareds from Table 3, the first

stage regression with the six supply-side instruments and their squared terms. For the most part,

the R-squareds are identical to the baseline column (1) models, showing that the instruments

collectively explain little of the variation in the treatments. Not surprisingly then, the FEFF for

these models range from 2 to 10, indicating that they do not pass a weak instruments test.

       It is reasonable to expect the effects of the practice style variables to vary considerably

with demographics, severity, and diagnosis. Column (3) shows that a first stage model that

included all of the interactions discussed above does fit better, and the value of FEFF also shows

that such a model would pass the weak instruments test in the models for treatment and for drugs

conditional on treatment. But the full interaction first stage would not pass a weak instruments

test in the models of red-flag drug treatments, which are of particular interest.

       The last two columns show first-stage models where Lasso has selected a more limited

set of controls. In column (4), the Lasso is constrained to select at most three instruments.

These models do not fit as well as the "full interaction" model would, but they do appreciably

improve the fit relative to no instruments or to the main 12-item vector of instruments. Column

(5) uses the instrument set chosen by Lasso using the refined data-driven penalty discussed in

Bellini et al. (2012). These models fit almost as well as the "full interaction" model, but are

much more parsimonious. The FEFF statistics in columns (4) and (5) indicate that all of the

models pass a weak instruments test. Hence, we will focus most of our attention on the post-

Lasso estimates using the refined data-driven penalty instrument sets in what follows.




                                                  29
     B. Two Stage Least Squares Estimates of the Effects of Treatments on Outcomes

       Table 5 focuses on costs, both overall total costs and costs for mental health care

specifically. We examine effects at 3 months, 12 months, and 24 months in order to see both the

short-run and medium-term effect of treatment choices. The first row shows OLS estimates.

Not surprisingly, the initial effect of treatment on costs is positive, increasing overall costs 44%,

where much of this increase is accounted for by the cost of mental health treatment itself. Over

the next 12 to 24 months, overall costs increase by a slightly smaller amount, suggesting some

cost savings in the longer term, even though costs for mental health care continue to rise.

However, these OLS results may be biased by selection into treatment.

       The post-Lasso TSLS estimates suggest that the OLS estimate of the effect of treatment

on total costs is biased upwards, especially in the short run. However, by 24 months, the effects

on total costs are remarkably similar in the OLS and TSLS models. The effects of treatment on

mental health costs are consistently larger in the TSLS models than in OLS. Overall, the results

indicate that receiving mental health treatment in the first three months after an initial claim is

associated with higher costs for mental health treatment, leading to higher overall health care

costs in both the short and medium run. That is, the higher initial costs are not offset by lower

costs down the road.

       The second panel of Table 5 shows the effect of receiving drug treatment, conditional on

any treatment. Children who did not receive drug treatment received therapy alone. The OLS

estimates suggest that mental health costs are lower for people who receive drug treatment, but

that overall health care costs are higher. However, the post-Lasso TSLS estimates indicate that

both types of costs are significantly higher when children initially receive drug treatment.

Effects on total costs are somewhat front-loaded with large initial increases in costs that




                                                 30
gradually taper off. It is possible that some of the initially high costs reflect negative drug

reactions. By two years out, children who are receiving drug treatment have total costs 94%

higher than those who received therapy alone. This finding supports guidelines which suggest

that it is useful to start with therapy.

        The third and fourth panels address the question of the type of drug therapy received, and

whether it is broadly consistent with practice guidelines or whether it raises a red flag. The OLS

estimates suggest that red-flag drug treatment reduces mental health costs, while increasing

overall costs. However, the post-Lasso estimates reverse the sign of the estimates for mental

health care costs. They suggest that red-flag prescribing raises both mental health costs and total

costs much more than other forms of treatment.

        Panel 4 focuses on children who received drug treatment, and looks at the effect of

receiving red-flag drugs in this sub-population. Here the post-Lasso estimates confirm that there

are higher total costs by 12 months, persisting to 24 months, when the total costs are 238%

higher than the costs for children who received drug treatment that was consistent with

guidelines (this is just the exponentiated coefficient from Panel D). Initially mental health costs

are lower, but by 24 months there is no statistically significant effect. These estimates suggest

then that it may be initially cheaper to treat a child with red-flag drugs, but that it increases non-

mental health medical care costs.

        Table 6 examines effects on facility use. Since ER visits and hospitalizations are very

expensive, they could be a significant driver of higher health care costs. These visits are also

important outcomes in their own right since ER visits and hospitalizations represent traumatic

events for children and their families and suggest that the initial treatment pursued was not

effective and/or led to significant side effects. OLS estimates indicate that treatment is




                                                  31
associated with higher facility use, measured as an ER visit or hospitalization. Treatment is also

associated with 0.56 more nights in the hospital by 24 months out, compared to no treatment

within three months.

        The post-Lasso TSLS estimates suggest that these effects are biased towards zero in OLS.

Among children who are treated, the probability of an ER visit or hospitalization rises in the first

three months by 62 percent. The effect falls to a 49.2% higher rate of facility use over the next

24 months. We also see a significant increase in the number of overnight stays in the hospital to

2.58 by 24 months out. These results suggest that the higher costs for treated children observed

in Table 5 are in part accounted for by greater facility use. Possibly, once they are in treatment

children are more likely to be taken to hospital when there is any deterioration in their condition.

        Another possibility is that treated children are more likely to go to the hospital because

drug treatment involves a higher risk of side effects. The second panel of Table 6 explores this

possibility by examining the effect of drug treatment conditional on any treatment. The TSLS

estimates show higher probabilities of facility use in the first three months of treatment. The

instruments further suggest an increase at 12 months, though not at 24 months. These results are

consistent with the idea that particularly in the short-term after treatment is first initiated, drug

therapy is associated with a higher number of visits to the hospital than therapy alone.

However, the estimates also suggest that by 24 months there is a reduction in the number of

nights in the hospital of about one and a half days. Hence, drug therapy may involve a tradeoff:

A higher short-run risk of ER visits due to side effects, but a longer-term benefit as a tolerable

drug regime is found by trial and error.

        The last two panels of Table 6 turn to the question of whether we can detect a beneficial

effect of following drug guidelines when prescribing for children. The third panel shows that




                                                  32
compared to children who receive other treatments, children who received red-flag drug

treatments in the first three months after an initial claim are much more likely to have a visit to

the hospital: The probability rises by 20 percentage points on a baseline of 10.1%. The

estimated effects on overnight stays in the hospital are too imprecisely estimated to be

informative but suggest that much of the increase in facility use may be coming from visits to the

ER which do not result in overnight stays.

       The last panel of Table 6 offers a sharper comparison by focusing on children who

received drugs in the first three months after their initial claim, and comparing children who

received red-flag drugs to those who received other drugs. The estimates on any facility use

show a 10.9 percentage point higher probability after three months on a baseline of 14.9%, for an

increase of 73%. This effect falls to a 48.4% increase by 24 months. Again, the estimated

effects on overnight stays in the hospital are too imprecisely estimated to be informative.

Overall, these estimates suggest that receiving a prescription that violates practice guidelines is

associated with a higher probability of ER visits, which is one of the drivers of higher costs in

these children.

       To summarize, both the OLS and the post-Lasso TSLS estimates indicate that total costs

are significantly higher for children who receive follow-up treatment in the next three months

after their initial claim. Conditional on treatment, those who receive drug treatments have even

higher total health care costs, and conditional on receiving drug treatment, those who get red-flag

treatments have the highest costs. The post-Lasso estimates are consistently higher than the OLS

estimates, suggesting that the marginal child who receives drug treatment or red-flag treatments

due to local variations in practice style incurs higher overall health care costs.




                                                  33
           The estimated effects of treatment types on mental health costs are more complicated.

We see that treatment does increase mental health care costs as one would expect, in both OLS

and the post-Lasso estimates. Conditional on treatment, drug treatment has a negative effect in

OLS, as does red-flag drug treatment conditional on drug treatment. However, the former effect

is reversed in the post-Lasso models, suggesting that drug treatment raises mental health care

costs overall. Red-flag treatments are estimated to increase costs further conditional on being

treated.

           Figure 3 traces out the implications for total costs of each choice in the treatment decision

tree holding all else equal. The numbers are based on the estimates in Table 5, and we focus

here on the total costs at 24 months. Figure 3 has a number of interesting implications. First,

although treated children have higher average costs than untreated children, this is primarily due

to higher costs among the group getting drug treatment: Children who receive only therapy have

lower costs over the next 24 months ($3415) than children who did not receive follow up

treatment within three months ($3537). Second, drug treatment leads to higher costs mainly

because of the high cost associated with red flag drug treatments: Children who had drug

treatments that followed guidelines have average costs of $4052 over the next 24 months

compared to $9653 for children receiving "red flag" drug therapies.

           Some of the higher costs associated with any treatment, drug treatment, and red-flag

treatments may be due to higher rates of facility use (defined as ER visits or hospitalizations).

Figure 4 traces out the implications of each step in the decision tree for cumulative use of ER

rooms and hospitalizations over 24 months. Children with red-flag drug treatments have the

highest facility use, but this does not entirely explain the higher facility use among treated

children: Even children with therapy alone have higher facility use than children who did not




                                                    34
immediately receive follow-up treatment. It is possible that people in treatment are more likely

to be advised to use the ER as a way to stay safe.



     C. Robustness

       In the discussion above we have emphasized conclusions based on a post-Lasso TSLS

procedure with a set of instruments chosen using the refined data-driven penalty

discussed in Bellini (2012). However, it is useful to think about how robust these conclusions

are to changes in the instrument set. In this section, we briefly discuss estimates using

alternative instrument sets. The first uses the "top three" instruments chosen by the Lasso

procedure. These estimates are shown in Table 7 (for costs) and Table 8 (for facility use).

       On the whole, these results are remarkably consistent with those discussed above. The

results for the effects of any treatment in the three months following an initial claim are almost

identical. Estimates for the effects of drug treatment conditional on treatment are smaller than

those discussed above, but show the same qualitative patterns. The estimates for the effects of

red-flag drugs conditional on treatment are very similar for costs, but differ in sign for the effects

on facility use after 24 months. However, the estimated effects of red-flag drugs conditional on

any drugs are remarkably consistent in the two specifications. On the whole then, the estimates

are quite robust to using this alternative instrument set. We prefer the main results presented

previously because in all cases, the optimally chosen instrument set has more explanatory power

in the first stage than the top three instruments.

       Another issue raised above has to do with children in our sample who are missing official

diagnoses. While we believe that most of the children with missing diagnoses do have a mental

health condition and so arguably should be included in the main sample, we have also re-




                                                     35
estimated our models excluding these children. These results are shown in Tables 9 and 10, and

Appendix Figures A1 and A2 show calculations analogous to Figures 3 and 4 about the

implications of the estimates for total costs and facility use in different groups of children.

       For the most part, the qualitative patterns are similar though the magnitudes vary. We

find, for example, that by 24 months children who are treated have 51.6% higher total health care

costs in this sample, compared to 33.1% higher in the full sample. The estimated effects of

treatment on the probability of having any facility visits (ER or hospitalization) and on overnight

stays in the hospital is very similar in the two samples.

       Compared to other treated children, those who received drug treatment have total costs

86.1% higher after 24 months in this sample, compared to 93.7% higher in the original sample.

The estimated effects on facility use are very similar to those discussed above.

       Turning to red-flag drug treatments, in the original sample we find that total costs are

205.1% higher for children receiving these treatments than for all treated children after 24

months. The corresponding number is 269.5% higher in the restricted sample.18 We also see

increases in facility use in both samples at three months, and in the restricted sample, we also see

an increase at 12 months.

       There may also be questions about the exclusion of psychiatrists per 1,000 BCBS

children, therapists per 1,000 BCBS children, and PCPs providing mental health services per

1,000 BCBS from our main instrument list. As discussed above, we also tried estimating our

models including these variables as potential instruments and found that they were not selected




18
   In the main sample, we can take the red-flag drug treated child's costs divided by the average
treated child's costs (9653/4708). In the diagnosis only sample, the equivalent ratio is
(13270/4924).


                                                  36
in the first stage Lasso procedure so that their inclusion in the potential instrument set had no

effect on our estimates.19

          One caveat to our results is that differences in parental attitudes, preferences, or financial

considerations (co-pays) could explain at least some of the variation in the probability that any

follow-up treatment is obtained in the three months after the initial mental health claim, or in the

probability that a child is prescribed psychiatric drugs. In areas where parents believe strongly in

the efficacy of drug therapy, we may see PCPs prescribing drugs to a larger share of the children

in their practices, for example. By a similar logic, we might expect then to see a corresponding

decrease (increase) in the share of mental health treatment being administered by psychiatrists

(PCPs). We have estimated models excluding these instruments and their interactions from the

potential instrument list provided to Lasso, and we find that our results, presented in Appendix

Tables A3 and A4, are robust to this change. We think it less plausible that parental demand

could be the main driver of variation in the types of drugs prescribed conditional on any

prescription. In our context, that would imply that many parents are demanding that their

children with newly emerging mental health conditions be initially treated with non-FDA

approved drugs, benzodiazepines, or tricyclic antidepressants.

          Overall then, our results are robust to variations in the instrument set and to excluding

children with missing diagnostic data.



VI. Discussion and Conclusions

          We use health insurance claims data to explore the effects of variation in mental health

treatment received in the first three months after an initial claim for mental illness. We focus on



19
     Column 4 of Appendix Table A2 shows which instruments were chosen in that specification.


                                                    37
initial claims for several reasons. First, this is a setting where treatment guidelines may be

especially useful since clinicians will typically have little history to inform their decision

making. Second, there is persistence in mental health treatment choices over time, suggesting

that the initial choice is especially important. Third, there is a lot of treatment that violates

treatment guidelines in this setting, even though the guidelines are not especially stringent.

        Most of the children in our sample would have received therapy, or an SSRI in

combination with therapy, had they been treated according to evidence-based guidelines. While

all of the treatments we single out as red-flag treatments may possibly be appropriate in some

cases, guidelines suggest that their use should be rare. And yet, nearly half of children (45.2%)

treated with drugs receive benzodiazepines, tricyclic anti-depressants, or drugs that are not FDA-

approved in the first three months after their initial health claim.

        Since treatment is likely to be affected by many unobserved factors that we cannot

observe in claims data, we pursue an instrumental variables strategy. Our instruments are based

on the idea that conditional on area fixed effects, children living in different places face doctors

with different practice styles, and that this is an exogenous source of variation in the treatment

that they will receive. Give a large number of possible instruments, and concerns about bias due

to weak instruments, we use the post-Lasso method suggested by Bellini et al. (2012) in which

Lasso is used to select instruments from the large pool of potential variables.

        We find that receiving mental health treatment in the first three months after an initial

claim is associated with higher costs for mental health treatment, and that higher initial costs are

not offset by lower costs down the road. The costs are higher among those receiving drug

therapy, and within this group, the highest costs are among children who receive what we dub

red-flag drug treatments. In fact, our estimates imply that higher costs among treated children




                                                  38
can be entirely explained by the costs associated with children getting red-flag drug treatments.

Children who receive therapy alone in the first three months after an initial mental health claim

have lower costs after 24 months than those who do not. Our estimates imply that, by 24 months

out, children who initially received a red-flag drug have 205% higher than the mean for all

treated children and are 131% more likely to have used an emergency room or experienced a

hospitalization. These costs are front-loaded and taper off over time, suggesting that red-flag

drug treatments may raise costs by leading to significant side effects.

       These results break new ground and contribute to several strands of literature. First, they

focus on an important determinant of children's non-cognitive skills: Their mental health. We

show that although the initial emergence of mental health conditions offers an potentially

important place to intervene in children's life trajectories, large numbers of U.S. children are

receiving mental health care that falls outside of accepted guidelines and poses risks to their

health. These risks are demonstrated by higher subsequent overall health care costs among these

children.

       Second, the results provide support for the guidelines themselves, contributing to the on-

going controversy about "rules vs. discretion" in medicine. Third, this research suggests that

analyses of large scale claims data can provide a useful complement to clinical research studies

in identifying best practices. Such analyses are now more feasible than ever before given

advances in machine learning and econometrics.




                                                 39
References

Bansak, Cynthia and Stephen Raphael. 2008. "The State Children's Health Insurance Program
and Job Mobility: Identifying Job Lock among Working Parents in Near-Poor Households,"
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 61(4): 564­579.

Belloni, Alexandre, Daniel Chen, Victor Chernozhukov, and Christian Hansen. 2012. "Sparse
Models and Methods for Optimal Instruments With an Application to Eminent Domain.,"
Econometrica, 80(6): 2369­2429.

Belloni, Alexandre, Victor Chernozhukov, and Christian Hansen. 2014. "High-dimensional
methods and inference on structural and treatment effects." Journal of Economic Perspectives,
28: 29­50.

Berndt Ernest, Robert Gibbons, Anton Kolotilin, Anna Taub. 2015. "The heterogeneity of
concentrated prescribing behavior: Theory and evidence from antipsychotics," Journal of Health
Economics 40:26­39.

Birmaher Boris, David A. Brent, AACAP Work Group on Quality Issues. 2007. "Practice
Parameter for the Assessment and Treatment of Children and Adolescents With Depressive
Disorders," J . Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 46(11).

Borghans, Lex, Angela Duckworth, James J. Heckman and Bas Ter Weel. "The Economics and
Psychology of Personality Traits," J. Human Resources Fall 2008 vol. 43 no. 4 972-1059

Connolly Sucheta, Gail Bernstein, AACAP Work Group on Quality Issues. 2007. "Practice
Parameter for the Assessment and Treatment of Children and Adolescents With Anxiety
Disorders." J . Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 46(2): 267-283.

Cuddy, Emily and Janet Currie. "Treatment of Mental Illness in the U.S. Adolescents Varies
Widely Within and Across Areas," May 2020.

Currie, Janet, William B. MacLeod, and Jessica Van Parys. 2016. "Physician Practice Style and
Patient Health Outcomes: The Case of Heart Attacks," Journal of Health Economics, 47: 64­80.

Currie, Janet, William B. MacLeod. 2017. "Diagnosis and Unnecessary Procedure Use:
Evidence from C-Section," Journal of Labor Economics, 35: 1­42.

Currie Janet, William B. MacLeod . 2020. "Understanding Doctor Decision Making: The Case
of Depression Treatment," Econometrica, 88 #3, May 2020, 847-878.

Currie Janet, Mark Stabile, Phongsack Manivong, Les Roos. 2010. "Child Health and Young
Adult Outcomes," Journal of Human Resources 45(3):517-548.

Cutler, David, Jonathan Skinner, Ariel D. Stern, and David Wennberg. 2019. "Physician Beliefs
and Patient Preferences: A New Look at Regional Variation In Health Care Spending," American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 11: 192­221.


                                              40
Findling Robert L., Ekaterina Stepanova. 2018. "The Workforce Shortage of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatrists: Is It Time for a Different Approach?" Journal of American Academy of
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 57(5):300-301.

Finkelstein Amy, Matthew Gentzkow, Heidi Williams. 2015. "Sources of geographic variation in
health care: Evidence from patient migration," The Quarterly Journal of Economics
131(4):1681­1726.

Fisher Elliot S., David Wennberg, Thérèse A. Stukel, Daniel J. Gottlieb, F. L. Lucas, and Etoile
Pinder. 2003a. "The implications of regional variations in medicare spending," Annals of Internal
Medicine 138 (4): 273­298.

Fisher Elliot S., David Wennberg, Thérèse A. Stukel, Daniel J. Gottlieb, F. L. Lucas, and Etoile
Pinder. 2003b. "The Implications of Regional Variations in Medicare Spending. Part 2: Health Outcomes
and Satisfaction with Care," Ann Intern Med 138(4):288­298.

Frank Richard G, Richard J. Zeckhauser. 2007. "Custom-made versus ready-to-wear treatments:
Behavioral propensities in physicians' choices," Journal of Health Economics 26(6):1101 ­
1127.

Fremont Wanda P., Robert Nastasi, Nancy Newman, Nancy Roizin. 2008. "Comfort Level of
Pediatricians and Family Medicine Physicians Diagnosing and Treating Child and Adolescent
Psychiatric Disorders," Int J Psychiatry Med. 38(2):153-68.

Ghandour Reem M, Laura J. Sherman, Catherine J. Vladutiu, Mir M. Ali, Sean E. Lynch,
Rebecca H. Bitsko, Stephen J. Blumberg. 2019. "Prevalence and treatment of depression,
anxiety, and conduct problems in U.S. children," The Journal of Pediatrics, 206:256­267.

Health Resources and Services Administration/National Center for Health Workforce Analysis;
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration/Office of Policy, Planning, and
Innovation. 2015. National Projections of Supply and Demand for Behavioral Health
Practitioners: 2013-2025. Rockville, Maryland.

Heckman, James, J. 2000. "Policies to Foster Human Capital," Research in Economics, 54 (1): 3-
56.

Heckman, James J., Jora Stixrud, and Sergio Urzua. The Effects of Cognitive and Noncognitive
Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior, Journal of Labor Economics 2006
24:3, 411-482.

Heneghan Amy, Andrew S. Garner, Amy Storfer-Isser, Karl Kortepeter, Ruth E.K, Stein, Sarah
M. Horwitz. 2008. "Pediatricians' Role in Providing Mental Health Care for Children and
Adolescents: Do Pediatricians and Child and Adolescent Psychiatrists Agree?," Journal of
Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics, 29(4):262-269.




                                                 41
Hilt, Robert J, Monica Chaudhari, Janice F Bell, Christine Wolf, Kent Koprowicz, and Bryan H
King. 2014. Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology. March: 83-89.

Kessler Daniel P, Mark B. McClellan. 2000. "Is Hospital Competition Socially Wasteful?"
Quarterly Journal of Economics 115(2):577-615.

McBain, Ryan K. Aaron Kofner, Bradley D. Stein, Jonathan H. Cantor, William B. Vogt, Hao
Yu. 2019. "Growth and Distribution of Child Psychiatrists in the United States: 2007-2016,"
Pediatrics, 144 (6).

McClellan J, S Stock, AACAP Work Group on Quality Issues. 2013. "Practice Parameter for the
Assessment and Treatment of Children and Adolescents With Schizophrenia," J . Am. Acad.
Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 52(9):976-990.

McQuaid J, Members of the Guideline Development Panel for the Treatment of Depressive
Disorders. 2019. "Clinical Practice Guideline for the Treatment of Depression Across Three Age
Cohorts," American Psychological Association Guideline Development Panel for the Treatment
of Depressive Disorders.

Montiel Olea, Jose L. and Carolin E. Pflueger. 2013. "A Robust Test for Weak Instruments,"
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 31, 358-369.

Sands Elizabeth G, Duncan S. Gilchrist. 2016. "Something to Talk About: Social Spillovers in
Movie Consumption," Journal of Political Economy 124 (5) :1339-1382.

Smith James P, Gillian Smith. 2010. "Long-term economic costs of psychological problems
during childhood," Social Science and Medicine, 71(1): 110-115.

Thomas Christopher R, Cordula E. Holzer. 2006 "The Continuing Shortage of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatrists," Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry
45(9):1023-1031.




                                              42
                                                        Figure 1
                              Prevalence of Childhood Mental Illness in BCBS Coverage Areas




Notes: This figure shows the prevalence of mental illness among children (10-17) with BCBS coverage between 2012-2018. Each
polygon represents a Census zip code tabulation area (ZCTA), where the blue-shaded polygons are ZCTAs with at least twenty
children with BCBS coverage.
                                          Figure 2
Illustrating the Definition of the Market Area for A Specific Zip Code, Princeton NJ, 08540

                                                            08540


                                                                    New Jersey




                  Pennsylvania




                                                                       Atlantic Ocean




Notes: BCBS children residing in Princeton NJ saw providers for mental health services in their
own zip code (08540) and also in the zip codes that are coded in lighter blue. Hence, these zip
codes together are considered the relevant market area for children in Princeton NJ. Markets for
all other zip codes are defined analogously, so that providers in each zip code may form part of
the market for children residing in multiple zip codes. We include up to 10 ZCTAs in each
market ranked in terms of the number of children who travel there (as in this example); in
markets where children traveled to fewer than 10 ZCTAs, we use only those ZCTAs.
                                           Figure 3
                           Implications for Total Cost at 24 Months




Notes: This figure traces out the implications of each initial treatment choice on total costs at 24
months. The share of children in each branch appears in parentheses. Cost estimates are based on
post-Lasso estimates in column 3 of Table 5.
                                           Figure 4
                          Implications for Facility Use at 24 Months




Notes: This figure traces out the implications of each initial treatment choice on facility use--ER
visit or hospitalization--at 24 months. The share of children in each branch appears in
parentheses. Cost estimates are based on post-Lasso estimates in column 3 of Table 6.
                                                         Table 1
                                                Descriptive Statistics
                                           (1)    (2)      (3)        (4)   (5)     (6)    (7)    (8)
                                                All MH                    Therapy Therapy       Red-flag
                                       All BCBS          Sample Treated                   Drugs
                                                BCBS                       Only and Drugs        Drugs
A: Child Characteristics
Number of children                   2,201,566 202,066 97,306              70,886     42,236        5,362      28,650     13,102
  % of sample                             -        -      -                 73%        43%           6%         29%        13%
Female                                 0.490     0.528  0.505               0.516     0.503         0.584      0.536       0.557
Age 1st appearance in sample           7.581     8.395  8.728               8.756     8.686         8.969      8.860       8.879
Hospitalized, any reason               0.012     0.030  0.036               0.039     0.027         0.100      0.056       0.069
ER, any reason                         0.099     0.158  0.176               0.187     0.182         0.298      0.193       0.196
Average monthly costs ($2018)           $157     $302   $346                $358       $291         $514        $456       $596
Neurodevelopmental condition           0.133     0.318  0.348               0.331     0.369         0.464      0.275       0.255
Neuro condition is ADHD                0.100     0.233  0.265               0.255     0.288         0.346      0.206       0.183
Age, 1st mental illness episode           -     12.023 11.492              11.501     11.409       11.866      11.637     11.690
Hospitalized, 1st mental illness          -      0.012  0.010               0.009     0.004         0.055      0.016       0.015
ER, 1st mental illness                    -      0.033  0.031               0.027     0.027         0.053      0.026       0.023
1st episode is an evaluation              -      0.421  0.446               0.473     0.722         0.452      0.106       0.078
B: Prevalance of ICD10 Diagnoses in the Sample
Substance use (F10-F19)                          0.013  0.008              0.003       0.003        0.014       0.004     0.004
Non-mood psychotic disorders (F20-F29)           0.013  0.012              0.010       0.007        0.053       0.015     0.012
Mood disorders (F30-F39)                         0.161  0.136              0.144       0.141        0.501       0.148     0.104
Anxiety / stress disorders (F40-F49)             0.573  0.547              0.553       0.736        0.828       0.284     0.227
Behavioral syndromes (F50-F59)                   0.027  0.025              0.014       0.013        0.046       0.015     0.016
Personality and behavioral disorders (F60-F69) 0.020    0.020              0.014       0.015        0.045       0.013     0.011
Other disorders originating in childhood         0.060  0.053              0.021       0.024        0.045       0.017     0.014
No MH diagnosis                                  0.267  0.308              0.363       0.165        0.050       0.654     0.724
Table 1. Data is from the BCBS Axis data base of insurance claims for 2012 to 2018. It covers children who have a valid
master member ID, pharmacy coverage, valid geographic information, and who were observed both before age 11 and for
at least one year between the ages of 10 and 18. Children in column 2 had at least one claim related to mental illness.
Column 3 includes all children who can be followed for at least 3 months; column 4 includes all children who can be
followed for at least 24 months: this is our population of interest in the analysis. Column 4 includes those who received any
follow up treatment in the 3 months following an initial claim. Children in column 5 received only therapy (no drugs) in
the three months following the initial claim. Column 6 includes children who received both therapy and drugs in the three
months following the initial claim. Column 7 includes children who received only drug treatment (no therapy) in the three
months following the initial claim. Column 8 includes children who received benzodiazepines, tricyclic anti-depressants, or
a non-FDA approved drug in the 3 months following the first claim. The variables "Hospitalized, any reason," "ER, any
reason," and "Average Monthly Costs" are computed taking the average over all of the months that a child appears in the
data, and then both facility measures are annualized. Dashes indicate that the category is not applicable.
                                                        Table 2
                          Small-Area Variation in Treatment, Provider Supply, and Practice Style
                                                                                                                 Within- Between-
Percentiles of the Area-Level Distribution:                              10th 25th 50th 75th 90th                ZCTA      ZCTA
                                                                                                                Variation Variation
A. Treatment (Source is BCBS)
Child treated within 3 months                                            0.20    0.56    0.77    1.00    1.00       37%          63%
Therapy Only (if any treatment)                                          0.00    0.29    0.58    1.00    1.00       51%          49%
Drugs & Therapy (if any treatment)                                       0.00    0.00    0.00    0.06    0.25       57%          43%
Drugs Only (if any treatment)                                            0.00    0.00    0.33    0.57    1.00       51%          49%
Red-flag Drug (if any drug treatment)                                    0.00    0.00    0.50    1.00    1.00       58%          42%
 Benzodiazepines                                                         0.00    0.00    0.00    0.33    1.00       60%          40%
 Tricyclic antidepressants                                               0.00    0.00    0.00    0.00    0.40       61%          39%
 Not FDA approved                                                        0.00    0.00    0.00    0.50    1.00       60%          40%
B. Provider Supply (Source is BCBS)
Psychiatrists per 1,000 BCBS children 10-17                               3.49 4.91 7.45 11.97 17.90                6%           94%
Therapists per 1,000 BCBS children 10-17                                 14.74 19.60 26.70 37.71 51.59              9%           91%
PCPs providing MH treatment per 1,000 BCBS children 10-17                17.80 26.60 39.77 60.07 89.23              9%           91%
C. Practice Style (Source is BCBS or IQVIA)
BCBS: Share MH providers who are psychiatrists                           0.07    0.09    0.11    0.15    0.18       8%           92%
BCBS: Share MH providers who are PCPs                                    0.12    0.15    0.18    0.22    0.24       11%          89%
BCBS: Share PCP's patients who receive a MH drug                         0.03    0.05    0.07    0.09    0.11       35%          65%
BCBS: Share provider prescriptions for red-flag drugs                    0.43    0.47    0.51    0.54    0.58       52%          48%
IQVIA: Share new prescriptions by psychiatrists                          0.03    0.05    0.07    0.09    0.12       35%          65%
IQVIA: Share new prescriptions for red-flag drugs                        0.28    0.32    0.36    0.40    0.44       50%          50%
Notes: This table is calculated by computing small area-level rates and then calculating percentiles of the distributions of those
rates. Small areas are defined using information about where children in a particular zip code actually go to receive mental
health care. Each row represents a separate distribution of ZCTAs. For example, places at the 90th percentile in terms of
psychiatrists per capita could be at the 10th percentile in terms of the fraction of PCPs treating mental health. BCBS indicates
that the variable is calculated using our main sample. IQVIA indicates that the data was calculated using that data base. The
variables "within" and "between" ZCTA variation represent the decomposition of total variation in each treatment, supply, and
style measure.
                                          Table 3
                Regressions with 6 Main Interactions and Quadratic Terms
                                         (1)           (2)           (3)        (4)
                                                                 Red-flag   Red-flag
                                     Treated         Drugs
                                                                   Drugs      Drugs
Conditional on:                           -                Treatment         Drugs
Child female                          0.023**       0.025**       0.029**    0.043**
                                      (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.003)    (0.006)
Child age (Years)                     0.004**       0.018**       0.014**    0.015**
                                      (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)    (0.003)
1st claim is hospitalization         -0.057**       0.116**       0.089**    0.095**
                                      (0.017)       (0.022)       (0.020)    (0.024)
1st claim is ER visit                -0.084**        -0.013       -0.018*     -0.028
                                      (0.026)       (0.012)       (0.009)    (0.018)
1st claim is evaluation               0.062**      -0.428**      -0.197**   -0.034**
                                      (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.004)    (0.011)
Hospitalized last 6 months            0.042**       0.097**       0.194**    0.226**
                                      (0.014)       (0.013)       (0.016)    (0.023)
ICD10: F10-F19                       -0.144**       0.094**         0.036      0.018
                                      (0.017)       (0.029)       (0.024)    (0.041)
ICD10: F20-F29                         -0.005       0.176**       0.083**      0.040
                                      (0.014)       (0.019)       (0.015)    (0.025)
ICD10: F30-F39                        0.253**       0.208**       0.030**   -0.106**
                                      (0.005)       (0.008)       (0.005)    (0.011)
ICD10: F40-F48                        0.336**       0.108**        0.013*   -0.046**
                                      (0.006)       (0.009)       (0.007)    (0.014)
ICD10: F50-F59                       -0.082**       0.111**       0.072**    0.094**
                                      (0.010)       (0.015)       (0.013)    (0.023)
ICD10: F60-F69                          0.015       0.090**        0.026*      0.013
                                      (0.010)       (0.016)       (0.012)    (0.024)
Other MH diagnosis                   -0.126**       0.087**       0.032**     -0.005
                                      (0.008)       (0.012)       (0.009)    (0.024)
No MH diagnosis                       0.503**       0.468**       0.235**    0.081**
                                      (0.009)       (0.012)       (0.009)    (0.016)
Neurodevelopmental condition         -0.042**      -0.074**      -0.046**      0.003
                                      (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.003)    (0.007)
BCBS: Share MH providers              -0.386*         0.096         0.071      0.092
 who are psychiatrists                (0.181)       (0.178)       (0.150)    (0.310)
     share squared                    1.054+         -0.642        -0.360     -0.302
                                      (0.593)       (0.547)       (0.458)    (1.005)
BCBS: Share MH providers               -0.272       0.742**         0.197     -0.140
 who are PCPs                         (0.265)       (0.249)       (0.209)    (0.444)
     share squared                      0.468       -1.410*        -0.338      0.417
                                           (0.672)         (0.680)        (0.576)          (1.148)
BCBS: Share PCP's patients                   0.201           0.297         -0.024           -0.345
 who receive an MH drug                    (0.134)         (0.182)        (0.154)          (0.331)
     share squared                          -0.435          -0.579         -0.301           -0.092
                                           (0.522)         (0.636)        (0.517)          (1.063)
BCBS: Share provider prescriptions           0.159           0.159         -0.003           -0.359
 for red flag drugs                        (0.175)         (0.180)        (0.146)          (0.347)
     share squared                          -0.108          -0.265          0.145          0.777*
                                           (0.175)         (0.181)        (0.149)          (0.354)
IQVIA: Share new prescriptions               0.146        -0.289**         -0.005          0.333+
 by psychiatrists                          (0.135)         (0.093)        (0.088)          (0.195)
     share squared                          -0.500         0.556+          -0.140         -1.029+
                                           (0.376)         (0.295)        (0.231)          (0.561)
IQVIA: Share new prescriptions            -0.350+           -0.113          0.113            0.393
 for red flag drugs                        (0.199)         (0.211)        (0.184)          (0.380)
     share squared                         0.469+            0.221         -0.042           -0.338
                                           (0.256)         (0.280)        (0.250)          (0.500)
Constant                                  0.257**          0.110+          -0.067            0.118
                                           (0.057)         (0.056)        (0.048)          (0.104)
Number of observations                      97306           70886          70886            28650
R-squared                                    0.170           0.491          0.215            0.062
Notes: This table presents first-stage results, where a child's treatment status is instrumented for
by the six original instruments and their squared terms. Each column is from a single regression
model, where the sample is conditional on treatment in columns 2 and 3 and on drug treatment
in column 4. All models include month and year fixed effects, corresponding to the date of the
child's initial mental illness claim. Standard errors, clustered at the ZIP-3 level, are in
parentheses.
+ Significant at the 10 percent level
* Significant at the 5 percent level
** Significant at the 1 percent level
                                           Table 4
                  Test Statistics for Alternative First-Stage Regressions
                   (1)               (2)            (3)            (4)                (5)

                                Main                                              Post-Lasso,
                OLS - No                            Full        Post-Lasso, 3
                           Instruments +                                              All
               Instruments                      Interactions    Instruments
                             Quadratic                                           Instruments

                 Any Follow Up Treatment in 3 Months After 1st Claim
N                   97306             97306            97306              97306            97306
R-squared            0.170            0.170            0.195              0.188            0.190
Feff                    -                2                23               383              207
                       Drug Treatment in 1st 3 Months After 1st Claim
                                     Conditional on Treatment
N                   70886             70886            70886              70886            70886
R-squared            0.491            0.491            0.515              0.509            0.512
Feff                    -                6                27               376              189
                  Red-flag Drug Treatment in 1st 3 Months After 1st Claim
                                     Conditional on Treatment
N                   70886             70886            70886              70886            70886
R-squared            0.215            0.215            0.223              0.217            0.220
Feff                    -                6                6                 75               57
                  Red-flag Drug Treatment in 1st 3 Months After 1st Claim
                                 Conditional on Drug Treatment
N                   28650             28650            28650              28650            28650
R-squared            0.058            0.062            0.068              0.064            0.064
Feff                    -               10                3                 55               42
Notes: This table presents post-estimation results from the first-stage model, where the
instrument choice set varies across specifications. F eff refers to the effective F statistic of
Montiel Olea and Plueger (2013). The main instruments include the shares of psychiatrists
and PCPs providing mental health treatment to children, the average share of patients in PCPs
caseloads receiving psychiatric drugs, the share of red-flag drugs in physician's caseloads in
BCBS and IQVIA, and the share of psychiatrists among initial psychiatric prescribers. In
columns 1-3, the instruments are pre-selected: column 1 uses no instruments (N=0); column 2
uses the main instruments as well as their squared terms (N=12); and column 3 includes all
potential instruments, i.e., a second-degree polynomial in the main instruments, as well as
interactions with age, severity (indicators for first event in ER, first event in hospital, first
event is evaluation, and hospitalization in previous 6 months), and diagnosis (indicators for
anxiety/depression, adjustment disorders, no diagnosis, neurodevelopmental, and other MH
diagnosis) (N=87). In columns 4 and 5, Lasso selects the instruments. Column 4 is a post-
Lasso model with a three-instrument constraint (N=3). Column 5 is a post-Lasso model where
a refined data-driven penalty is used for the Lasso (6N8). See Appendix Table A2 for a full
list of the instruments selected in each model. All models include patient controls (age, female,
severity, and diagnosis) as well as month and year fixed effects, corresponding to the date of
the child's initial mental illness claim. Standard errors, clustered at the ZIP-3 level, are in
parentheses.
                                                          Table 5
                                              Effects of Treatment on Costs
                                     (1)    (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)            (6)
                                     Log(Total Costs)                     Log(Total MH Costs)
                           3 months 12 months 24 months          3 months      12 months      24 months
A. Any Follow Up Treatment in 3 Months After 1st Claim (N=97306)
OLS
 Treatment                  0.366**      0.339**      0.280**     0.311**       0.519**        0.555**
 SE                          (0.012)     (0.011)      (0.011)     (0.016)        (0.017)        (0.018)
 R2                           0.146       0.150        0.150       0.510          0.267          0.427
Post-Lasso 2SLS
  Treatment                        0.253**      0.295**        0.286**            0.617**          0.786**           0.869**
  SE                               (0.063)      (0.062)        (0.053)             -0.077          (0.088)           (0.081)
Mean Dependent Variable             6.785        7.761          8.387               5.205            5.669             6.010
B. Drug Treatment 1st 3 Months After 1st Claim, Cond. on Treatment (N=70886)
OLS
  Treatment                        0.183**      0.246**        0.259**           -1.027**         -0.835**          -0.695**
  SE                               (0.017)      (0.015)        (0.014)            (0.025)           -0.024           (0.024)
  R2                                0.143        0.149          0.155               0.626            0.557             0.504
Post-Lasso 2SLS
  Treatment                        1.128**      0.874**        0.661**            0.969**          1.216**           1.203**
  SE                               (0.065)      (0.058)        (0.051)            (0.087)          (0.089)           (0.083)
Mean Dependent Variable             6.871        7.844          8.456               5.212            5.728             6.081
C. Red-Flag Drug Treatment in 1st 3 Months, Cond. On Treatment (N=70886)
OLS
  Treatment                        0.343**      0.408**        0.388**           -0.665**         -0.542**          -0.430**
  SE                               (0.029)      (0.023)        (0.020)            (0.034)          (0.037)           (0.037)
  R2                                0.148        0.157          0.162               0.610            0.547             0.497
Post-Lasso 2SLS
  Treatment                        2.607**      2.199**        1.768**            1.990**          2.623**           2.574**
  SE                               (0.235)      (0.203)        (0.182)            (0.263)          (0.299)           (0.300)
Mean Dependent Variable             6.871        7.844          8.456               5.212            5.728             6.081
D. Red-Flag Drug Treatment in 1st 3 Months, Cond. On Drugs (N=28650)
OLS
  Treatment                        0.347**      0.384**        0.348**           -0.104**          -0.061*            -0.011
  SE                               (0.031)      (0.025)        (0.022)            (0.021)          (0.028)           (0.033)
  R2                                0.185        0.199          0.201               0.687            0.608             0.548
Post-Lasso 2SLS
  Treatment                         0.530       0.803**        0.868**           -0.786**          -0.537*            -0.294
  SE                               (0.329)      (0.265)        (0.242)            (0.248)          (0.274)           (0.321)
Mean Dependent Variable             6.781        7.848          8.495               3.736            4.334             4.783
Notes: This table presents results from OLS and post-Lasso 2SLS models of mental health treatment on log total health
costs (columns 1-3) and log mental health costs (columns 4-6). The instruments in the post-Lasso 2SLS models are
chosen using a refined data-driven penalty and are displayed in Appendix Table A2. Panel A includes 6 instruments;
Panel B includes 7 instruments; Panel C includes 8 instruments; and Panel D includes 4 instruments. Post-estimation
results from the first-stage of each model are included in Table 4. See Appendix Table A2 for a full list of the instruments
selected in each model. All models include patient controls (age, female, severity, and diagnosis) as well as month and
year fixed effects, corresponding to the date of the child's initial mental illness claim. Standard errors, clustered at the ZIP-
3 level, are in parentheses.
+ Significant at the 10 percent level
* Significant at the 5 percent level
** Significant at the 1 percent level
                                                  Table 6
                                    Effects of Treatment on Facility Use
                                   (1)    (2)           (3)       (4)       (5)         (6)
                                  DV: Visited Facility?           Number Nights in Hospital
                          3 months 12 months 24 months        3 months 12 months 24 months
A. Any Follow Up Treatment in 3 Months After 1st Claim (N=97306)
OLS
 Treatment                 0.014**     0.022**       0.027**   0.199**   0.337**     0.556**
 SE                         (0.002)    (0.003)       (0.003)    (0.056)   (0.071)     (0.093)
 R2                          0.366      0.226         0.178      0.029     0.035       0.025
Post-Lasso 2SLS
  Treatment                        0.062**       0.101**      0.119**          1.117+       1.648*        2.582**
  SE                               (0.015)       (0.020)      (0.023)         (0.571)      (0.682)         (0.972)
Mean Dependent Variable              0.100         0.169        0.242           0.289        0.541           0.915
B. Drug Treatment 1st 3 Months After 1st Claim, Cond. on Treatment (N=70886)
OLS
  Treatment                        0.069**       0.083**      0.088**         0.362**      0.597**        1.019**
  SE                               (0.003)       (0.005)      (0.005)         (0.070)      (0.117)         (0.289)
  R2                                 0.328         0.209        0.169           0.028        0.039           0.026
Post-Lasso 2SLS
  Treatment                        0.085**        0.038*        0.007          -0.531       -0.403        -1.559+
  SE                               (0.013)       (0.017)      (0.022)         (0.772)      (0.738)         (0.806)
Mean Dependent Variable              0.101         0.173        0.247           0.333        0.607           1.033
C. Red-Flag Drug Treatment in 1st 3 Months, Cond. On Treatment (N=70886)
OLS
  Treatment                        0.080**       0.085**      0.084**         0.371**      0.610**        0.948**
  SE                               (0.004)       (0.005)      (0.006)         (0.098)      (0.097)         (0.295)
  R2                                 0.330         0.209        0.169           0.028        0.039           0.026
Post-Lasso 2SLS
  Treatment                        0.201**         0.061        0.003          -1.063       -0.854          -1.685
  SE                               (0.034)       (0.043)      (0.054)         (1.721)      (1.645)         (1.864)
Mean Dependent Variable              0.101         0.173        0.247           0.333        0.607           1.033
D. Red-Flag Drug Treatment in 1st 3 Months, Cond. On Drugs (N=28650)
OLS
  Treatment                        0.062**       0.062**      0.058**          0.273*      0.444**         0.669*
  SE                               (0.004)       (0.005)      (0.006)         (0.132)      (0.124)         (0.293)
  R2                                 0.265         0.190        0.164           0.040        0.056           0.040
Post-Lasso 2SLS
  Treatment                         0.109*        0.121*       0.147*          -1.930       -1.782          -1.603
  SE                               (0.049)       (0.061)      (0.065)         (2.668)      (3.212)         (4.224)
Mean Dependent Variable              0.149         0.229        0.304           0.665        1.076           1.638
Notes: This table presents results from OLS and post-Lasso 2SLS models of mental health treatment on
facility use (columns 1-3) and the number of overnight stays in the hospital (columns 4-6). The instruments in
the post-Lasso 2SLS models are chosen using a refined data-driven penalty and are displayed in Appendix
Table A2. Panel A includes 6 instruments; Panel B includes 7 instruments; Panel C includes 8 instruments;
and Panel D includes 4 instruments. Post-estimation results from the first-stage of each model are included in
Table 4. See Appendix Table A2 for a full list of the instruments selected in each model. All models include
patient controls (age, female, severity, and diagnosis) as well as month and year fixed effects, corresponding to
the date of the child's initial mental illness claim. Standard errors, clustered at the ZIP-3 level, are in
parentheses.
+ Significant at the 10 percent level
* Significant at the 5 percent level
** Significant at the 1 percent level
                                                    Table 7
                   Treatment Effects on Costs using Three-Instrument Constraint
                                   (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)         (5)            (6)
                                        Log(Total Costs)                      Log(Total MH Costs)
                              3 months 12 months 24 months 3 months 12 months 24 months
A. Any Follow Up Treatment in 3 Months After 1st Claim (N=97306)
  Treatment                      0.141*     0.200**       0.209**       0.599**     0.729**       0.825**
  SE                            (0.071)      (0.068)      (0.059)       (0.078)      (0.09)        (0.083)
Mean Dependent Variable 6.785                 7.761        8.387         5.205        5.669          6.010
B. Drug Treatment 1st 3 Months After 1st Claim, Cond. on Treatment (N=70886)
  Treatment                     0.878**     0.660**       0.505**       0.464**     0.731**       0.761**
  SE                            (0.063)      (0.062)      (0.057)       (0.078)     (0.087)        (0.082)
Mean Dependent Variable 6.871                 7.844        8.456         5.212        5.728          6.081
C. Red-Flag Drug Treatment in 1st 3 Months, Cond. On Treatment (N=70886)
  Treatment                     2.871**     2.254**       1.826**       1.224**     2.067**       2.263**
  SE                            (0.276)       (0.26)      (0.239)       (0.279)      (0.32)        (0.314)
Mean Dependent Variable 6.871                 7.844        8.456         5.212        5.728          6.081
D. Red-Flag Drug Treatment in 1st 3 Months, Cond. On Drugs (N=28650)
  Treatment                       0.541     0.804**       0.869**      -0.781**     -0.563*         -0.295
  SE                            (0.332)      (0.268)      (0.243)        (0.25)     (0.274)        (0.316)
Mean Dependent Variable 6.781                 7.848        8.495         3.736        4.334          4.783
Notes: This table presents results from post-Lasso 2SLS models of mental health treatment on log total
health costs (columns 1-3) and log mental health costs (columns 4-6), where the Lasso is constrained to
select at most three instruments. These instruments are shown in Appendix Table A2. Post-estimation
results from the first-stage of each model are included in Table 4. All models include patient controls
(age, female, severity, and diagnosis) as well as month and year fixed effects, corresponding to the date
of the child's initial mental illness claim. Standard errors, clustered at the ZIP-3 level, are in parentheses.
+ Significant at the 10 percent level
* Significant at the 5 percent level
** Significant at the 1 percent level
                                                   Table 8
                Treatment Effects on Facility Use using Three-Instrument Constraint
                                 (1)           (2)          (3)             (4)          (5)          (6)
                                     DV: Visited Facility?                  Number Nights in Hospital
                             3 months 12 months 24 months              3 months 12 months 24 months
Any Follow Up Treatment in 3 Months After 1st Claim (N=97306)
  Treatment                   0.060**      0.100**       0.124**         1.101+       1.670*       2.525*
  SE                           (0.015)      (0.020)      (0.024)         (0.575)      (0.684)      (1.037)
Mean Dependent Variable 0.100                 0.169        0.242           0.289        0.541        0.915
Drug Treatment 1st 3 Months After 1st Claim, Cond. on Treatment (N=70886)
  Treatment                   0.039**        -0.011      -0.046*          -0.042       -0.131     -1.635*
  SE                           (0.013)      (0.018)      (0.023)         (0.327)      (0.389)      (0.759)
Mean Dependent Variable 0.101                 0.173        0.247           0.333        0.607        1.033
Red-Flag Drug Treatment in 1st 3 Months, Cond. On Treatment (N=70886)
  Treatment                    0.094*      -0.109+      -0.219**           0.266       -0.022     -3.983+
  SE                           (0.044)      (0.064)      (0.076)         (0.872)      (1.059)      (2.250)
Mean Dependent Variable 0.101                 0.173        0.247           0.333        0.607        1.033
Red-Flag Drug Treatment in 1st 3 Months, Cond. On Drugs (N=28650)
  Treatment                    0.110*       0.121+        0.149*          -2.384       -2.416       -2.614
  SE                           (0.051)      (0.062)      (0.066)         (3.042)      (3.617)      (4.618)
Mean Dependent Variable 0.149                 0.229        0.304           0.665        1.076        1.638
Notes: This table presents results from post-Lasso 2SLS models of mental health treatment on of mental
health treatment on facility use (columns 1-3) and the number of overnight stays in the hospital (columns
4-6), where the Lasso is constrained to select at most three instruments. These instruments are shown in
Appendix Table A2. Post-estimation results from the first-stage of each model are included in Table 4.
All models include patient controls (age, female, severity, and diagnosis) as well as month and year
fixed effects, corresponding to the date of the child's initial mental illness claim. Standard errors,
clustered at the ZIP-3 level, are in parentheses.
+ Significant at the 10 percent level
* Significant at the 5 percent level
** Significant at the 1 percent level
                                                   Table 9
                           Effects of Treatment on Costs Among Diagnosed
                                   (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)          (5)          (6)
                                        Log(Total Costs)                      Log(Total MH Costs)
                               3 months 12 months 24 months             3 months 12 months 24 months
A. Any Follow Up Treatment in 3 Months After 1st Claim (N=67336)
  Treatment                     0.553**      0.485**      0.416**        1.628**     1.779**       1.816**
  SE                             (0.078)      (0.075)      (0.065)        (0.092)     (0.103)      (0.096)
Mean Dependent Variable           6.863        7.795        8.405          5.933       6.393        6.709
B. Drug Treatment 1st 3 Months After 1st Claim, Cond. on Treatment (N=45157)
  Treatment                     0.998**      0.802**      0.621**        0.421**     0.703**       0.777**
  SE                             (0.057)      (0.052)      (0.047)        (0.066)     (0.070)      (0.067)
Mean Dependent Variable           7.035        7.941        8.522          6.288       6.810        7.128
C. Red-Flag Drug Treatment in 1st 3 Months, Cond. On Treatment (N=45157)
  Treatment                     3.231**      2.628**      2.039**        1.856**     2.639**       2.797**
  SE                             (0.207)      (0.178)      (0.153)        (0.214)     (0.233)      (0.226)
Mean Dependent Variable           7.035        7.941        8.522          6.288       6.810        7.128
D. Red-Flag Drug Treatment in 1st 3 Months, Cond. On Drugs (N=9911)
  Treatment                     1.322**      1.738**      1.706**         0.858+      0.949+        0.842
  SE                             (0.425)      (0.460)      (0.462)        (0.472)     (0.562)      (0.579)
Mean Dependent Variable           7.462        8.387        8.950          6.295       7.024        7.456
Notes: This table presents results from post-Lasso 2SLS models of mental health treatment on log total
health costs (columns 1-3) and log mental health costs (columns 4-6), where children who had not
received an official mental health diagnosis are excluded from the sample. The instruments in each model
are chosen using a refined data-driven penalty and are displayed in Appendix Table A2. Panel A includes
5 instruments; Panel B includes 7 instruments; Panel C includes 7 instruments; and Panel D includes 1
instrument. See Appendix Table A2 for a full list of the instruments selected in each model. All models
include patient controls (age, female, severity, and diagnosis) as well as month and year fixed effects,
corresponding to the date of the child's initial mental illness claim. Standard errors, clustered at the ZIP-3
level, are in parentheses.
+ Significant at the 10 percent level
* Significant at the 5 percent level
** Significant at the 1 percent level
                                                  Table 10
                        Effects of Treatment on Facility Use Among Diagnosed
                                   (1)         (2)          (3)            (4)           (5)         (6)
                                      DV: Visited Facility?                Number Nights in Hospital
                               3 months 12 months 24 months 3 months 12 months 24 months
Any Follow Up Treatment in 3 Months After 1st Claim (N=67336)
  Treatment                     0.078**     0.115**      0.127**       1.539**        2.119*       2.964*
  SE                            (0.019)      (0.024)     (0.027)        (0.763)       (0.899)     (1.283)
Mean Dependent Variable          0.104        0.173       0.245           0.351         0.658       1.109
Drug Treatment 1st 3 Months After 1st Claim, Cond. on Treatment (N=45157)
  Treatment                     0.082**     0.043**       0.012          -0.466        -0.404     -1.577*
  SE                            (0.012)      (0.015)     (0.019)        (0.647)       (0.611)     (0.727)
Mean Dependent Variable          0.104        0.177       0.251           0.426         0.778       1.327
Red-Flag Drug Treatment in 1st 3 Months, Cond. On Treatment (N=45157)
  Treatment                     0.276**     0.161**       0.088          -1.733        -1.199    -4.211+
  SE                            (0.035)      (0.045)     (0.056)        (2.363)       (2.225)     (2.365)
Mean Dependent Variable          0.104        0.177       0.251           0.426         0.778       1.327
Red-Flag Drug Treatment in 1st 3 Months, Cond. On Drugs (N=9911)
  Treatment                      0.114      0.397**      0.502**          1.799       5.661*        8.382
  SE                            (0.117)      (0.147)     (0.150)        (1.729)       (2.704)     (8.282)
Mean Dependent Variable          0.216        0.307       0.386           1.512         2.401       3.602
Notes: This table presents results from post-Lasso 2SLS models of mental health treatment on facility
use (columns 1-3) and the number of overnight stays in the hospital (columns 4-6). The instruments in
each model are chosen using a refined data-driven penalty and are displayed in Appendix Table A2.
Panel A includes 5 instruments; Panel B includes 7 instruments; Panel C includes 7 instruments; and
Panel D includes 1 instrument. See Appendix Table A2 for a full list of the instruments selected in each
model. All models include patient controls (age, female, severity, and diagnosis) as well as month and
year fixed effects, corresponding to the date of the child's initial mental illness claim. Standard errors,
clustered at the ZIP-3 level, are in parentheses.
+ Significant at the 10 percent level
* Significant at the 5 percent level
** Significant at the 1 percent level
                                   Appendix Table A1
                        Area Characteristics of BCBS Children
                                                 (1)        (2)           (3)        (4)
                                             National                 All MH
                                                       All BCBS                   Sample
                                             Average                   BCBS
Total Population (000s)                         31.5       27.1          26.8       26.5
Total Population: Female                        51%        51%           51%        51%
Total population: 0-17                          23%        23%           23%        23%
Total population: 10-17                         10%        11%           11%        11%
White Alone                                     73%        80%           82%        82%
Black or African American Alone                 13%         9%            8%         8%
Other Race                                      15%        11%           10%        10%
Hispanic or Latino                              19%        12%           10%        10%
Family Households                               67%        69%           68%        68%
Married (Not Including Separated)               48%        53%           53%        53%
Less than High School                           13%        10%            9%         9%
High School Diploma                             56%        56%           55%        55%
Bachelor's Degree or Better                     31%        34%           36%        36%
Labor Force Participation Rate                  63%        64%           65%        65%
Employment Rate                                 94%        95%           95%        95%
Average Household Income (In $2018)          $84,303 $90,742 $94,584 $95,209
Gini Index                                      0.44       0.43          0.43       0.43
Owner Occupied Housing Units                    64%        71%           71%        72%
Families Below Poverty Level                    11%         8%            8%         8%
Adult Poverty Rate                              14%        11%           10%        10%
Average Commute to Work (In Min.)               26.7       25.6          25.5       25.6
Uninsured                                        9%         8%            7%         7%
Public Health Coverage                          35%        32%           31%        31%
Private Health Insurance                        67%        73%           75%        75%
Children Living with Single Parents             31%        26%           26%        26%
Number of ZCTAs                                33120      27906         16487      13848
Note: This table presents estimates from the American Community Survey 2018 5-Year
files for ZCTA geographies. Each row represents a weighted average of each ZCTA
measure, where the weights correspond to the relevant population in each ZCTA.
Column 1 includes all ZCTAs in the country, and the weights correspond to the total
reported population in the ZCTA. Column 2 includes all ZCTAs with at least one child
aged 10-17 with BCBS coverage, and the weights correspond to the number of BCBS-
insured children 10-17. Column 3 includes all ZCTAs with at least one child aged 10-17
with BCBS coverage and a mental health condition, and the weights correspond to the
number of BCBS-insured children 10-17 with mental illness. Column 4 includes all
ZCTAs with at least one child aged 10-17 with BCBS coverage, a mental health
condition, and at least 2 years of continuous coverage after their initial mental health
event--this column corresponds to our main analysis sample. The three health insurance
variables ("Uninsured," "Public Health Coverage," and "Private Health Coverage") do
not add to 100 given overlapping coverage.
                                                              Appendix Table A2
                                                        Instruments Selected by Lasso
            (1)                       (2)                    (3)                     (4)                   (5)                             (6)
      Main Analysis                                                      Alternative Specifications
                                                      Lasso, Excluding                              Lasso, Excluding             Lasso, Excluding All
   Lasso, Data-driven            Lasso, Top 3                                Lasso, Including
                                                     Children Without                               PCP Prescribing               Potential Demand
          Penalty                Instruments                                 Physician Supply
                                                          Diagnoses                                    Instrument                   Instruments
A. Probability of Any Follow Up Treatment in 3 Months After 1st Claim
   first_eval#bad_u18n           F43#bcbs_bad       first_eval#bad_u18n first_eval#bad_u18n first_eval#bad_u18n                    first_eval#bad_u18n
      dax#bad_u18n             F43#s1_by_psych          dax#bad_u18n           dax#bad_u18n          dax#bad_u18n                     dax#bad_u18n
      F43#share_mh               dax#bad_u18n           F43#share_mh           F43#share_mh          F43#bcbs_bad                     F43#bcbs_bad
      F43#bcbs_bad                                      F43#bcbs_bad           F43#bcbs_bad         F43#s1_by_psych                   F98#bad_u18n
    F43#s1_by_psych                                   F43#s1_by_psych        F43#s1_by_psych         F98#bad_u18n
      F98#bad_u18n                                                             F98#bad_u18n
B. Probability of Receiving Drug Treatment in 1st 3 Months After 1st Claim, Conditional on Treatment
      dax#bad_u18n               dax#share_gp        first_eval#share_gp       dax#bad_u18n          dax#bad_u18n                    dax#bcbs_bad
       dax#share_gp              F43#bcbs_bad           dax#share_mh            dax#share_gp          dax#share_gp                  dax#bad_u18n
      F43#bcbs_bad               F43#share_gp           dax#bcbs_bad           F43#bcbs_bad          F43#bcbs_bad                   F43#bcbs_bad
       F43#share_gp                                      dax#share_gp           F43#share_gp          F43#share_gp                  F98#bcbs_bad
      F98#bcbs_bad                                      F43#bcbs_bad           F98#bcbs_bad          F98#bcbs_bad                 bcbs_bad#bad_u18n
      F98#bad_u18n                                      F43#share_gp           F98#bad_u18n          F98#bad_u18n
     F98#share_psych                                    F98#bcbs_bad          F98#share_psych       F98#share_psych
C. Probability Receiving Red-Flag Drug Treatment in 1st 3 Months After 1st Claim, Conditional on Treatment
   first_eval#bad_u18n          F43#share_mh            dax#bcbs_bad        first_eval#bad_u18n first_eval#bad_u18n               first_eval#bad_u18n
      dax#bad_u18n               dax#bad_u18n           dax#bad_u18n           dax#bad_u18n          dax#bad_u18n                    dax#bad_u18n
     dax#share_psych           dax#share_psych           dax#share_gp         dax#share_psych       dax#share_psych                  F43#bcbs_bad
      F43#share_mh                                      F43#bcbs_bad           F43#share_mh          F43#bcbs_bad                    F98#bcbs_bad
      F43#bcbs_bad                                      F43#bad_u18n           F43#bcbs_bad           F43#share_gp                bcbs_bad#bad_u18n
      F98#bcbs_bad                                      F98#bcbs_bad           F98#bcbs_bad          F98#bcbs_bad
     F98#share_psych                                    F98#bad_u18n          F98#share_psych       F98#share_psych
 no_diagnosis#bcbs_bad                                                     bcbs_bad#bad_u18n bcbs_bad#bad_u18n
D. Probability Receiving Red-Flag Drug Treatment in 1st 3 Months After 1st Claim, Conditional on Drug Treatment
       dax#share_mh              dax#share_mh           dax#share_mh            dax#share_mh          dax#share_gp                first_eval#bad_u18n
   bcbs_bad#bcbs_bad          bcbs_bad#bcbs_bad                             bcbs_bad#bcbs_bad bcbs_bad#bcbs_bad                       dax#bad_u18n
bcbs_bad#bad_u18n            bcbs_bad#bad_u18n                            bcbs_bad#bad_u18n       bcbs_bad#bad_u18n                   F43#bcbs_bad
no_diagnosis#bcbs_bad                                                                                                                 F98#bcbs_bad
                                                                                                                                  bcbs_bad#bad_u18n
E. Number of Potential Instruments
             87                             87                      87                          93                       70                        23
Notes: This table presents the instruments selected by Lasso in first-stage models, where the instrument choice set varies across specifications. In
columns 1-3, the Lasso is presented with the full 87-element potential instrument vector discussed in the text. In columns 4-6, the Lasso is presented with
alternative potential instrument vectors. Column 1 lists the instruments selected in the main analysis, corresponding to Tables 5 and 6. Column 2 lists the
instruments selected when the Lasso routine is constrained to chose at most 3 instruments, corresponding to Tables 7 and 8. Column 3 lists the
instruments selected when only children with diagnoses are included in the analysis, corresponding to Tables 9 and 10. Column 4 expands the potential
instrument vector to include three additional physician supply measures--psychiatrists, therapists, and PCPs per 1,000 BCBS children. Columns 5 and 6
remove variables potentially reflecting demand from the original set, corresponding to Appendix Tables A3 and A4. The character "#" denotes an
interaction between two variables. "Share_psych" and "share_gp" refer to the shares of psychiatrists and PCPs providing mental health treatment to
children; "share_mh" refers to the average share of patients in PCPs caseloads receiving psychiatric drugs; "bcbs_bad" and "bad_u18n" refer to the share
of red-flag drugs in physician's caseloads in BCBS and IQVIA, respectively; and "s1_by_psych" refers to the share of psychiatrists among initial
psychiatric prescribers. Indicators for first event in ER ("first_er"), first event in hospital ("first_hosp"), first event is evaluation ("first_eval"), and
diagnoses of anxiety/depression ("dax"), adjustment disorders ("F43"), no diagnosis ("no_diagnosis"), and other MH diagnosis ("F98") are also shown.
                                                  Appendix Table A3
                       Effects of Treatment on Costs, Excluding Possible Demand Instruments
                                         (1)           (2)          (3)              (4)            (5)           (6)
                                               Log(Total Costs)                          Log(Total MH Costs)
                                     3 months 12 months 24 months                3 months 12 months 24 months
A. Any Follow Up Treatment in 3 Months After 1st Claim (N=97306)
Post-Lasso, Excl. PCP
  Treatment                           0.253**       0.298**      0.290**          0.607**        0.776**       0.866**
  SE                                   (0.064)      (0.061)      (0.052)          (0.078)        (0.090)       (0.083)
Post-Lasso, Excl. All Demand
  Treatment                           0.262**       0.307**      0.289**          0.625**        0.794**       0.879**
  SE                                   (0.065)      (0.063)      (0.054)          (0.077)        (0.087)       (0.079)
Mean Dependent Variable                 6.785        7.761         8.387            5.205          5.669         6.010
B. Drug Treatment 1st 3 Months After 1st Claim, Cond. on Treatment (N=70886)
Post-Lasso, Excl. PCP
  Treatment                           1.128**       0.874**      0.661**          0.969**        1.216**       1.203**
  SE                                   (0.065)      (0.058)      (0.051)          (0.087)        (0.089)       (0.083)
Post-Lasso, Excl. All Demand
  Treatment                           1.170**       0.920**      0.696**          0.971**        1.214**       1.200**
  SE                                   (0.073)      (0.063)      (0.056)          (0.089)        (0.091)       (0.084)
Mean Dependent Variable                 6.871        7.844         8.456            5.212          5.728         6.081
C. Red-Flag Drug Treatment in 1st 3 Months, Cond. On Treatment (N=70886)
Post-Lasso, Excl. PCP
  Treatment                           3.879**       3.006**      2.321**          2.512**        3.351**       3.365**
  SE                                   (0.284)      (0.261)      (0.228)          (0.318)        (0.357)       (0.350)
Post-Lasso, Excl. All Demand
  Treatment                           2.212**       1.917**      1.495**          1.238**        1.846**       1.891**
  SE                                   (0.254)      (0.220)      (0.190)          (0.239)        (0.279)       (0.278)
Mean Dependent Variable                 6.871        7.844         8.456            5.212          5.728         6.081
D. Red-Flag Drug Treatment in 1st 3 Months, Cond. On Drugs (N=28650)
Post-Lasso, Excl. PCP
  Treatment                             0.424        0.719*      0.834**           -0.192         -0.158        -0.173
  SE                                   (0.346)      (0.289)      (0.267)          (0.249)        (0.301)       (0.357)
Post-Lasso, Excl. All Demand
  Treatment                             0.400       0.723**      0.860**          0.869**        0.728*        0.676+
  SE                                   (0.322)      (0.262)      (0.238)          (0.283)        (0.341)       (0.393)
Mean Dependent Variable                 6.781        7.848         8.495            3.736          4.334         4.783
Notes: This table presents results from post-Lasso 2SLS models of mental health treatment on log total health costs
(columns 1-3) and log mental health costs (columns 4-6). In the "post-Lasso, Excl. PCP" model, the instruments used
in the Lasso estimation exclude any instrument involving the average share of patients in PCPs caseloads receiving
psychiatric drugs (N=70). In the "post-Lasso, Excl. All Demand" model, the instruments used in the Lasso estimation
further exclude any instrument involving the shares of psychiatrists and PCPs providing mental health treatment to
children and the share of psychiatrists among initial psychiatric prescribers (N=23). The instruments in the post-Lasso
2SLS models are chosen using a refined data-driven penalty and are displayed in Appendix Table A2. Panel A
includes 5(4) instruments; Panel B includes 7(5) instruments; Panel C includes 8(5) instruments; and Panel D includes
3(5) instruments in the post-Lasso, Excl. PCP (post-Lasso, Excl. All Demand) model. See Appendix Table A2 for a
full list of the instruments selected in each model. All models include patient controls (age, female, severity, and
diagnosis) as well as month and year fixed effects, corresponding to the date of the child's initial mental illness claim.
Standard errors, clustered at the ZIP-3 level, are in parentheses.
+ Significant at the 10 percent level
* Significant at the 5 percent level
** Significant at the 1 percent level
                                                  Appendix Table A4
                 Effects of Treatment on Facility Use, Excluding Possible Demand Instruments
                                       (1)           (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)           (6)
                                           DV: Visited Facility?                     Number Nights in Hospital
                                  3 months 12 months 24 months                 3 months 12 months 24 months
A. Any Follow Up Treatment in 3 Months After 1st Claim (N=97306)
Post-Lasso, Excl. PCP
  Treatment                        0.062**        0.099**       0.116**          1.120+         1.659*       2.598**
  SE                                (0.015)       (0.020)        (0.023)         (0.572)        (0.685)       (0.983)
Post-Lasso, Excl. All Demand
  Treatment                        0.062**        0.102**       0.113**           1.222*        1.834*       2.790**
  SE                                (0.016)       (0.020)        (0.023)         (0.622)        (0.729)       (1.029)
Mean Dependent Variable               0.100         0.169          0.242           0.289          0.541         0.915
B. Drug Treatment 1st 3 Months After 1st Claim, Cond. on Treatment (N=70886)
Post-Lasso, Excl. PCP
  Treatment                        0.085**         0.038*          0.007          -0.531         -0.403      -1.559+
  SE                                (0.013)       (0.017)        (0.022)         (0.772)        (0.738)       (0.806)
Post-Lasso, Excl. All Demand
  Treatment                          0.080*       0.034+           0.003          -0.482         -0.376      -1.597*
  SE                                (0.013)       (0.017)        (0.021)         (0.761)        (0.732)       (0.802)
Mean Dependent Variable               0.101         0.173          0.247           0.333          0.607         1.033
C. Red-Flag Drug Treatment in 1st 3 Months, Cond. On Treatment (N=70866)
Post-Lasso, Excl. PCP
  Treatment                        0.204**          0.039         -0.105         1.935**          1.639        -2.016
  SE                                (0.048)       (0.061)        (0.071)         (0.692)        (1.163)       (3.056)
Post-Lasso, Excl. All Demand
  Treatment                        0.170**          0.027         -0.035          -2.375         -2.732      -5.680+
  SE                                (0.033)       (0.045)        (0.054)         (2.767)        (2.803)       (3.023)
Mean Dependent Variable               0.101         0.173          0.247           0.333          0.607         1.033
D. Red-Flag Drug Treatment in 1st 3 Months, Cond. On Drugs (N=28650)
Post-Lasso, Excl. PCP
  Treatment                           0.022         0.022          0.068          -3.223         -4.173        -2.437
  SE                                (0.057)       (0.072)        (0.076)         (3.162)        (3.830)       (4.984)
Post-Lasso, Excl. All Demand
  Treatment                         0.108+        0.136+        0.195**            3.716         -4.099        -2.744
  SE                                (0.056)       (0.072)        (0.072)         (3.577)        (4.054)       (5.344)
Mean Dependent Variable               0.149         0.229          0.304           0.665          1.076         1.638
Notes: This table presents results from OLS and post-Lasso 2SLS models of mental health treatment on facility use
(columns 1-3) and the number of overnight stays in the hospital (columns 4-6). In the "post-Lasso, Excl. PCP"
model, the instruments used in the Lasso estimation exclude any instrument involving the average share of patients
in PCPs caseloads receiving psychiatric drugs (N=70). In the "post-Lasso, Excl. All Demand" model, the
instruments used in the Lasso estimation further exclude any instrument involving the shares of psychiatrists and
PCPs providing mental health treatment to children and the share of psychiatrists among initial psychiatric
prescribers (N=23). The instruments in the post-Lasso 2SLS models are chosen using a refined data-driven penalty
and are displayed in Appendix Table A2. Panel A includes 5(4) instruments; Panel B includes 7(5) instruments;
Panel C includes 8(5) instruments; and Panel D includes 3(5) instruments in the post-Lasso, Excl. PCP (post-Lasso,
Excl. All Demand) model. See Appendix Table A2 for a full list of the instruments selected in each model. All
models include patient controls (age, female, severity, and diagnosis) as well as month and year fixed effects,
corresponding to the date of the child's initial mental illness claim. Standard errors, clustered at the ZIP-3 level, are in
parentheses.
+ Significant at the 10 percent level
* Significant at the 5 percent level
** Significant at the 1 percent level
                                    Appendix Figure A1
            Implications for Total Cost at 24 Months Among Diagnosed Children




Notes: This figure traces out the implications of each initial treatment choice on total costs at 24
months among the subset of children who received a mental health diagnosis within 3 months.
The share of children in each branch appears in parentheses. Cost estimates are based on post-
Lasso estimates in column 3 of Table 9.
                                     Appendix Figure A2
           Implications for Facility Use at 24 Months Among Diagnosed Children




Notes: This figure traces out the implications of each initial treatment choice on facility use--ER
visit or hospitalization--at 24 months among the subset of children who received a mental health
diagnosis within 3 months. The share of children in each branch appears in parentheses. Cost
estimates are based on post-Lasso estimates in column 3 of Table 10.
