                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              THE GLOBAL FACTOR STRUCTURE OF EXCHANGE RATES

                                      Sofonias Korsaye
                                        Fabio Trojani
                                       Andrea Vedolin

                                     Working Paper 27892
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27892


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2020




For comments and discussions we thank Pasquale della Corte, Jerome Detemple, Juan Londono,
Hanno Lustig, Fabricius Somogyi, Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, Adrien Verdelhan, and Alberto
Quaini. We also thank seminar and conference participants at the University of Geneva, SFI
Research Days, York Empirical Asset Pricing Workshop, NBER IFM Meeting, SITE "Asset
Pricing, Macro Finance and Computation", Econometric Society World Congress, Vienna
Symposium on Foreign Exchange Markets, and the European Finance Association Meeting. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Sofonias Korsaye, Fabio Trojani, and Andrea Vedolin. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Global Factor Structure of Exchange Rates
Sofonias Korsaye, Fabio Trojani, and Andrea Vedolin
NBER Working Paper No. 27892
October 2020
JEL No. F3,F31,G15

                                          ABSTRACT

We provide a model-free framework to study the global factor structure of exchange rates. To this
end, we propose a new methodology to estimate international stochastic discount factors (SDFs)
that jointly price cross-sections of international assets, such as stocks, bonds, and currencies, in
the presence of frictions. We theoretically establish a two-factor representation for the cross-
section of international SDFs, consisting of one global and one local factor, which is independent
of the currency denomination. We show that our two-factor specification prices a large cross-
section of international asset returns, not just in- but also out-of-sample with R2s of up to 80%.


Sofonias Korsaye                                         Andrea Vedolin
University of Geneva                                     Questrom School of Business
24 rue du Général-Dufour                                 Boston University
Geneva 1211                                              595 Commonwealth Avenue
Switzerland                                              Boston, MA 02215
sofonias.korsaye@unige.ch                                and NBER
                                                         avedolin@bu.edu
Fabio Trojani
University of Geneva - Swiss Finance Institute
fabio.trojani@alphacruncher.com
   One central finding of the large literature that studies the factor structure of exchange rates is that
the co-movement of exchange rates can be described by a few factors. As a result, workhorse models
in international finance posit international stochastic discount factors (SDFs) that are driven by a
handful of global and local factors. These models are shown to fit many stylized facts in international
macro-finance well. These results, however, rest on two pillars.
   On the theoretical side, it is assumed that agents can trade in global international markets that
are integrated, frictionless, and complete. While a natural starting point, such an assumption has
non-trivial consequences for the factor structure of exchange rates. First, the degree of market
segmentation (or the lack thereof) affects the factor structure of SDFs. For example, as we increase the
degree of segmentation across countries, SDFs become less correlated and hence the factor structure
weaker. In such cases, the importance of global factors may decrease while local factors become
more important. Second, the assumption that markets are complete and frictionless also implies
that the rate of appreciation of the exchange rate (X ) is uniquely recovered from the ratio of the
foreign and the domestic SDFs: X = Mf /Md . This identity--which is known as the asset market
view of exchange rates (AMV)--implies that shocks to foreign and domestic SDFs pin down the
factor structure of exchange rates. However, it is well known that departures from the integrated and
frictionless benchmark may cause AMV to be violated. As a result, the ensuing global factor structure
would depend not only on the factor structure of SDFs but also on the ex ante assumptions about the
degree of financial market integration and the presence of barriers to trade.
   On the empirical side, the literature extracts global factors from the cross-section of exchange rates
alone. However, assumptions about the menu of tradable assets can have first-order implications
for the nature of extracted factors. For example, it is well known that FX and fixed income markets
are intimately linked, as many intermediaries hedge their FX exposure in bond markets. Moreover,
recent empirical evidence in Koijen and Yogo (2020) suggests significant substitution effects across
international stocks, bonds, and currencies. It is hence natural to study global factors by focusing not
just on exchange rates but also on a broader cross-section of international assets.
   In this paper, we study the global factor structure of exchange rates in the presence of trade
frictions and when global investors can trade a broad cross-section of international assets. We first
develop a theoretical framework to study international SDFs while accommodating a wide class of
trade frictions. Such barriers to trade generate market segmentation along assets and countries as an
endogenous outcome rather than an assumption. As our main theoretical result, we show that, under
fairly mild conditions and irrespective of the nature and extent of trade frictions, international SDFs
exhibit a two-factor structure and the AMV continues to hold. As a result, two factors exactly span
the cross-section of exchange rates. Empirically, we take the viewpoint of global investors who can
trade stocks, bonds, and currencies across different num´
                                                        eraires and study their optimal portfolios.
Extracting two factors from the cross-section of international SDFs of these global investors, we show
that they price the cross-section of international assets not just in- but also out-of-sample. Moreover,
we document a tight link between our two factors and those of Verdelhan (2018), who argues that two
global factors, dollar and carry, account for a significant fraction of the variation in exchange rates.
   Our paper contributes to the literature along at least three dimensions. First, we provide a novel



                                                    1
theoretical framework to study model-free SDFs in the presence of frictions when the menu of assets
available for trade is potentially large. Our framework is general, as it can incorporate various forms
of frictions, such as proportional transaction costs, margin or collateral constraints, and short-sell
constraints, while at the same time ensuring that model-free SDFs are consistent with the absence
of arbitrage in asset markets with frictions.1 It is well-known that in frictionless and arbitrage-free
markets, asset prices can be fully characterized by an SDF that only depends on asset returns, which
at the same time prices all assets exactly; see, e.g., Ross (1978) and Hansen and Richard (1987),
among many others. However, in markets with frictions, linear SDF pricing implies in general non-
zero pricing errors on some assets, which directly reflect the underlying structure of market frictions.
Earlier literature has often treated pricing errors as evidence of SDF misspecification, by expressing
them in terms of the least squares distance between an SDF and the family of SDFs that price correctly
all assets. We instead explicitly work under the assumption of arbitrage-free markets with frictions
and the resulting pricing error structures. In this setting, we characterize model-free SDFs in terms of
the optimal portfolios of constrained global investors, which allows us to recover global model-free
SDFs from asset return data alone.
    Second, as we deviate from the complete and frictionless market assumption, violations of the
AMV arise for the vast majority of international SDFs, see, e.g., Backus, Foresi, and Telmer (2001).
This, however, implies a factor structure in international model-free SDFs that is not exact. While this
is expected, we theoretically show that there exists a model-free SDF family--the family of minimum-
entropy SDFs--which satisfies the AMV even in international asset markets with frictions, as long as
frictions are internationally symmetric. Such symmetry requires that market frictions are identical
across currency denominations.2 We establish two powerful properties of minimum-entropy SDFs
in markets with symmetric frictions. First, we show that these SDFs are by construction num´
                                                                                           eraire-
invariant, meaning that an optimal SDF pricing assets well in one currency also prices assets well
in any other currency. Second, this num´
                                       eraire invariance results in an exact two-factor structure of
international SDFs.
    Third, using a large cross-section of short- and long-term bonds and equities in developed
countries, we explore the global factor structure of exchange rates by estimating minimum-
entropy SDFs under varying transaction cost features. When we assume that investors can trade
internationally the full menu of assets in frictionless markets, we obtain volatile SDFs satisfying a
virtually exact single-factor dynamics with nearly perfectly correlated SDFs. In such a setting, we find
global investors' optimal portfolios to imply positions in single assets that may be hard to maintain
in practice, without taking massively levered long and short positions. When instead we impose
frictions, we obtain a number of zero optimal portfolio positions on some assets, i.e., endogenous
   1
     Our setting also avoids the usual problems of standard approaches for estimating model-free SDFs from large cross-
sections of asset returns, as it is well-known that they can lead to spurious estimates. For example, Kozak, Nagel, and Santosh
(2020) address this concern using a model-free SDF that shrinks the coefficients of low variance principal components
of characteristics-based factors via machine learning techniques. In contrast, we directly incorporate various forms of
economically motivated international financial market frictions, which endogenously lead to more robust model-free SDFs.
   2
     For instance, when we assume a symmetric market, we can either impose no frictions at all or we can impose the
exact same friction across all countries. Asymmetric markets, on the other hand, imply differences in the portfolio weight
dependent component of frictions of some countries, such as, e.g., lower trade barriers for investing in local assets than in
foreign assets.



                                                              2
market segmentation. Moving from symmetric to asymmetric market settings, we find that SDF
volatilities further drop by 20% and that the ensuing optimal portfolios become even more sparse.
While lower than under the symmetric market setting, minimum entropy SDF correlations are still
very high and common factor structures very strong.
       The optimal portfolios of global investors in markets with frictions further uncover interesting
insights into the global factor composition of international SDFs. We find that global investors always
trade a carry, i.e., they are long high interest rate currencies and short low interest rate currencies, and
are long US equity, while virtually ignoring long-term bonds. While these findings connect to a larger
literature documenting priced systematic dollar and carry risks, our model-free approach allows us
to interpret global factor compositions economically via the optimal portfolios of global investors.
       From the cross-section of estimated international model-free SDFs, we identify the global factor
as the average log SDF across currency denominations and the local currency basket factor as the
average appreciation of a currency relative to the basket of remaining currencies. Using our cross-
section of bonds and equities, we then study the pricing properties of our two factors, both in- and
out-of-sample. As is well-known, in a frictionless market pricing errors of in-sample model-free SDFs
are zero by construction. Hence, to control for such overfitting issues, out-of-sample analysis is more
meaningful to compare the pricing abilities of SDFs across different market structures. Based on
rolling training periods of ten years for SDF estimation and one year rolling windows for pricing
evaluation, we find that our global factor alone explains up to 98% of the in-sample cross-sectional
variation and up to 80% of the out-of-sample variation in the cross-section of currencies, stock, and
bond returns across all denominations, in a way that is quite robust across different specifications of
market frictions. We also find that market frictions are instrumental to improve the out-of-sample
pricing performance as for example, the out-of-sample R2 in the frictionless case amounts to a
mere 40% when pricing the cross-section of FX. We also show that our two factors--the global SDF
and the currency basket factor--are intimately linked to carry and dollar. This evidence provides
model-free support to the model-based evidence in Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2011, 2014)
and Verdelhan (2018). This may seem surprising prima facie since our SDFs are estimated using
information including international stock and bond returns, not just currencies. This, however,
implies that the two-factor SDF structure proposed in these papers may have implications for asset
returns more generally, not just exchange rates.
       Finally, motivated by a large literature in international finance emphasizing the importance of
international capital flows for exchange rate determination, we explore the link between the factors
in our two-factor representation, gross capital flows, and financial intermediaries' constraints.3 To
explore this relationship more formally, we run regressions of our global SDF factor and local currency
baskets, on proxies of capital flows and measures of financial intermediaries' constraints, such as
implied volatility (see, e.g., Rey (2015)). Our results indicate that while the global SDF factor is strongly
linked to proxies of intermediary constraints, such as implied volatilities and the intermediary capital
   3
    For instance, Camanho, Hau, and Rey (2019) study a dynamic portfolio balancing model where exchange rates are
determined by the net currency demand from portfolio balancing motives of global intermediaries. Since our framework
establishes a unique mapping between the optimal portfolios of global investors in markets with frictions and model-free
SDFs, it appears natural to study the links between our estimated SDF factors and international equity and bond flows.



                                                           3
proxy of He, Kelly, and Manela (2017), the local currency basket factors have no relation with these
variables. For capital flows, we find instead the opposite result: While changes in capital flows induce
a significant drop in the local currency basket factor, the global SDF is unaffected by them.
       As a last exercise, we ask how big transaction costs have to be to match the equity and bond
home bias typically observed in the data. In our analysis, we impose trading costs directly observable
from markets (bid-ask spreads, leverage constraints, etc). However, it is reasonable to assume that
these costs only represent a lower bound of the real costs that investors face when trading assets
internationally.4 To get a sense of the size of the cost needed to match the almost perfect home bias
observed in the data, we take our asymmetric market friction setting and increase the cost to trade
foreign assets. We find that in order to achieve almost perfect home bias, trading foreign assets needs
to be around six times more expensive than trading local assets. Given that the average bid-ask spread
is around 2bps, this implies that trading foreign assets entails a transaction cost of around 10bps in
unobservable costs. Overall, different from earlier literature that has argued that transaction costs
need to be unrealistically high to explain the home bias in the data, we conclude that these costs can
be relatively small.
Literature Review: Our paper contributes to a growing literature in international finance studying
global factors. The seminal work of Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2011, 2014) and Verdelhan
(2018) documents that two factors, carry and dollar, explain a significant share of the systematic
variation in exchange rates. Panayotov (2020) studies global risk in an extended version of Lustig,
Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2014), in which the US SDF has a larger exposure to global risk than
all other international SDFs. Maurer, T^
                                       o, and Tran (2019) extract two principal exchange rate
components from the cross-section of all cross-currency returns related to dollar and carry, in order
to construct country specific SDFs. These SDFs are shown to price international equity returns well
in-sample. Aloosh and Bekaert (2019) reduce the cross-section of currencies by means of currency
baskets that measure the average appreciation of each currency against all other currencies. They
then apply clustering techniques to the cross-section of currency baskets and identify two clusters,
one related to the dollar and another related to the Euro. Lustig and Richmond (2020) model gravity
in the cross-section of exchange rates and find factor structures related to physical, cultural, and
institutional distances between countries. Jiang and Richmond (2019) link trade networks between
countries to exchange rates comovement in order to explain the existence of the global dollar and
carry factors.
       Our paper is different from this literature along several dimensions. First, it relies on common
SDF factors that are extracted from a family of model-free, num´
                                                               eraire invariant SDFs, which satisfy
the AMV in arbitrage-free international asset markets with frictions. Second, our methodology allows
us to extract global factors jointly from a cross-section of returns including international equities and
bonds, in addition to exchange rate returns. Third, our factors are directly related to the optimal
portfolios of global investors in international asset markets with frictions, which provide additional
unique insights into the factor composition in terms of the portfolio exposure of these investors
to various international assets. Fourth, the generality of our methodology allows us to incorporate
   4
    For example, Coeurdacier and Rey (2013) argue that there could also be hedging costs and informational frictions which
are very difficult to observe.


                                                            4
market frictions leading to endogenous market segmentation and to study the implication for global
factor structures thereof. In this context, we find that our two factors which are extracted from the
cross-section of SDFs are related to carry and dollar, in line with the findings of Lustig, Roussanov,
and Verdelhan (2011, 2014). Finally, we show that our common factors jointly price cross-sections of
returns including international equities and bonds, in addition to exchange rate returns, not just in-
but also out-of-sample.
   Our paper is also related to a more recent literature that studies priced risk factors across different
asset classes. For example, Lettau, Maggiori, and Weber (2014) show that the difference between
the unconditional and downside risk market betas can price the cross-section of expected returns
across various asset classes and He, Kelly, and Manela (2017) document that shocks to intermediaries'
equity capital ratio is a priced risk factor. Our paper is different from theirs as we provide a theoretical
framework of how to extract model-free SDFs from cross-sections of assets in the presence of frictions
and study their pricing ability not just in- but also out-of-sample.
   Our work naturally extends an important literature estimating model-free SDFs that minimize
various notions of stochastic dispersion. These SDFs are motivated by a need for powerful diagnostics
when testing asset pricing models. For instance, Hansen and Jagannathan (1991), Stutzer (1995), and
Almeida and Garcia (2017), among others, propose various such asset pricing bounds, while forcing
exact pricing of all assets. In a different context, Ghosh, Julliard, and Taylor (2019) estimate minimum
Kullback-Leibler divergence SDFs which price exactly all assets in-sample. Using these SDFs, they
introduce a nonparametric empirical asset pricing model that performs better than standard factor
models in pricing low dimensional cross-sections of assets out-of-sample. Sandulescu, Trojani, and
Vedolin (2020) study international SDFs in frictionless markets when pricing errors are zero. The
main focus of that paper is the relationship between market incompleteness and financial market
structures to address international finance puzzles. Our approach significantly differs from this
literature, by allowing for non-zero pricing errors on a subset of assets, where pricing errors are
motivated by the presence of market frictions. Moreover, the portfolio penalizations induced by
our approach allow us to accommodate large cross-sections of assets, leading to model-free SDFs
with a reasonable dispersion. In our empirical analysis, we demonstrate that such penalizations are
essential to obtain an improved pricing accuracy out-of-sample.
   Finally, our paper is naturally linked to a smaller but important literature studying model-free
SDFs in markets with frictions. He and Modest (1995) and Luttmer (1996) extend the Hansen
and Jagannathan (1991) minimum variance SDF setting by incorporating various specifications
of sublinear transaction costs that give rise to generalized diagnostics for asset pricing models.
Hansen, Heaton, and Luttmer (1995) provide the econometric tools for the evaluation of asset
pricing models in such settings. An important theoretical finding in this literature is that the pricing
functional sublinearity gives rise to SDFs with non-zero pricing errors, which are tightly constrained
by the given transaction cost structure. Korsaye, Quaini, and Trojani (2020) extend this theory to
address minimum dispersion SDFs resulting from general convex pricing errors structures, which are
characterized in terms of investors' optimal portfolios. We make use of this theory in order to identify
financial market structures that deliver num´
                                            eraire invariant model-free SDF families which satisfy



                                                     5
the AMV. This result is key to identify parsimonious global exchange rate factors structures. Second,
we exploit the theoretical relation between num´
                                               eraire invariant model-free SDFs and the optimal
portfolios of investors in markets with frictions, in order to study economic factor compositions in
terms of the SDF exposures to international asset returns.


Outline of the paper:      The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1 provides the theoretical
framework for studying model-free SDFs in international financial markets with frictions. Section
2 presents our main empirical findings, Section 3 reports some robustness checks, and Section 4
concludes. The Appendix provides proofs and derivations, while the Internet Appendix provides
additional extensions and results omitted from the paper for brevity.


1      Global Stochastic Discount Factors and Market Frictions

In this section, we develop a model-free framework that allows us to study international SDFs in the
presence of various forms of frictions, such as bid-ask spreads, short-selling, margin, or collateral
constraints.

1.1     Model-Free SDFs in the Presence of Frictions

We start our analysis by developing a counterpart to the fundamental theorem of asset pricing in the
presence of transaction costs, a result that enables us to characterize the set of stochastic discount
factors in markets with frictions. For the time being, we focus on a single-country setting and drop
all references to particular countries and currencies. We extend our framework to a multi-country
setting in Subsection 1.3, where we study international SDFs.
      Consider an economy consisting of n assets indexed by set N = {1, 2, . . . , n}, with gross returns
denoted by R = (R1 , . . . , Rn ). While a subset of assets, denoted by S  N , can be traded with no
transaction costs, assets in set F = N \ S are subject to trading frictions. We refer to these assets
as frictionless and frictional assets, respectively. Throughout, we use n and f = n - s to denote the
number of frictionless and frictional assets in the economy, respectively.
      We model transaction costs using a closed and sublinear transaction cost function h, which
quantifies the costs associated with any portfolio based on the same common num´
                                                                               eraire for returns.
More specifically, we assume that implementing a portfolio with vector of portfolio weights  =
[S F ]  Rn entails a cost equal to h(F ), where F  Rf denotes the sub-vector of portfolio
weights of frictional assets. The assumption that transaction cost function h is sublinear has two
important implications. First, it implies that the cost of a portfolio implemented in a single execution
is no greater than the cost of implementing the same portfolio in multiple executions. Second, it
implies that the cost of implementing portfolio  1 , which is a multiple of another portfolio  2 with
a certain factor, is equal to the cost of implementing portfolio  2 multiplied by the same factor.5 As
we show in subsequent sections, this specification of transaction costs is general enough to nest the
 5                                            1   2      1       2                               1   2
   Formally, sublinearity of h ensures that h(F + F )  h(F ) + h(F ) for all pairs of portfolios F , F  Rf and h(F ) =
h(F ) for all   0 and portfolios F  Rf .



                                                          6
various market frictions relevant for our empirical analysis, including short-selling constraints, bid-
ask spreads, and a general class of proportional transaction costs (such as leverage constraints).
   Given the set of assets N = S  F and transaction cost function h, we define the set of all portfolio
returns that can be traded with finite transaction costs as

                                   = {x =  R : h(F ) < ,   Rn }.

We also define a pricing functional  :   R as the minimum cost of replicating a given return when
accounting for transaction costs:

                                   (x) = infn  1 + h(F ) : x =  R .
                                           R

Finally, as is standard in the literature, we say the pair (,  ) is an arbitrage-free price system if x  0
with P(x > 0) > 0 implies  (x) > 0.
   Our first result, which serves as the foundation of our subsequent analysis, establishes that
absence of arbitrage in a frictional market is equivalent to the existence of SDFs inducing a
corresponding set of closed-form constraints on non-zero pricing errors for frictional assets.

Proposition 1. Price system (,  ) is arbitrage free if and only if there exists a strictly positive stochastic
discount factor M such that

                             E[M RS ] - 1 = 0       and      E[M RF ] - 1  C ,                             (1)

where

                              C = {y  Rf : y F  h(F ) for all F  Rf }                                      (2)

and RF and RS are the vectors of gross returns of frictional and frictionless assets, respectively.

   Proposition 1 is akin to the well-known fundamental theorem of asset pricing. It establishes the
existence of strictly positive SDFs in markets with frictions by a standard no-arbitrage condition.
Furthermore, it provides a characterization of the set of all admissible SDFs: according to equation
(1), any such SDF prices all frictionless assets exactly but may result in non-zero pricing errors for
assets subject to trading frictions, where the set of possible pricing errors, C , is uniquely characterized
in definition (2) by transaction cost function h. Intuitively, constraining the pricing error in set C
ensures that the gain induced by mispricing via the SDFs for investing in any portfolio cannot exceed
the transaction cost of implementing such a portfolio.
   It is immediate to see that Proposition 1 nests the textbook case of arbitrage-free markets with
no frictions as a special case: when all assets are frictionless, then E[M Rk ] = 1 for all k  N .
Proposition 1 also extends other results in the prior literature, such as Hansen, Heaton, and Luttmer
(1995) and Luttmer (1996), which study markets with pricing errors constrained by a convex cone.
For example, while Luttmer (1996) focuses on an economy in which h(F )  {0, }, our more flexible
formulation using a general sublinear transaction cost function allows us to incorporate a wider class
of trading frictions, such as proportional transaction costs, which play a central role in our empirical
application. We next provide a series of examples to illustrate how our setup can incorporate a variety
of market frictions.

                                                      7
Example 1 (Short-sell constraints). As a first example, we show that our framework can incorporate
short-sell constraints in a straightforward manner. Consider the following transaction cost function,

                                                            0       F  0
                                                h(F ) =
                                                                    otherwise,

according to which taking short positions in any of the frictional assets is infinitely costly, while taking
long positions is costless. Under such a specification of transaction costs, Proposition 1 implies that,
under no arbitrage, there exists a strictly positive stochastic discount factor M which induces non-
positive pricing errors for assets subject to short-sell constraints, while pricing all frictionless assets
exactly, i.e.,

                                  E[M RF ] - 1  0           and         E[M RS ] - 1 = 0.

Example 2 (Bid-ask spreads). A natural way to incorporate bid-ask spreads into our framework is to
                        +
consider long positions F , when one buys an asset at ask price at time 0 and sells it at bid price at
                            -
time 1, and short positions F , when one buys an asset at bid price at time 0 and sells at ask price
                                                                                                +
at time 1. This corresponds to a setting with (i) no short-selling constraints on long position F and
                                              -                    +   -
(ii) no buying constraints on short positions F . Denoting by F = [F , F ] the extended portfolio
vector of long and short position on each asset, we can easily incorporate these market frictions with
following transaction cost function:
                                                                    +      -
                                                       0            F  0 , F 0
                                        h(F ) =
                                                                    otherwise.

Under this specification of transaction costs, Proposition 1 implies that the pricing errors on the long
positions have to be negative, while the pricing errors on short positions have to be positive, with no
pricing errors for assets that are not subject to such constraints. That is,

                          E[M R+
                               F] - 1  0              E[M R-
                                                           F] - 1  0             E[M RS ] - 1 = 0,

              -
where R+
       F and RF are the gross return vectors for long and short positions, respectively.

Example 3 (Proportional transaction costs). As our final example, we consider transaction costs that
are proportional to portfolio positions. We can model a general class of such frictions by assuming
that h(F ) =  F for some norm · and a constant   0. A simple application of Proposition 1
then implies that, under no arbitrage, there exists a strictly positive SDF M such that:

                                 E[M RF ] - 1                   and      E[M RS ] - 1 = 0,                    (3)

where ·         denotes the dual norm of · .6 As a useful special case, consider transaction costs specified
by the l1 -norm, that is, h(F ) =               k F   |k |. Under such a specification, equation (3) implies that
|E[M Rk ] - 1|   for any asset k  F subject to transaction costs. In other words, proportional
transaction costs impose a maximum bound of  on frictional assets' pricing errors. As expected,
   6
       The dual of norm · is defined as y      = sup{ y :     1}.


                                                                8
this bound also implies that a decrease in transaction cost parameter  results in a smaller set of
admissible SDFs and smaller pricing errors.7

       We conclude this discussion by noting that it is straightforward to accommodate different types
of trading frictions for different subsets of assets. For example, one could introduce short-sell
constraints for equities, while at the same time impose bid-ask spreads on the carry trade. In such
settings, set C in Proposition 1 simply becomes the Cartesian product of the individual sets reflecting
the trading frictions applied to each subset of assets.

1.2      Minimum-Entropy SDFs

Proposition 1 provides a characterization of the set of admissible SDFs in terms of the transaction
cost function h. In general, however, there may exist multiple strictly positive SDFs that satisfy the
restrictions in Proposition 1. As in frictionless economies, such multiplicity may arise as a result of
market incompleteness. However, in our frictional framework, transaction costs may also be a source
of SDF multiplicity, with a larger set C in equation (2) resulting in larger set of SDFs.
       Due to such potential multiplicity, we focus next on a specific SDF, called the minimum-entropy
SDF. As we show in subsequent results, this SDF satisfies a "num´
                                                                eraire-invariance" property, which
plays a central role in our characterization of the factor structure of exchange rates when we extend
our framework to an international setting. We start with the following definition:

Definition 1. Given transaction function h, the minimum-entropy SDF M0 is given by

                                          M0 = arg min        E[- log M ]
                                                   M >0
                                                       s.t.   E[M RS ] - 1 = 0                                           (4)
                                                              E[M RF ] - 1  C ,

where set C is given by equation (2).

       As the minimum entropy label suggests, problem (4) picks the SDF with the smallest entropy from
the set of all possible SDFs characterized by absence of arbitrage, while the constraints in (4) ensure
that it respects the pricing constraints induced by the transaction cost function.8 Working directly
with problem (4) is inconvenient as it is an infinite-dimensional constrained optimization problem.
Therefore, using convex duality theory, in the following proposition we characterize the minimum-
entropy SDF with a solution to an unconstrained finite-dimensional optimization problem.

Proposition 2. Given transaction cost function h, the minimum-entropy SDF satisfies

                                                      M0 = 1/0 R,                                                        (5)
   7
     Note that, unlike our previous examples, transaction cost h(F ) =  F may take finite non-zero values. As a result,
transaction costs within this class fall outside the framework studied by Luttmer (1996), who only considers market frictions
in which h(F )  {0, }.
   8
     The minimum-entropy SDF belongs to the family of minimum-dispersion SDFs, which include several other well-
known SDFs such as Hansen and Jagannathan's (1991) minimum-variance SDF and minimum Kullback-Leibler divergence
SDFs, among many others.



                                                              9
where
                                      0 = arg min      E[- log( R)] +  1 + h(F )                          (6)
                                                Rn

and R denotes the vector of asset returns.9

      This proposition provides a closed-form expression for the minimum-entropy SDF that can be
estimated directly from the data. In particular, it characterizes the minimum-entropy SDF in terms of
the transaction cost function h and the solution of a penalized optimal growth portfolio problem. As
a result, equations (5) and (6) will serve as the basis of our empirical analysis in Section 2.
      As an example, consider the proportional transaction costs under the l1 -norm specified in
Example 3. It is immediate from the above result that the minimum-entropy SDF can be obtained
in terms of an optimal growth portfolio with a lasso-type penalty. Therefore, as is well known from
the machine learning literature, such lasso penalization gives rise to an optimal portfolio with a sparse
vector of portfolio weights for assets subject to market frictions.

1.3      International SDFs

We now extend our framework to a multi-country setting in which global investors trade assets
internationally in markets with possibly different currency denominations. Formally, consider an
economy consisting of m countries, denoted by {1, . . . , m}. Investors in country i have access to a
large set of n assets--consisting of both local and foreign assets--denominated in country i's currency.
We use R(i) to denote the vector of asset returns accessible to investors in country i, denominated in
i's currency. Conversion of returns denominated in currency j to corresponding returns in currency i
may be made accessible to investors in all countries through exchange rate markets:

                                                      R(i) = X (ij ) R(j )                                (7)

for all pairs of countries i and j , where X (ij ) denotes the gross exchange rate return, with the exchange
rate defined as the price in country i currency of one unit of country j 's currency.
      As in our single-country framework, a subset of assets F (i)  N available to investors in country i
is subject to trading frictions, with a sublinear transaction cost function h(i) . Note that, in general, the
set of frictional assets and their corresponding transaction costs may differ across countries. However,
one particularly useful special case arises when all transaction cost are assumed to be identical:

Definition 2. International financial markets are symmetric if F (i) = F and h(i) = h for all i.

      Irrespective of whether international markets are symmetric or not, Proposition 1 implies that
they are arbitrage free with respect to each currency denomination if there exists a collection of strictly
positive country-specific SDFs {M (i) }m
                                       i=1 such that

                                         (i)                                 (i)
                                 E[M RS ] - 1 = 0           and       E[M RF ] - 1  C (i)
                                   (i)         ( i)
for all countries i, where RS and RF denote the returns of the frictionless and frictional assets in
country i, respectively, and C (i) is the pricing error constraint set for investors in country i, defined
  9
      This statement implicity assumes that the optimization problem (6) has a unique solution 0 .


                                                              10
                                                                                              (i)
in equation (2). Finally, we can define the country-specific minimum-entropy SDFs {M0 }m
                                                                                       i=1 as
the solutions of optimization problems similar to (4) for each country i. Our next result relates
international SDFs to exchange rates in markets with frictions.

Proposition 3 (Asset market view of exchange rates). If international financial markets are symmetric,
then
                                                               (j )   ( i)
                                              X (ij ) = M0 /M0                                      (8)
                                       ( i)             (j )
for all pairs of countries i = j , where M0 and M0 are the minimum-entropy SDFs of country i and j .

   The above result establishes that, as long as markets are symmetric, the exchange rate return
between any pair of currencies is uniquely pinned down by the ratio of the two countries' minimum-
entropy SDFs.     While it is well-known that in complete and frictionless markets the rate of
appreciation of the exchange rate has to be equal to the ratio of the two countries' SDFs, Proposition
3 shows that the same relationship holds for minimum-entropy SDFs under much more general
conditions, irrespective of the extent of market incompleteness and the presence and nature of
transaction costs.
   The significance of equation (8), which is known as the asset market view of exchange rates
(AMV), is threefold. First, it implies that, as long as markets are symmetric, the cross-section of
m(m - 1)/2 distinct log exchange rate returns is described exactly by a log linear transformation of
the cross-section of m minimum entropy SDFs. Second, it implies a parsimonious factor structure
of (minimum-entropy) international SDFs. This is a consequence of the fact that, under AMV,
for international SDFs pairs to match the exchange rate volatility, they must be almost perfectly
correlated (Brandt, Cochrane, and Santa-Clara, 2006). Third, the fact that Proposition 3 holds for
any specification of transaction cost function h implies that one can uniquely pin down the factor
structure of exchange rates without explicitly specifying the set of assets available to investors in
each country: one can obtain the factor structure while allowing for the set of traded assets to be
determined endogenously. This is in contrast to the extant literature that estimates factor structures
by imposing a priori assumptions on the set of traded assets, which may lead to different exchange
rate factor representations depending on the specification of the menu of the assets.
   We now turn to another important property of international minimum-entropy SDFs, namely
num´
   eraire-invariance, according to which, international SDFs that price the cross-section of
exchange rates are independent of their currency denomination.               The following corollary to
Propositions 2 and 3 formalizes this concept:
                                                                                (i)
Corollary 1. Suppose international financial markets are symmetric. Then, 0 = 0 for all countries
         (i)
i, where 0 is the solution to i's penalized optimal growth portfolio problem in (6).

   The Corollary establishes that the optimal portfolio weights are the same for all countries. This
is a consequence of the functional form of the minimum-entropy SDFs. The num´
                                                                            eraire-invariance
property of minimum-entropy SDFs then follows immediately: the optimal portfolio return in each
country can be converted to the optimal portfolio return of another country via the corresponding
                             (i)                 (j )
exchange rate return, i.e., 0 R(i) = X (ij ) 0 R(j ) . While a simple consequence of our previous

                                                          11
results, Corollary 1 plays a central role in establishing the parsimonious nature of global factor
structures, as we show next.
       We conclude this discussion by noting that when international markets are not symmetric, the
AMV usually does not hold. In general, for an arbitrary choice of a family of minimum-dispersion
SDFs, the AMV may be violated and deviations from it can be captured by a family of Backus, Foresi,
and Telmer (2001) stochastic exchange rate wedges { (ij ) }1i,j m , defined by:
                                                                  (j )
                                                                M0
                                             X (ij ) =           (i)
                                                                         exp( (ij ) ).                                   (9)
                                                                M0

1.4      The Global Factor Structure of Exchange Rates

Having developed the necessary theoretical framework, we can finally characterize the global factor
structure of exchange rates with a model-free approach. In particular, we establish that, as long as
international financial markets are symmetric--and irrespective of the nature of trade frictions--the
cross-section of minimum-entropy SDFs has a two-factor representation consisting of a global factor
and a local currency basket factor. The next theorem formalizes this result:

Theorem 1. Suppose international markets are symmetric and let (w1 , . . . , wm ) denote a set of weights
               m
such that      i=1 wi   = 1. Then, the minimum-entropy SDF of country i satisfies
                                                                (i)
                                                     log M0 = G + CB(i) ,                                               (10)

where
                                   m
                                                  (j )
                           G=-           wj log 0 R(j )               and      CB(i) = -               wj log X (ij )
                                  j =1                                                          j =i

denote the global SDF factor and the local currency basket factor of country i, respectively.

       Equation (10) thus establishes that every (log) minimum-entropy SDF can be written as the sum of
(i) a common factor given by the average negative log return of the optimal portfolios across currency
denominations and (ii) a currency basket factor CB(i) measuring the average appreciation of currency
i relative to all other currencies j = i.
       The two-factor decomposition in Theorem 1 will serve as the basis of our empirical analysis
in subsequent sections.           In particular, from equation (10), we use the following two-factor
approximation of the local SDF, consisting of both the global and the local currency basket factor:
                                              ( i)                                       ( i)
                                            M0  exp(G + CB(i) ) =: M0 ,                                                 (11)
                                            (1)                       (n)
which by Theorem 1 is exact with 0                = . . . = 0               whenever international markets are symmetric.10
Second, we can also study a one-factor representation of the local SDFs as an approximate global
SDF:
                                                         ( i)
                                                     M0  exp(G) =: M0 .                                                 (12)
  10
    The two-factor representation given in (11) is also related to Aloosh and Bekaert (2019) who decompose local SDFs into
a global SDF and a component which is orthogonal to the global SDF. However, different from us, these authors construct
global SDFs from equal-weighted currency baskets of all possible bilateral exchange rates with respect to a base currency.


                                                                       12
We then test how the one- and two-factor approximations in equations (11) and (12) explain the cross-
section of international asset returns.
      We conclude by noting that the two-factor representation in equation (10) is closely related to
the models of Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2011, 2014) and Verdelhan (2018), who posit that
country-level SDFs are driven by two factors: carry and dollar, where the latter measures the average
appreciation with respect to the dollar. Our representation in Theorem 1 establishes that, in case of
minimum-entropy SDFs in symmetric markets, not only does the cross-section of SDFs consists of
a global factor and a local currency basket factor--akin to the dollar factor in the above-mentioned
papers--but also that there cannot be any other factors. In asymmetric markets, more generally, the
two-factor representation in equation (10) holds approximately, because of the presence of exchange
rate wedges due to asymmetric frictions. Intuitively, the degree of accuracy of the approximation
depends on the extent of the deviations from market symmetry. However, it is an empirical question
how important these deviations are in the data.11


2      Empirical Analysis

Proposition 2 and in particular equation (5) allows us to estimate minimum dispersion international
SDFs directly from returns data in the presence of trading frictions. We study two different market
settings with varying transaction costs in both symmetric and asymmetric markets and explore the
impact of frictions on the properties of SDFs. Using SDFs denominated in different currencies, we
then extract the two factors from equation (10) in order to price cross-sections of currencies as well
as long-term bonds, and stocks.

2.1     Data

In our empirical analysis, we use monthly data between January 1988 and December 2015. We focus
on the following developed markets: Australia, Canada, Euro Area, Japan, New Zealand, Switzerland,
United Kingdom, and United States.12 We collect data on exchange rates, short- and long-term
interest rates, and MSCI country equity indices' prices from Datastream. When we analyze a specific
currency denomination, we treat the corresponding market as the domestic and all other markets as
foreign. Hence, we do not consider bilateral trades but a global economy where global investors can
trade all possible assets.
      We also calculate equity and FX volatility from the corresponding returns. To this end, we compute
the standard deviation over one month of daily MSCI price index changes for each currency, and then
the cross-sectional mean of these volatility series. Option-implied volatility on the S&P500, VIX, is
available from the webpage of the CBOE. We also calculate a measure of gross capital flows. To this
                                       ¨
end, we follow Avdjiev, Hardy, Kalemli-Ozcan, and Serv´
                                                      en (2018) and construct measures of in- and
outflows for the countries in our sample using quarterly data from the Balance of Payment (BOP)
data available from the International Monetary Fund. The BOP data captures capital flows in and
 11
    In our empirical analysis, we study various specifications of symmetric or asymmetric frictions in international asset
markets and find that the approximation is very accurate also in asymmetric markets, i.e., stochastic wedges are negligible.
 12
    Before the introduction of the Euro, we take the Deutsche Mark in its place.


                                                            13
out of a given country. We define inflows into any given country as the sum of direct investment into
equity and debt, portfolio equity and debt, and other investment debt from the liability side. Similarly,
outflows are defined the same way but from the asset side. To construct one variable of gross capital
flows, we take averages across all countries.13 Lastly, we use two variables which capture global risk
aversion and intermediaries' capital constraints: the "Global Financial Cycle" variable of Miranda-
Agrippino and Rey (2020) and intermediary capital of He, Kelly, and Manela (2017), both available
from the authors' webpages.

2.2    Market Settings

We study two different market settings, symmetric and asymmetric markets, and in each market
impose different types of transaction costs.


S YMMETRIC     MARKETS :    For the first symmetric market setting, we assume that global investors can
trade the full menu of assets and there are no frictions to trade. The second symmetric market
setting arises when investors face proportional transaction costs. We assume that investors incur
no transaction costs when trading short-term bonds globally (i.e., investors can borrow and lend at
the short-term interest rate without any frictions) but face transaction costs when trading long-term
bonds and equity. More specifically, we assume that transaction costs, modeled with an l1 -norm,
are proportional to their positions and in line with the size of bid-ask spreads.14 To this end, the
proportional transaction cost parameter  is chosen such that we have comparable pricing errors
implied on the returns based on mid-prices by (i) SDFs in an economy with proportional transaction
costs and by (ii) SDFs in an economy where market frictions are quantified by bid-ask spreads.


A SYMMETRIC MARKETS : In the first asymmetric market setting, we assume that investors face bid-ask
spreads when buying and selling international assets. To this end, we use average bid-ask spreads for
exchange rates directly available from Datastream which are in the order of 2bps. For the long-term
bonds, we also assume average bid-ask spreads of 2bps in line with Adrian, Fleming, and Vogt (2017)
for the US and Bank of International Settlement (2016) for Japan and Germany ten-year bonds. For
equity indices, we impose a 6bps spread.15 The second asymmetric market setting assumes that local
short-term bonds can be traded without any frictions whereas all foreign short-, as well as long-term
bonds and equities face proportional transaction costs which are again consistent with the size of
the bid-ask spread. In these settings the asymmetry is introduced through frictions that differentiate
between home and foreign assets. To this end, we introduce an additional cost in the order of 2bps
when trading forerign assets.
  13
     Taking principal components across country-level gross flows and using the first principal component in our analysis
instead leads to qualitatively and quantitatively similar results.
  14
     This is a special case of equation (3), where h(F ) =  kF |k |.
  15
     It is in general impossible to know the exact bid-ask spread of assets. Luttmer (1996) uses bid-ask spreads of around
0.012% which corresponds to the tick size on the NYSE. Andersen, Bondarenko, Kyle, and Obizhaeva (2018) document that
the bid-ask spread on E-Mini Futures on the S&P500, one of top two most liquid exchange traded futures in the world, is
around 0.25 index points.




                                                           14
2.3     Properties of Model-Free International SDFs

As a first exercise, we study the properties of international SDFs, their comovement, and the
corresponding optimal portfolio weights. To this end, we estimate equation (5) using the different
transaction cost functions discussed before. Table 1 provides summary statistics for SDFs in each
currency denomination for the four market structures.

                                           [Insert Table 1 here.]

      While average SDFs are the same across the different market settings, volatilities decrease
significantly as we impose market frictions. For example, while the average volatility in markets
with no frictions is around 0.36, the volatility in asymmetric markets with transaction costs is only
around 0.2, a 45% drop. Recall that in asymmetric markets, deviations from the AMV can be captured
by a stochastic wedge. To save space, we relegate summary statistics on stochastic wedges to the
Internet Appendix. We find stochastic wedges to be minuscule and on average to be nearly zero
for all currency pairs echoing the findings in Lustig and Verdelhan (2019) and Sandulescu, Trojani,
and Vedolin (2020). Notice, however, while these authors study stochastic wedges in frictionless
markets, we show that wedges are also small in the presence of frictions. Small stochastic wedges
have immediate consequences for the cross-country correlations of international SDFs and hence
factor structures.
      We present cross-country correlations for the four market settings in the lower parts of each panel.
The correlations are almost perfect in symmetric markets. This is intuitive, as under the assumption
of market symmetry the AMV holds, which "enforces" a high correlation among international SDFs;
see Proposition 3. As we move to an asymmetric market setting where transaction costs vary among
the different countries, we notice that the correlations are slightly lower but still all above 90%. This
may be more surprising, given that in this case we have violations of the AMV. The importance of this
finding is twofold. First, the almost perfect correlation even in incomplete markets with asymmetric
frictions implies that stochastic wedges are inconsequential for understanding the key properties of
SDF factor structures. Second, as a consequence a strong factor structure of exchange rates emerges
even in presence of market frictions, which implies that a low number of factors is sufficient to explain
the cross-section of international asset returns.

2.4     Optimal Portfolio Weights

In order to shed more light on the optimal SDFs for different currencies, we now study optimal
portfolios. Our theoretical framework allows us to exactly identify optimal portfolio weights from
agents' Euler equations. Figure 1 plots the optimal portfolio weights for symmetric markets with no
frictions (upper panel) and symmetric proportional transaction costs (lower panel).

                                           [Insert Figure 1 here.]

      Recall that a direct consequence of Proposition 3 is that portfolio holdings have to be identical
in symmetric markets. Therefore, we only plot the USD denominated portfolio weights. We notice


                                                     15
that whenever investors can trade without frictions, portfolio weights can be very large both long
and short. The larger positions reveal that investors borrow in the lower interest rate currencies such
as JPY, USD, CAD, and EUR and hold long positions in high interest rate currencies such as NZD
and AUD. Most positions in long-term bonds are short, with the exception of USD, EUR, and JPY.
Global investors hold large long positions in USD, AUD, and CHF equity indices. The large positions
indicate that without taking large levered positions it may be hard to maintain this portfolio, which
also contributes to the high volatilities documented in Panel A of Table 1.
      When we impose symmetric proportional transaction costs on investors, given by an l1 -norm,
some weights on assets are zero, portfolio holdings are sparse, and the size of the positions shrink,
see the lower panel in Figure 1. More specifically, most portfolio weights on the long-term bonds
are zero. This is not very surprising given that currency risk premia at the long-end of the term
structure are small, see, e.g., Lustig, Stathopolous, and Verdelhan (2019). Investors also drop most
of the equity indices except for a long position in the USD and CHF, and a short position in the JPY.
Interestingly, most of the wealth is held in short-term bonds. In particular, as in the case with no
transaction costs, global investors trade a "carry." Short positions are in typical funding currencies,
whereas long positions are in investment currencies. Overall, we conclude that even small transaction
costs which restrain investors' leverage can have significant impacts on the optimal portfolios held by
global investors.

                                     [Insert Figures 2 and 3 here.]

      Figures 2 and 3 plot the cases where we assume asymmetric bid-ask spreads and proportional
transaction costs, respectively. Because in asymmetric markets portfolio weights vary across the
different currency denominations, we plot all currencies separately. As in the symmetric proportional
transaction cost case, portfolios are more sparse and investors hold positions that resemble the carry
and long equity. The most sparse portfolio coincides with the case when investors face asymmetric
proportional transaction costs. The sparsity translates directly to the low SDF volatility reported in
Table 1. Even though in asymmetric markets portfolio weights are not enforced to be the same,
positions look almost identical. As in the symmetric market cases investors engage in carry trades:
shorting the US dollar, CAD, EUR or CHF and go long in the NZD and AUD. In addition, investors
trade long USD and CHF equity.

2.5     The Global Factor Structure of Exchange Rates

We now turn to the factor structure of exchange rates, the main forcus of our paper. Different
from earlier literature, which primarily estimates SDF factors from the cross-section of currencies
(or currency portfolios), our framework allows us to estimate the cross-section of international SDFs
from international stock and bond data, in addition to currencies, under different assumptions for
the underlying market frictions.
      We leverage our findings thus far by noticing that the almost perfect correlation among
international SDFs across all market settings naturally implies a very parsimonious SDF factor
structure, not just in settings where the AMV holds but also in the presence of asymmetric frictions.

                                                  16
Indeed, recall that our two-factor representation decomposes each minimum entropy SDF into two
conceptually distinct factors: A global factor given by the average return of a maximum growth
portfolio, which is independent of the currency num´
                                                   eraire, and a local currency basket factor; see
equation (10). Moreover, while equation (10) holds under market symmetry, the almost perfect
correlation we find among international SDFs in asymmetric settings suggests that the resulting AMV
deviations are rather small and that the two-factor approximation is quite accurate in these settings
as well.

2.5.1      Global SDFs and Currency Baskets

Figure 4 plots the time-series of the global SDF risk factors from equation (10) for the four market
settings. While we notice a much higher volatility for the global factor in market settings without any
frictions, especially during crises, there is overall a high comovement among the different SDFs.16
These SDF factors simultaneously increase during bad economic times, such as recessions, or during
times of disruptions in financial markets, such as the dot com bubble burst or the Lehman default.
Interestingly, we notice that global SDFs spike during US specific crisis events. For example, in all
four market settings, we find that global SDFs exhibit a massive spike in August 2011 during the US
downgrade from AAA to AA+ by S&P.
                                                    [Insert Figure 4 here.]
       Figure 5 plots the time-series of the local currency baskets. While the global SDF is by construction
currency independent, notice that local currency baskets are country specific. The global SDF factor
correlates very differently to the local currency baskets. For example in the asymmetric proportional
transaction cost setting, it correlates negatively to the high interest rate currency baskets, NZD (-43%)
and AUD (-36%), and it positively correlates to typical funding currencies CHF (15%), EUR (26%), and
JPY (31%). Global SDFs are instead almost uncorrelated to currency baskets USD (6%), GBP (3%) and
CAD (-1%).

                                                    [Insert Figure 5 here.]

2.5.2      Factor Premia: Empirical Framework

We now turn to our main empirical results. To this end, we study the pricing ability of global SDF
factors and local currency basket factors for the cross-section of international asset returns. Recall
from equation (2) that in markets with frictions, minimum entropy SDFs always imply non-zero
pricing errors even in-sample. One might therefore wonder whether there are any implications for
running standard Fama and MacBeth (1973) cross-sectional regressions. To this end, notice that
                                                                         (i)
our setting implies that any vector of excess returns Re in currency i has to satisfy the following
decomposition:

                                                                  (i)             (i)
                                                            M0                  M0
                              E[R(i)         (i)
                                 e ] = -Cov Re ,                   (i)
                                                                         +E          (i)
                                                                                            ( i)
                                                                                           Re      ,   (13)
                                                           E[M0 ]              E[M0 ]
  16
       The average correlation across the four settings is 94%.


                                                                  17
                 (i)
where M0 is the local SDF. Here, the second term on the RHS represents the vector of pricing errors
                         (i)
induced by SDF M0 , while the first term represents the expected excess returns that is explained by
a return covariance with this SDF.
        The decomposition in equation (13) then gives rise to the following linear beta model for expected
excess returns:
                                                                                               ( i)
                                     (i)                      (i)                        M0                                (i)
                       E[R( i)        ( i)
                          e - Re 1] =  (
                                           (i)
                                               -  1) + E                              ( i)
                                                                                                          ( i)
                                                                                                        (Re    - R e 1) ,        (14)
                                                                                   E[M0 ]

where we denote by y the component-wise average of a vector y , by (i) the (scalar) SDF factor
premium and by  the vector of SDF betas:
                                                                      (i)         ( i)
                                                            Cov (Re , M0 )
                                                   ( i) =                   (i)
                                                                                           .                                     (15)
                                                              Var(M0 )

Note that in equation (14), the second term in the sum on the RHS is a vector of cross-sectionally
centred pricing errors, which immediately leads to a zero-mean error term for a two-step cross-
sectional analysis of excess returns. However, such an error term may not be cross-sectionally
orthogonal to the vector of SDF betas, as this constraint is not part of the definition of a minimum-
entropy SDF in markets with frictions. Moreover, recall that by construction the factor premium of
           (i)
SDF M0 equals:
                                                                             (i)
                                                               Var(M0 )
                                                    (i) = -                 (i)
                                                                                     .                                           (16)
                                                                    E[M0 ]

Taken together, this implies that the choice of factor premium (16) in linear model (14) may lead to a
suboptimal cross-sectional fit. However, notice that an optimal fit is obtained via the factor premium
estimated by a standard two-step Fama and MacBeth (1973) regression approach:
                                                             (i)                    (i)                (i)
                                                    (i) -  1                E[Re - Re 1]
                                     (i)
                                     F M B   :=                                                                        .         (17)
                                                                (i)                                   (i)
                                                      (i) -  1                 (i) -  1

                                      ( i)
Here, differences between F M B and (i) provide information about the adjustments in SDF factor
premia needed to obtain an optimal cross-sectional fit. Moreover, inference on the precise value of
 ( i)
F M B is easily feasible with standard methods in a simple single-factor linear model of the form:
                                                    ( i)                                 (i)
                                      E[R( i)        (i)
                                         e - Re 1] =  (
                                                         (i)
                                                             -  1) +                                         (i)
                                                                                                                   .             (18)

In the following, we therefore estimate factor premia via the standard two-step Fama and MacBeth
(1973) estimator defined in equation (17) and we quantify the in- and out-of-sample pricing accuracy
                               (i)
of international SDFs M0 , together with their two- and single-factor approximations in equations
(11) and (12), respectively.
        We present regression results both in- and out-of-sample for the cross-section of currencies and
international stocks and bonds both separately and jointly. We focus on results denominated in USD
(unless noted) and relegate results for all other currency denominations to the Internet Appendix.

                                                                    18
2.5.3   Factor Premia: In-Sample Evidence

Tables 2 and 3 summarize in-sample estimated SDF factor premia (17) for the USD denominated
cross-section of currencies (Table 2) and stocks and bonds (Table 3), using two-step Fama and
MacBeth (1973) regressions. Column 1 of each table reports the price of risk with respect to the
                                   (usd)
local minimum entropy SDF M0               . Column 2 reports the risk premium relative to the single-factor
SDF approximation M0 in equation (12). Column 3 instead reports the results for the two-factor SDF
                  (usd)
approximation M0          in equation (11).
   As by construction pricing errors are zero (i.e., expected asset returns are perfectly matched) in
absence of market frictions, in-sample R2 s are 100% for minimum entropy SDFs, which are exactly
                                                              (usd)        (usd)
reproduced by their two-factor SDF approximation: M0                  = M0         . Moreover, we find that in such
settings, the pricing accuracy provided by the global single-factor SDF is also virtually perfect. As we
introduce market frictions and asymmetry, the in-sample pricing ability of the minimum entropy
SDF intuitively declines. However, we find that such decline is rather limited, with a lowest in-
sample R2 across market settings of about 97% (92%) for currencies (currencies, bonds, and stocks).
All estimated factor risk premia in Tables 2 and 3 are negative and highly statistically significant
for all SDFs and SDF factor specifications. Across all market settings, we find the global SDF
explains virtually the same cross-sectional variation as the local minimum SDF. Using the two-factor
                                  (usd)
representation instead, i.e., M0          , increases the adjusted R2 only marginally relative to the global
SDF for the cross-section of carry trades, while it even decreases the adjusted R2 for the full cross-
section of excess returns.

                                           [Insert Tables 2 and 3 here.]

   Overall, we conclude that one single factor can explain the majority of the variation of
international asset returns. This finding is particularly noteworthy for currencies. For example,
while our R2 s are similar in size to those reported in the literature, notice that our global SDF is
not calculated from the cross-section of currencies itself, like for example the HML factor in Lustig,
Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2011), the currency volatility factor in Menkhoff, Sarno, Schmeling, and
Schrimpf (2012), or the currency baskets in Aloosh and Bekaert (2019). Moreover, while these papers
price the cross-section of currency portfolios, we price the cross-section of individual currency
returns together with long-term bond, and stock index returns.
   It is also worth highlighting that the R2 s in Table 3 capture not only with-in asset class variation but
also across asset class variation. To show this, Figure 6 plots the expected excess return as a function
of exposure to the global SDF risk factor M0 for the USD denominated economy, together with the
estimated price of risk (dashed line). In all four settings we find that the global factor model captures
the cross asset class variation. Not surprisingly, as market frictions and asymmetry are introduced,
the assets are less aligned across the dashed line compared to the case with no frictions. Moreover,
in presence of asymmetry and market frictions, the variation in the risk exposure increases as can
be gleaned from the x-axis of each figure. For example, while in the case of no transaction costs
risk exposures vary between -0.05 and 0.01, risk exposures in a setting with asymmetric proportional
transaction costs vary between -0.12 and 0.04. This feature is directly related to the properties

                                                        19
of pricing errors induced by the various SDFs, as tighter pricing error constraints imply a higher
minimum SDF variability and a weaker co-movement with asset excess returns.

                                                [Insert Figure 6 here.]

       Finally, we can also compare the pricing ability of the one- versus two-factor SDF representation
across currency denominations different from the US dollar. To this end, we plot in Figure 7 (Figure
8) the cross-sectional R2 s for different economies in the symmetric (asymmetric) market settings.
In the case of no transaction costs (upper four panels in Figure 7), adding the currency basket
always leads to R2 s which are 100%, independent of the currency denomination and the asset class
priced. This is expected, as in this setting, the two-factor SDF approximation is exact and the local
currency minimum entropy SDFs produce by construction a perfect cross-sectional fit. When we add
symmetric frictions (lower four panels), we notice that while for the cross-section of currencies we still
see a 100% in-sample R2 by construction, differences between the R2 s when using the global factor
alone and adding the local currency basket diminish. A similar picture emerges in the asymmetric
market settings, see Figure 8. The global SDF uniformly explains a large fraction of the cross-sectional
variation across all asset classes. The lowest R2 is about 58% for Australian dollar denominated long-
term bonds. One observation worth highlighting is the following. Interestingly, we find that the
local currency basket provides consistent additional explanatory power for the so-called commodity
currencies, AUD, CAD, and NZD. This is the case across different specifications of frictions. This
echoes findings in Aloosh and Bekaert (2019) who document evidence for a priced commodity risk
factor for the cross-section of currencies. We show that this is also true for long-term bonds and
equities more generally.

                                             [Insert Figures 7 and 8 here.]

2.5.4     Factor Premia: Out-Of-Sample Evidence

An economically more interesting question asks whether our SDF factor models are able to price the
cross-section of international assets out-of-sample. To this end, we use a training window of ten-
years of monthly returns up to say, month y , to estimate the optimal weight ^y solving problem (6)
by maximizing a penalized Sharpe ratio instead of a penalized expected log utility criterion.17 For
the following twelve monthly return observations Ry+m , we compute the sequence of out-of-sample
monthly SDFs M  ^ y+m = max{-   ^ Ry+m , 0}. We then construct the out-of-sample SDF time-series
                                         y
 ^ y+m } in a rolling window manner, by updating the estimation window at the yearly frequency.
{M
Here, the out-of-sample global SDF is computed using the local out-of-sample SDFs together with
equation (12). We finally evaluate the out-of-sample pricing performance, by calculating out-of-
sample cross-sectional R2 s with two-step Fama and MacBeth (1973) regressions.
  17
     While all our in-sample results are derived for the minimum-entropy SDF for reasons explained in the theory section,
we now compute minimum-variance SDFs to ensure non-negative out-of-sample SDFs, which cannot be guaranteed for
out-of-sample minimum-entropy SDFs. In general, we find our results not to be dependent on the dispersion measured
used. For example, even though minimum variance SDFs do not imply the AMV even in symmetric markets, we find the
ensuing factor structures to be very similar to those for minimum entropy SDFs. We therefore conclude that the results on
the factor structure of international assets does not depend on the dispersion measure used in a significant way. We gather
all results for in-sample minimum variance SDFs in the Internet Appendix to save space.


                                                            20
       Tables 4 and 5 present the out-of-sample results for the four market settings. The results are mixed
for the cross-section of FX returns: While estimated SDF factor premia are significant in specifications
with transaction costs, they are insignificant in the no frictions case. This, however, is not very
surprising given the volatile nature of the no friction SDFs documented in Table 1 and highlights the
need to impose frictions for superior out-of-sample pricing. To see this more clearly, we can gauge
the estimated factor premia in symmetric market settings but with proportional transaction costs.
In this case, we significantly improve on the cross-sectional pricing abilities of both the local and
global SDFs, with significantly increased R2 s. We can further improve upon the pricing performance
by imposing asymmetric market settings, as the ensuing SDFs feature more robust properties, e.g.,
lower volatilities and lower sensitivities to currency returns. Indeed, when pricing only the currency
returns, proportional transaction costs lead to further improved R2 s and statistical significance in
estimating the risk premium. For instance, when we assume that markets are asymmetric and global
investors face proportional transaction costs, the global SDF alone explains 80% of the variation in
currency returns, which is more than twice the R2 in absence of market frictions. When pricing the
full cross-section of assets, we obtain similarly large R2 of about 80% for the global SDFs. Finally, in
settings with transaction costs, we find that the SDF currency basket factor is typically significant and
that it adds to cross-sectional pricing accuracy especially when pricing currency returns.

                                           [Insert Tables 4 and 5 here.]

       Figure 9 plots the expected excess return as function of the exposure to out-of-sample global SDF
risk factor for the USD denominated economy. The ability of global SDF alone to capture the variation
within and across asset classes increases as frictions and asymmetry are introduced. Moreover, as in
the in-sample case, the variation of the exposure to the global SDF risk factor increases with market
frictions and asymmetry.

                                               [Insert Figure 9 here.]

2.5.5     Relation To Verdelhan (2018)

In our setting, SDFs are fully characterized by two factors: the average negative log return of global
optimal portfolios and a currency basket measuring the average appreciation relative to all other
currencies. It is natural to ask how these factors relate to the carry and dollar risk factors in Verdelhan
(2018) given that ours are estimated from stock and bond data.
       Figure 10 plots the global SDF together with carry (upper panel) and the currency basket risk factor
together with dollar (lower panel) in a symmetric market with proportional transaction costs. The
evidently very high correlation is important for at least two reasons.18 First, recall that in our two-
factor SDF representation from Proposition 1, the decomposition of the SDFs into global SDF and
currency basket is exact under the assumption of symmetric markets whenever we use minimum
entropy SDFs. This implies that, given the global SDF and currency basket factors, there cannot exist
  18
    By construction, the dollar factor and our currency basket should be the same, the reason for the less than perfect
correlation is due to the fact that the dollar factor in Figure 10 uses a larger cross-section of currencies than we do.



                                                          21
any other factors. Therefore, two factors are sufficient to describe in-sample risk premia not only
for currencies, but also stocks, and bonds. Second, in our framework, global investors can buy and
sell a broad menu of assets, including stocks, as well as short- and long-term bonds. Hence, our risk
factors are not extracted from currencies, as in the case of Verdelhan (2018), but from international
asset prices. Here, the global SDF can be interpreted as a function of the optimal portfolios of these
global investors. Despite these differences, the two factors are highly correlated, implying that the
global factors in Verdelhan (2018) may not just be important drivers of bilateral exchange rates, but
also more broadly of international asset returns.

                                               [Insert Figure 10 here.]

2.6      Capital Flows, International SDFs, and Home Bias

A large literature in international finance emphasizes the importance of international capital flows
for exchange rate determination. For example, in the model of Hau and Rey (2006), incomplete
hedging of FX risk of global investors induces capital flows which are key drivers of exchange rates.
More recently, Camanho, Hau, and Rey (2019) study a dynamic portfolio balancing model where
exchange rates are determined by the net currency demand from portfolio balancing motives of
global intermediaries.19 One defining feature of international capital flows is that they are driven by
a low number of global factors, see, e.g., Milesi-Ferretti and Tille (2011), Forbes and Warnock (2012),
Rey (2015), and Davis, Valente, and van Wincoop (2019).
       Recall that our framework provides a unique mapping between the optimal portfolios of global
investors trading in markets with frictions and SDFs. It is therefore natural to assume that our
estimated SDFs are linked to equity and bond flows internationally. In the following, we study
the relation between our two factors--global SDF and local CB--and measures of capital flows or
intermediaries' constraints. To this end, we run regressions from changes in global SDF and local CB
on changes in capital flows, volatilities, global cycle, and He, Kelly, and Manela (2017) intermediary
capital:
                                       G      or CB(i)           = 0 × Xt + t ,

where Xt are either changes in world equity, the Verdelhan (2018) carry or dollar factor, changes in
VIX or FX volatility, changes in the Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2020) global cycle, changes in our
proxy of capital flows, and changes in intermediary capital.20 The results are presented in Table 6 for
the global SDF (Panel A) and the local CB (Panel B).
       We find that changes in carry, VIX and FX volatility lead to positive and significant increases in
the global SDF. This makes intuitively sense since high states of the global SDF coincide with globally
bad times, i.e., times of high global volatility. Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2020)'s global cycle, on the
other hand, significantly reduces global SDFs. As the authors show, their factor is inversely related
  19
      Relatedly, instead of asset flows, Gabaix and Maggiori (2015) assume that global demand of goods results in capital
flows which are intermediated by global financiers. Since intermediaries' SDFs are a function of financial constraints, the
tightness of these constraints determine asset prices and exchange rates in equilibrium.
   20
      To make all coefficients comparable, we standardize each variable, meaning we de-mean and divide each variable by its
standard deviation.



                                                            22
to time-varying risk aversion of heterogeneous global investors. As risk aversion increases, so does
the global SDF. Changes in capital flows, on the other hand, do not have any significant effect on the
global SDF.
       Panel B reveals a different picture, as none of the previous factors has a significant coefficient
anymore. Not very surprisingly, dollar is highly statistically significant here, with an associated R2 of
88%. The coefficient on changes in capital flows is now significant and negative, indicating that a one
standard deviation drop in capital flows leads to a 0.2 standard deviation drop in the local CB factor.
Overall, we conclude that the two components of country-level SDFs load differently on intermediary
constraints and capital flows: while the global SDF is linked to measures of global volatility and risk
aversion, local CB captures changes in capital flows.

                                                  [Insert Table 6 here.]

       As a last exercise, we use our framework to study home bias in global portfolios. It is well-known
that capital flows follow a distinct pattern during crises: domestic capital inflows increase during
periods of domestic or global crises (retrenchment), while investors withdraw capital from foreign
markets during periods of foreign crises (fickleness), see, e.g., Forbes and Warnock (2012). This
pattern leads to an increase in the home bias in bonds and equities.21 As noted by Broner, Didier, Erce,
and Schmukler (2013), these patterns are difficult to explain in models without frictions. In our main
analysis, we impose average transaction costs observable in stock and bond markets. It is, however,
reasonable to assume that these costs only represent a lower bound to the true cost associated with
international trade. For example, Coeurdacier and Rey (2013) emphasize the potentially important
role of hedging costs and informational frictions, which are very difficult to observe.22
       While we can measure transaction costs such as bid-ask spreads, it is harder to quantify other
types of asset trade costs such as the cost to trade via an intermediary or the role of international
taxation. Intangible costs such as information frictions and behavioral biases are even harder to
quantify, see, e.g., Coeurdacier and Rey (2013) for a discussion.23 It is therefore natural to assume that
the observed costs such as bid-ask spreads that we impose to extract international SDFs represent a
lower bound to the true costs of trading foreign assets.
       In the following, we can use our framework to estimate the unobservable cost of trading foreign
assets such that portfolio holdings line up with the home bias observed in the data. To this end, we
incrementally increase foreign transaction costs relative to local transaction costs and study the effect
on the optimal portfolios of model-free SDFs.
  21
      For example, French and Poterba (1991) and Lewis (1999), and more recently Camanho, Hau, and Rey (2019), show that
the proportion of domestic stocks invested in portfolios exceeds their country's relative market capitalization in the world.
This home bias phenomenon extends to bonds and is found to be even more pronounced, see, e.g., Maggiori, Neiman, and
Schreger (2020).
   22
      Most studies that empirically explore the effect on asset trade costs conclude that the costs would need to be
unrealistically high to explain the level of home bias observed in the data. For example, French and Poterba (1991) argue
in a mean-variance framework that these costs must be several hundred basis points. However, a different strand of the
literature argues that if diversification benefits are small across countries, then these costs can be small and still explain
home bias, see, e.g., Martin and Rey (2004) and Bhamra, Coeurdacier, and Guibaud (2014).
   23
      Van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp (2009) study a model of home bias with informational frictions in international
markets and link information asymmetry to earning forecasts, investors behavior, or pricing errors.



                                                             23
                                           [Insert Figure 11 here.]

      Figure 11 plots the optimal portfolio weights for each currency assuming that transaction costs
on the foreign assets are six times as big as on the local assets. As we note, there is an almost perfect
home bias in equities and long-term bonds for each currency. For nearly all currencies, local investors
short the local long-term bond and have a long position in the local equity index. At the same
time, we notice that across all currency denominations, investors trade the carry. For example, US
investors short the US short-term bond while holding a long position in the Australian short-term
bond. Australian global investors, on the other hand, short the Japanese Yen and buy New Zealand
short-term bonds. This implies that independent of the foreign transaction cost, investors trade carry.
      To get a sense of the implied cost to achieve home bias, recall that the average bid-ask spread
is around 2bps in our data sample, which implies that the "hidden" costs are around 10bps. As
mentioned earlier, these costs can include differences in taxation, behavioral or informational costs,
as well as intermediation costs. Therefore, we conclude that even small transaction costs can lead to
highly currency biased portfolios.


3      Robustness

In this section, we perform two robustness checks on our main results. First, we study the robustness
of our results with respect to the weighting scheme used to calculate the global SDF and currency
basket factors. Second, we explore potential weak identification issues in our two-step regressions.

3.1     Weighting Scheme

Recall from Theorem 1 that in order to calculate global factors, we need weights (w1 , . . . , wm ) and we
            m
require     i=1 wi   = 1. Our main results rely on equal weights for each currency i, however, one might
wonder how the weighting scheme affects our results. A priori, we do not expect the specific weighting
scheme to have a big effect on our results for at least two reasons. First, in symmetric market settings,
SDFs are the same, irrespective of the currency num´
                                                   eraire. However, even in asymmetric markets,
our results show that international optimal portfolios are very similar across currencies. Second, as
is well-known from the exchange rate volatility puzzle, the volatility of exchange rates is significantly
smaller than the volatility of international SDFs. However, in order to check for robustness, we employ
GDP-weights instead of equal weights and re-run all our analysis.
      To save space, we defer all results to the Internet Appendix. Our findings indicate that there is
virtually no difference whether we use equal weights or GDP weights as all results are the same. We
therefore conclude that the particular weighting scheme does not affect our results.

3.2     Weak Identification

The identification of factors describing the cross-section of asset returns and the estimation of their
factor premia may be challenged by several problems, such as model misspecification, small time-
series sample sizes relative to the number of test assets, or poor identification. Our analysis is


                                                     24
unlikely to be plagued by the first two, given (i) that we work with a linear SDF factor model that is by
construction correctly specified (see equation (18)) and (ii) a sufficiently long time-series compared
to the cross-sectional dimension. However, since we jointly price under a single-factor approach
various asset classes (stocks, currencies, and bonds) having different volatilities and potentially
heterogeneous factor structures, one may nevertheless be worried about identification issues. Such a
concern may arise, e.g., when estimated betas in the first step of the two-stage Fama and MacBeth
(1973) methodology do not display enough variation, leading to weak identification of the factor
prices of risk in the second stage, invalid asymptotic properties of the two-stage estimator of the price
of factor risk, and spuriously large cross-sectional adjusted R2 s; see, e.g., Kleibergen and Zhan (2020),
among many others.
    Intuitively, the cross-section of factor betas is linked to the variance of SDFs via the underlying
pricing constraints satisfied by these SDFs. An excessive SDF variance under exact pricing constraints
(as is for example the case with no frictions) may therefore produce low average SDF correlations
with returns and hence a degenerate or nearly degenerate cross-section of SDF betas. These issues,
however, are naturally mitigated by minimum dispersion SDFs allowing for non-zero pricing errors
(as in our market settings with frictions), because of the lower variance of these SDFs, induced by the
less tight pricing error constraints.
    To explore a possible weak identification problem in our empirical framework in Section 2.5.2, we
borrow from the recent methodology proposed in Kleibergen and Zhan (2020). Their methodology
includes a simple test of weak identification for Fama and MacBeth (1973) two-step empirical asset
pricing frameworks and an extended Gibbons, Ross, and Shanken (1989) test, which is robust against
weak identification, for jointly testing correct specification and parametric hypotheses for the vector
of factor risk premia.

                                                [Insert Figure 12 here.]

    Figure 12 reports the p-values of the Kleibergen and Zhan (2020) test of weak identification for the
various in-sample Fama and MacBeth (1973) settings considered in our analysis. Overall, we never
find evidence of weak identification for all asset pricing frameworks based on model-free SDFs in
markets with frictions, since all p-values for the test are minuscule. In contrast, for the asset pricing
frameworks based on model-free SDFs in frictionless markets, we find that the results for the cross-
section of long-term bond returns may suffer from a weak identification issue for different currency
denominations. This finding is not very surprising, given our earlier finding that the cross-sectional
distribution of SDF betas for long-term bonds is nearly degenerate in frictionless settings.24
    In summary, we conclude that our main empirical findings on the in- and out-of-sample cross-
sectional pricing accuracy of our model-free SDFs in international markets with frictions is not driven
by weak identification issues.
   24
      We report the same statistics for the out-of-sample Fama and MacBeth (1973) two-step empirical asset pricing estimates
in the Internet Appendix. We again find no evidence of weak identification in markets with frictions.




                                                            25
4    Conclusions

This paper develops a theoretical model-free framework that allows us to identify global risk factors
from cross-sections of international assets, such as stocks, bonds, and currencies when investors face
barriers to trade. Intuitively, limiting the allocation of wealth that is invested into risky assets leads
to more sparse portfolios, endogenously segmented markets, and hence more robust properties of
international SDFs.
    Our main theoretical contribution is twofold. First, under the assumption of market symmetry,
we show that we can always uniquely recover the exchange rate appreciation from the ratio of foreign
and domestic num´
                eraire-invariant SDFs even in the presence of frictions. The num´
                                                                                eraire-invariance
makes our SDFs uniquely suited to extract global risks. Second, our main result characterizes
international SDFs using a two factor representation. The first factor, global SDF, is currency-
independent and pertains to the average optimal portfolio return of global investors. The second
factor, currency basket, is given by the average appreciation of a local currency against the foreign
currencies.
    We then use this framework to estimate international SDFs from the cross-section of stocks, and
short- and long-term bonds for developed countries. When international agents face no barriers
to trade, SDFs need to exactly price all assets, which leads to volatile SDFs and perfect correlation,
because the AMV holds. Imposing market frictions significantly reduces the SDF volatility, but we
find again correlations to be nearly perfect, the reason being that investors hold almost identical
portfolios. Closer inspection of these portfolios reveals that global investors take their biggest
exposures in the classical carry trade, together with long positions in USD and CHF equities and short
position in JPY equity.
    We analyze the ability of our factor representation to price separately and jointly the cross-section
of currency returns, bonds, and equities. Both the in- and out-of sample results suggest that the
num´
   eraire-invariant global SDF risk factor alone captures most of the cross-sectional variation both
within and across asset classes. Moreover, introducing market frictions and market asymmetries
is instrumental to generate a better out-of sample fit of the cross-section of international assets.
Indeed, when international investors face asymmetric proportional transaction costs, the ensuing
SDF captures up to 95% of the in- and 80% of the out-of-sample cross-sectional variation across all
denominations. Finally, we link our two factors to variables proposed in the literature and find them
to be strongly related to measures of volatility and capital flows.
    In our paper, we explore the source and nature of common factors across international assets
from asset return data alone, but we ignore international portfolio holdings data. Future research
could link the observed prices directly to optimal portfolios held by international investors. For
example, in the demand systems approach of Koijen and Yogo (2020) global factors of stocks, bonds,
and currencies are determined by matching not just asset prices but also holdings data. Moreover, our
framework naturally accommodates the latent demand highlighted in Koijen and Yogo (2020), due to
the presence of wedges in case of asymmetric markets. We leave this exciting research for future work.




                                                   26
Figures




Figure 1. Optimal Weights: Symmetric Markets. The upper panel plots the portfolio weights in each
asset denominated in USD assuming that investors face no trade barriers. The lower panel plots
the portfolio weights in each asset denominated in USD assuming that investors face symmetric
proportional transaction costs. ST-XXX is the short-term bond for currency XXX, LT-XXX is the long-
term bond for currency XXX, and E-XXX is the equity index for currency XXX. Data is monthly and
runs from January 1988 to December 2015.




                                                27
Figure 2. Optimal Weights: Bid-Ask Spreads. This figure plots the portfolio weights in each asset for
all currency denominations assuming that investors face bid-ask spreads. ST-XXX is the short-term
bond for currency XXX, LT-XXX is the long-term bond for currency XXX, and E-XXX is the equity index
for currency XXX. Data is monthly and runs from January 1988 to December 2015.




                                                 28
Figure 3.  Optimal Weights: Asymmetric Proportional Transaction Costs. This figure plots
the portfolio weights in each asset for all currency denominations assuming that investors face
proportional transaction costs. ST-XXX is the short-term bond for currency XXX, LT-XXX is the long-
term bond for currency XXX, and E-XXX is the equity index for currency XXX. Data is monthly and
runs from January 1988 to December 2015.




                                                29
Figure 4. Global SDF Factor. This figure plots the num´
                                                      eraire-invariant global SDF factor, i.e., G =
   1   m           (j )
-m     j =1 log 0 R , estimated with no frictions (upper left), with symmetric proportional transaction
costs (upper right), with bid-ask spreads (lower left), and asymmetric proportional transaction cost
(lower right). Gray bars indicate recessions according to NBER. Data is monthly and runs from January
1988 to December 2015.




                                                  30
Figure 5. Local Currency Baskets. This figure plots the country-specific currency basket, i.e., the
average appreciation of each local currency with respect to the remaining currencies. Gray bars
indicate recessions according to NBER. Data is monthly and runs from January 1988 to December
2015.




                                                31
        CHF                                                                            CHF
          AUD                                                                               AUD
                   EUR                                                                            EUR
       USD                                                                             USD
                          CAD                                                                           CAD

                                NZD                                                    NZD
                                      GBP                                                               GBP

                                                                                                              NZD
                                            NZD
                                              AUD                                                               AUD


                                                        GBP                                                                    GBP
                                                          NZD                                                         NZD
                                                                AUD                                                                  CAD
                                                                                                                                           CHF
                                                        CAD                                                                 AUD
                                                           CHF        EUR                                                                        EUR
                                                                            CHF                                                       CHF
                                                                            JPYEUR                                            JPY                 EUR USD
                                                                     CAD       GBP                                                   CAD                  JPY
                                                                     USD        JPY                                                         GBP
                                                                                JPY                                                                  JPY




       CHF                                                                              CHF
             AUD                                                                                  AUD
     USD                                                                              USD
              EUR                                                                            EUR
                         CAD                                                                            CAD

                                                                                            NZD
             NZD
                                                                                                        GBP

                     GBP              NZD                                                                       NZD

                                            AUD                                                                       AUD


                                                        GBP                                                                           GBP

                                                  NZD                                                                   NZD          AUD
                                                               CHF                                                                          CHF
                                                  AUD
                                                        CAD          EUR                                                      CAD           EUR
                                                              CHF                                                                   JPY       CHF
                                                                      CAD EUR                                                                       EUR
                                                                                                                                                         JPY
                                                                          USD                                                                        USD
                                                          JPY                 JPY                                                      CAD
                                                                    GBP                                                                  GBP
                                                                           JPY                                                                        JPY




Figure 6. In-Sample Risk-Return Relationship with Global SDF. The upper panel reports the in-
sample risk-return relation for USD-denominated currencies, bonds, and equities in symmetric
market settings, no transaction costs (left) and symmetric proportional transaction costs (right).
The lower panel corresponds to asymmetric market settings, Bid-Ask spreads (left) and asymmetric
proportional transaction costs (right). The figures report the relation between the expected excess
returns (y -axis) and the risk factor exposures (x-axis), where the factor depends only on the global SDF,
i.e., M0 := exp(G). The dashed line corresponds to the coefficient  in the cross-sectional regression
(18) and the factor loading U SD is given in equation (15). Data is monthly and runs from January 1988
to December 2015.




                                                                                 32
                                        (a) No Transaction Cost




                              (b) Symmetric Proportional Transaction Cost


Figure 7. In-sample R2 s Across All Denominations Symmetric Markets. This figure reports the cross-
sectional variation explained in an asymmetric proportional transaction cost setting by a factor model
using only the global factor, M0 (black line) and a factor model using both the global factor and the
                                 (i)
local currency basket factor, M0 , (dashed red line). Cross-sectional R2 s are reported when pricing all
assets (top-left), currency returns (top-right), long-term bonds (bottom-left), and international equity
indices (bottom-right). Data is monthly and runs from January 1988 to December 2015.


                                                  33
                                           (a) Bid-Ask Spread




                              (b) Asymmetric Proportional Transaction Cost


Figure 8. In-sample R2 s Across All Denominations Asymmetric Markets. This figure reports the cross-
sectional variation explained in an asymmetric proportional transaction cost setting by a factor model
using only the global factor, M0 (black line) and a factor model using both the global factor and the
                                 (i)
local currency basket factor, M0 , (dashed red line). Cross-sectional R2 s are reported when pricing all
assets (top-left), currency returns (top-right), long-term bonds (bottom-left), and international equity
indices (bottom-right). Data is monthly and runs from January 1988 to December 2015.


                                                  34
                           AUD                                                          AUD


               CAD                                                                CAD
                             NZD                                                        NZD
                 EUR                                                             EUR
                                                                                          CHF
       USD
                 CHF
                                                                                        USD

                                           NZD                                                             NZD


                                            AUD                                           GBP                     AUD
                     GBP                                                   CHF                                                             CHF
                                     JPY
                                                                NZD                                                           NZD
                                                                       CHF                                                           CHF
                                                  CAD                                                     JPY           CAD
                                                        AUD                EUR                                                              EUR
                                                                                                                              GBP
                                                           CAD                                                                        EUR
                                             GBP                  EUR                                             AUD
                                                                        USD                                                   CAD                JPY
                                                               GBP                                                                  GBP USD
                                                                        JPY
                                                         JPY                                                                         JPY




               AUD                                                                        AUD


        CAD                                                                        CAD
                NZD
         EUR                                                                      EUR     NZD

               CHF
                                                                                 CHF          USD
      USD                                                                                                        NZD
                                     NZD

                                                                                                                  AUD
                GBP                        AUD
                                                                     CHF                      GBP                                          CHF
                                                                                                    JPY
                                   JPY                  NZD                                                               NZD   CHF
                                                  CAD                CHF
                                                                           EUR                                             CAD
                                                                                                                                    EUR
                                                    GBP CAD                                                                  CAD
                                            AUD                   EUR                                            AUD     GBP
                                                                                                                               EUR      USD
                                                               USD    JPY
                                                                GBP                                                                 GBP
                                                                                                                                             JPY
                                                              JPY
                                                                                                                                           JPY




Figure 9. Out-of-Sample Risk-Return Relationship with Global SDF. The upper panel reports the out-
of-sample risk-return relation for USD-denominated currencies, bonds, and equities in symmetric
market settings, no transaction costs (left) and symmetric proportional transaction costs (right).
The lower panel corresponds to asymmetric market settings, Bid-Ask spreads (left) and asymmetric
proportional transaction costs (right). The figures report the relation between the expected excess
returns (y -axis) and the risk factor exposures (x-axis), where the factor depends on only the global SDF,
i.e., M0 := exp(G). The dashed line corresponds to the coefficient  in the cross-sectional regression
(18) and the factor loading U SD is given in equation (15). Data is monthly and runs from January 1988
to December 2015.




                                                                            35
Figure 10. Global SDF, Local CB and Verdelhan (2018) Risk Factors. The upper panel plots the global
SDF factor, G, together with Verdelhan (2018)'s Carry factor. The lower panel plots the local currency
basket, CB usd , together with Verdelhan (2018)'s Dollar factor. Time-series are six-month moving
averages calculated from monthly data running from January 1988 to December 2015.




                                                 36
Figure 11. Home Bias. This figure plots the optimal portfolio weights in an asymmetric market setting
where transaction costs on foreign assets are six times larger than in local markets. Data is monthly
and runs from January 1988 to December 2015.




                                                 37
                                            (a) Factor: exp(G)




                                        (b) Factor: exp(G + CB (i) )

Figure 12. Test of Weak Identification. This figure reports the p-values of Kleibergen and Zhan (2020)
test of weak identification, which tests with a 2 -statistic the null hypothesis  -  = 0 in linear model
(18). The null hypothesis is tested for two single-factor models: Panel (a), where the factor is given by
only the global SDF, i.e., M0 = exp(G), and Panel (b), where the factor is constructed from the global
                                          ( i)
factor and the currency basket, i.e., M0 = exp(G + CB (i) ). p-values are reported when pricing all
assets (top-left), currency returns (top-right), long-term bonds (bottom-left), and international equity
indices (bottom-right). Data is monthly and runs from January 1988 to December 2015.


                                                    38
                                                                                                                                                          Tables



                                                     Table 1. Summary Statistics Global SDFs

     This table reports summary statistics: mean and standard deviation and average correlations for minimum entropy SDFs denominated in
     different currencies assuming four different market structures: no transaction costs, symmetric transaction costs, bid-ask spreads, and asymmetric
     transaction costs. Data is monthly and runs from January 1988 to December 2015.



                                  Panel A: No Transaction Cost                               Panel B: Symmetric Proportional Transaction Cost
                 USD     GBP     AUD     CAD     CHF      EUR      JPY    NZD        USD       GBP     AUD     CAD     CHF     EUR      JPY      NZD
        mean     0.997   0.996   0.995   0.996   0.998    0.997   0.999   0.995      0.997     0.996   0.995   0.996   0.998   0.997   0.999     0.995
        stdev    0.359   0.347   0.348   0.352   0.355    0.361   0.369   0.341      0.234     0.225   0.221   0.230   0.233   0.237   0.245     0.217
        USD      1.000                                                               1.000
        GBP      0.996   1.000                                                       0.992     1.000
        AUD      0.995   0.993   1.000                                               0.988     0.985   1.000
        CAD      0.998   0.996   0.997   1.000                                       0.995     0.991   0.993   1.000




39
        CHF      0.993   0.995   0.993   0.994   1.000                               0.987     0.991   0.986   0.987   1.000
        EUR      0.996   0.997   0.996   0.996   0.998    1.000                      0.990     0.994   0.991   0.991   0.997   1.000
        JPY      0.996   0.994   0.992   0.994   0.993    0.995   1.000              0.992     0.988   0.984   0.988   0.988   0.989   1.000
        NZD      0.994   0.994   0.997   0.997   0.995    0.996   0.993   1.000      0.988     0.987   0.994   0.992   0.990   0.993   0.986     1.000
                                    Panel C: Bid-Ask Spreads                                 Panel D: Asymmetric Proportional Transaction Cost
                 USD     GBP     AUD     CAD     CHF      EUR      JPY    NZD        USD       GBP     AUD     CAD     CHF     EUR      JPY      NZD
        mean     0.997   0.996   0.995   0.996   0.998    0.997   0.999   0.995      0.997     0.996   0.995   0.996   0.998   0.997   0.999     0.995
        stdev    0.265   0.256   0.248   0.255   0.257    0.264   0.270   0.246      0.206     0.202   0.186   0.200   0.202   0.206   0.210     0.190
        USD      1.000                                                               1.000
        GBP      0.981   1.000                                                       0.944     1.000
        AUD      0.983   0.986   1.000                                               0.952     0.956   1.000
        CAD      0.978   0.985   0.986   1.000                                       0.958     0.949   0.971   1.000
        CHF      0.966   0.983   0.975   0.978   1.000                               0.943     0.952   0.964   0.956   1.000
        EUR      0.977   0.991   0.986   0.982   0.988    1.000                      0.940     0.967   0.962   0.950   0.979   1.000
        JPY      0.975   0.981   0.978   0.976   0.972    0.978   1.000              0.957     0.949   0.954   0.948   0.955   0.949   1.000
        NZD      0.979   0.986   0.987   0.986   0.983    0.988   0.977   1.000      0.945     0.953   0.968   0.960   0.965   0.962   0.950     1.000
                                         Table 2. Risk Prices FX: In-Sample

This table reports estimated in-sample risk prices in the two-step Fama and MacBeth (1973) regressions of USD
                                                                                                              usd
denominated currency excess returns on estimated factor loadings of (1) the corresponding local SDF (M0           ),
(2) approximation of the latter with the global SDF, i.e., M0 := exp(G), and (3) approximation with both the
                                                        usd
global SDF and the local currency basket factor, i.e., M0   := exp(G+CBusd ). The global SDF factor is the average
SDF calculated from the cross-section of all local SDFs. The currency basket factor is the average appreciation
of the local currency. Shanken (1992)-corrected standard errors are reported in brackets. Labels ( ), ( ) and
( ) denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. Data runs from January 1988 to December
2015.

             Panel A: No Transaction Cost                    Panel B: Symmetric Proportional Transaction Cost
   usd                    usd
  M0           M0        M0         R2 (%)    RMSE(%)     usd
                                                         M0           M0         usd
                                                                                M0         R2 (%)    RMSE(%)
                                                               
 -0.129                             100.000    0.000    -0.055                             100.000    0.000
   [0.062]                                                [0.026]
             -0.129                  99.510    0.011                -0.054                  99.534    0.011
              [0.063]                                                [0.026]
                        -0.129 100.000         0.000                           -0.055 100.000         0.000
                          [0.062]                                                [0.026]

               Panel C: Bid-Ask Spreads                    Panel D: Asymmetric Proportional Transaction Cost
   usd                    usd
  M0           M0        M0         R2 (%)    RMSE(%)     usd
                                                         M0           M0         usd
                                                                                M0         R2 (%)    RMSE(%)
                                                               
 -0.079                              99.370    0.012    -0.053                              97.187    0.026
   [0.038]                                                [0.026]
             -0.075                  99.136    0.014                -0.049                  97.121    0.026
              [0.037]                                                [0.024]
                        -0.075       99.563    0.010                           -0.049       98.085    0.022
                          [0.036]                                                [0.024]




                                                        40
                                         Table 3. Risk Prices All: In-Sample

This table reports estimated in-sample risk prices in the two-step Fama and MacBeth (1973) regressions of USD
denominated currency, bond and equity excess returns on estimated factor loadings of (1) the corresponding
               usd
local SDF (M0      ), (2) approximation of the latter with the global SDF, i.e., M0 := exp(G), and (3) approximation
with both the global SDF and the local currency basket factor, i.e., M0      usd
                                                                                 := exp(G + CBusd ). The global SDF
factor is the average SDF calculated from the cross-section of all local SDFs. The currency basket factor is the
average appreciation of the local currency. Shanken (1992)-corrected standard errors are reported in brackets.
Labels ( ), ( ) and ( ) denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. Data runs from January
1988 to December 2015.

              Panel A: No Transaction Cost                     Panel B: Symmetric Proportional Transaction Cost
   usd                      usd
  M0            M0         M0         R2 (%)    RMSE(%)         usd
                                                               M0        M0          usd
                                                                                    M0         R2 (%)   RMSE(%)
                                                                   
 -0.129                               100.000    0.000    -0.061                               92.059    0.081
    [0.040]                                                  [0.021]
              -0.127                   99.634    0.017                 -0.061                  93.211    0.074
               [0.039]                                                  [0.020]
                         -0.129 100.000          0.000                            -0.061       92.059    0.081
                            [0.040]                                                  [0.021]

                Panel C: Bid-Ask Spreads                       Panel D: Asymmetric Proportional Transaction Cost
   usd                      usd
  M0            M0         M0         R2 (%)    RMSE(%)         usd
                                                               M0        M0          usd
                                                                                    M0         R2 (%)   RMSE(%)
                                                                   
 -0.076                                97.815    0.042    -0.051                               94.051    0.070
    [0.024]                                                  [0.017]
              -0.072                   98.144    0.039                 -0.048                  94.963    0.064
               [0.023]                                                  [0.016]
                         -0.073        97.744    0.043                            -0.048       94.172    0.069
                            [0.023]                                                  [0.016]




                                                          41
                                     Table 4. Risk Prices FX: Out-of-Sample

This table reports estimated out-of-sample risk prices in the two-step Fama and MacBeth (1973) regressions
of USD denominated currency excess returns on estimated factor loadings of(1) the corresponding local SDF
   usd
(M 0   ), (2) approximation of the latter with the global SDF, i.e., M0 := exp(G), and (3) approximation with both
the global SDF and the local currency basket factor, i.e., M0    usd
                                                                      := exp(G + CBusd ). The global SDF factor is
the average SDF calculated from the cross-section of all local SDFs. The currency basket factor is the average
appreciation of the local currency. Shanken (1992)-corrected standard errors are reported in brackets. Labels
( ), ( ) and ( ) denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. Data runs from January 1988 to
December 2015.

            Panel A: No Transaction Cost                    Panel B: Symmetric Proportional Transaction Cost
  usd                   usd
 M0           M0       M0        R2 (%)    RMSE(%)      usd
                                                       M0          M0        usd
                                                                            M0        R2 (%)      RMSE(%)
                                                              
  -0.270                         36.262     0.129     -0.196                          71.560       0.086
  [0.245]                                              [0.141]
            -0.269               35.030     0.130                -0.196               70.478       0.088
            [0.248]                                              [0.142]
                       -0.297    45.245     0.119                          -0.194     76.307       0.079
                       [0.253]                                              [0.137]

              Panel C: Bid-Ask Spreads                   Panel D: Asymmetric Proportional Transaction Cost
  usd                   usd
 M0           M0       M0        R2 (%)    RMSE(%)      usd
                                                       M0          M0        usd
                                                                            M0        R2 (%)      RMSE(%)
                                                              
 -0.245                          72.722     0.084     -0.184                          81.890       0.069
  [0.175]                                              [0.126]
            -0.249               69.940     0.088                -0.182               80.936       0.070
            [0.180]                                              [0.125]
                      -0.247     76.716     0.078                          -0.176     85.322       0.062
                       [0.173]                                              [0.119]




                                                       42
                                     Table 5. Risk Prices All: Out-of-Sample

This table reports estimated out-of-sample risk prices in the two-step Fama and MacBeth (1973) regressions
of USD denominated currency, bond and equity excess returns on estimated factor loadings of(1) the
                              usd
corresponding local SDF (M0       ), (2) approximation of the latter with the global SDF, i.e., M0 := exp(G), and
(3) approximation with both the global SDF and the local currency basket factor, i.e., M0   usd
                                                                                                := exp(G + CBusd ).
The global SDF factor is the average SDF calculated from the cross-section of all local SDFs. The currency basket
factor is the average appreciation of the local currency. Shanken (1992)-corrected standard errors are reported
in brackets. Labels ( ), ( ) and ( ) denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. Data runs
from January 1988 to December 2015.

            Panel A: No Transaction Cost                  Panel B: Symmetric Proportional Transaction Cost
  usd                   usd
 M0           M0       M0        R2 (%)   RMSE(%)       usd
                                                       M0          M0        usd
                                                                            M0        R2 (%)      RMSE(%)
                                                              
 -0.199                          69.066    0.127      -0.127                          78.018        0.107
  [0.139]                                              [0.086]
            -0.198               68.627    0.128                 -0.126               77.653        0.108
            [0.138]                                              [0.086]
                      -0.199     71.824    0.121                           -0.125     79.339        0.103
                       [0.138]                                              [0.085]

              Panel C: Bid-Ask spreads                   Panel D: Asymmetric Proportional Transaction Costs
  usd                   usd
 M0           M0       M0        R2 (%)   RMSE(%)       usd
                                                       M0          M0        usd
                                                                            M0        R2 (%)      RMSE(%)
                                                              
 -0.144                          77.616    0.108      -0.113                          79.461        0.103
  [0.096]                                              [0.076]
            -0.144               76.844    0.110                 -0.111               79.335        0.103
            [0.096]                                              [0.074]
                      -0.143     78.943    0.104                           -0.110     80.763        0.100
                       [0.095]                                              [0.073]




                                                        43
                              Table 6. Global SDF and Local CB: Regressions

This table reports estimates of regressions from changes in Global SDF and USD Local CB in symmetric
markets with transaction costs on changes in world equity, Verdelhan (2018)'s Carry and Dollar, FX volatility,
VIX, Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2020) global cycle, gross capital flows, and He, Kelly, and Manela (2017)
intermediary capital. All variables are standardized, meaning we de-mean and divide each variable by its
standard deviation. Newey and West (1987) adjusted t-statistics are reported in brackets. Labels ( ), ( ) and
( ) denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. Data is quarterly and runs from January 1988
to December 2015.

                                               Panel A: Global SDF
 world equity           -0.378
                         [-3.114]
 carry                               0.353
                                     [2.096]
 dollar                                          -0.100
                                               [-0.725]
 FX vol                                                    0.353
                                                            [2.715]
 VIX                                                                  0.388
                                                                       [3.223]
 global cycle                                                                    -0.270
                                                                                  [-3.405]
 capital flow                                                                                    0.079
                                                                                               [1.196]
 intermediary capital                                                                                    -0.311
                                                                                                          [-2.682]
 R2 (%)                    14.273    12.438      1.010      12.483     15.093        7.312      0.629        9.680
                                                Panel B: Local CB
                               
 world equity           -0.305
                         [-3.087]
 carry                                 0.145
                                     [1.233]
 dollar                                        0.940
                                               [20.103]
 FX vol                                                       0.035
                                                            [0.278]
 VIX                                                                     0.105
                                                                       [0.914]
 global cycle                                                                       -0.050
                                                                                  [-0.434]
 capital flow                                                                                -0.191
                                                                                              [-2.040]
 intermediary capital                                                                                       -0.098
                                                                                                          [-0.901]
 R2 (%)                      9.284    2.100     88.421       0.125      1.108        0.253      3.634        0.968




                                                      44
Appendix A Proofs

Throughout the proofs, we assume that each component of the vector of returns R belongs to the
space Lq (, F , P) of random variables on (, F , P) with finite q -th moment, for some 1 < q < , and
denote the dual space of Lq by Lp , where 1/p + 1/q = 1.

Proof of Proposition 1

Sublinearity of transaction cost function h implies sublinearity of pricing functional  and a set 
of traded payoffs that is a convex cone. Therefore, by Chen (2001, Theorem 5) and Clark (1993,
Theorem 6), the no-arbitrage condition is equivalent to the no-free-lunch condition (Harrison and
Kreps (1979)). On the other hand, by Chen (2001, Theorem 1), the no-free-lunch condition is
equivalent to the existence of a strictly positive, continuous linear functional  defined on Lq , such
that  |   .25 Therefore, by the Riesz Representation Theorem, this is equivalent to the existence of
a strictly positive element M in dual space Lp , such that  (x) = E[M x]. Hence, E[M x]   (x) for all
x  . By the definition of pricing functional  , these inequalities holds if and only if

                                                 E[M R]   1 + h(F )

for all   Rn , where F  Rf denotes the sub-vector of portfolio weights of frictional assets, i.e.:

                                  F E[M RF ] + S E[M RS ]  F 1 + S 1 + h(F ).

Since this inequality holds for all   Rn , it can be stated as the intersection of the two following
inequalities:

                                  S E[M RS ]  S 1                    for all S  Rs
                                 F E[M RF ]  F 1 + h(F )             for all F  Rf .

The first of these two inequalities, given that it holds for every S  Rs , is equivalent to constraint
E[M RS ] = 1, while the second inequality, by Bauschke and Combettes (2011, Prop. 13.10 (i)) is
equivalent to the constraint h (E[M RF ] - 1)  0, where h is the convex conjugate of transaction
cost function h. Since h is closed and sublinear, by Hiriart-Urruty and Lemar´
                                                                             echal (2012, Theorem
3.1.1), it is a support function of set C in equation (2). Recalling that the convex conjugate of a support
function of a set C is the set's indicator function (i.e., h ( ) = 0 if   C and =  otherwise), the
second inequality above is equivalent to the condition E[M RF ] - 1  C . This concludes the proof.

Proof of Proposition 2

Recall from Definition 1 that the minimum-entropy SDF is the solution to the following optimization
problem:
                                        M0 = arg min       E[- log M ]
                                                 M >0
                                                    s.t.   E[M RS ] - 1 = 0                          (A.1)
                                                           C (E[M RF ] - 1)  0,
  25
        | denotes the restriction of functional  to .


                                                            45
where set C is given by equation (2) and

                                                                 0                 if x  C
                                                   C (x) =
                                                                 +                 if x  C

is the indicator function. Therefore, by Proposition 2 of Korsaye, Quaini, and Trojani (2020),

                                                             M0 = 1/(0 R),

where we are using the fact that the convex conjugate of (x) = - log(x) restricted to the positive reals
is given by + (x) = - log(-x) and 0 is the solution to the dual optimal portfolio problem:


                      0 = arg min                -E[log( R)] +  1 + sup{ F : C ( )  0} .                         (A.2)
                                     Rn                                            

The proof is therefore complete once we show that the optimal portfolio problem in (A.2) is identical
to the problem in (6). To this end, note that sup { F : C ( )  0} = supC ( F ), which is the
support function of set C . Therefore, by Corollary 3.1.2 of Hiriart-Urruty and Lemar´
                                                                                     echal (2012),
sup { F : C ( )  0} = h(F ). Consequently, the problems in (6) and (A.2) are identical.

Proof of Proposition 3
       ( i)
Let M0 denote the minimum-entropy SDF in country i. From Definition 1,
                                    (i)
                              M0 = arg minp                 E[- log(M )]
                                               M L+
                                                                     ( i)                    (i)
                                                   s.t.     E[M RS ] - 1 = 0 , E[M RF ] - 1  C ,

where C = {y  Rf : y F  h(F ) for all F  Rf }. Note that under market symmetry set C is
independent of country index i. Equation (7) then gives for any pair of indices i = j :
                        (i)
                     M0 = arg minp                 E[- log(M )]
                                          M L+
                                                                     (j )                                 (j )
                                           s.t.    E[M X (ij ) RS ] - 1 = 0 , E[M X (ij ) RF ] - 1  C .

The solution of this optimization problem is unaffected if we replace the objective function with
E[- log(M )] - E[log X (ij ) ]:
                        (i)
                     M0 = arg minp                 E[- log(M X (ij ) )]
                                          M L+
                                                                     (j )                                 (j )
                                           s.t.    E[M X (ij ) RS ] - 1 = 0 , E[M X (ij ) RF ] - 1  C .

However, since X (ij ) > 0, it also follows for any pair of indices i = j :
                              (i)
                       M0 X (ij ) = arg minp                 E[- log(M )]
                                                   M L+
                                                                            (j )                   (j )
                                                     s.t.    E[M RS ] - 1 = 0 , E[M RF ] - 1  C .

Noting that the right-hand side of this last identity defines the minimum-entropy SDF for country j ,
                       (i)                  (j )
we finally obtain M0 X (ij ) = M0 . This concludes the proof.

                                                                        46
Proof of Corollary 1
     (i)
Let 0 denote the solution to country i's penalized optimal portfolio problem in equation (6), i.e.,
                                        (i)
                                        0 = arg min               E[- log( R(i) )] +  1 + h(i) (F (i) )
                                                  n     R

                                                       s.t.        R(i) > 0 .

By assumption, financial markets are symmetric, i.e. h(i) = h and F (i) = F . Therefore, for any country
index j = i market symmetry and equation (7) yield:
                                 (i)
                                0 = arg min            E[- log( R(j ) )] - E[log X (ij ) ] +  1 + h(F )
                                          n    R

                                                s.t.   X (ij )  R(j ) > 0 .

Since X (ij ) > 0, the left hand side of the above identity also reads
                                          (i)
                                         0 = arg min                 E[- log( R(j ) )] +  1 + h(F )
                                                   n     R

                                                         s.t.         R(j ) > 0 .
                                                                            (j )                    (i)       (j )
The right-hand side of this last identity defines 0 . Therefore, 0 = 0 for all pairs of countries
with indices i = j . This concludes the proof.

Proof of Theorem 1
                                                                                                                     (j )
From Proposition 2, the minimum-entropy SDF of country j satisfies log M0                                                   = - log 0 R(j ) , where
0 is the solution to j 's penalized optimal portfolio problem (6). Moreover, by Corollary 1 this solution
                                                                                                                                              (i)
is independent of the country index j . On the other hand, Proposition 3 guarantees that log M0                                                     =
     (j )
log M0      -   log X (ij )   for all country pairs i = j . Together, we obtain:

                                                            (i)
                                                  log M0 = - log 0 R(j ) - log X (ij ) .

                                                                                                                                          m
Multiplying both sides of this equation by wj , summing over all j = i and using the fact that                                            j =1 wj   =
1, we obtain:
                                                              m
                                                 (i)
                                        log M0 = -                   wj log 0 R(j ) -          wj log X (ij ) ,
                                                              j =1                      j =i

thus establishing equation (10). This concludes the proof.




                                                                           47
References
A DRIAN , T., M. F LEMING , AND E. V OGT (2017): "An Index of Treasury Market Liquidity: 1991-2017,"
  Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No. 827.

A LMEIDA , C., AND R. G ARCIA (2017): "Economic Implications of Nonlinear Pricing Kernels,"
   Management Science, 63(10), 3361­3380.

A LOOSH , A., AND G. B EKAERT (2019): "Currency Factors," Working Paper, Neoma Business School.

A NDERSEN , T. G., O. B ONDARENKO, A. S. K YLE , AND A. A. O BIZHAEVA (2018): "Intraday Trading
  Invariance in the E-Mini S&P500 Futures Market," Working Paper, Northwestern University.
                                      ¨ ZCAN , AND L. S ERV E
AVDJIEV, S., B. H ARDY, S. K ALEMLI - O                     ´ N (2018): "Gross Capital Flows by Banks,
  Corporates, and Sovereigns," BIS Working Papers No 760.

B ACKUS , D. K., S. F ORESI , AND C. I. T ELMER (2001): "Affine term structure models and the forward
   premium anomaly," Journal of Finance, 56(1), 279­304.

B ANK OF I NTERNATIONAL S ETTLEMENT (2016): "Fixed Income Market Liquidity," Committee on the
   Global Financial System Papers No 55.

B AUSCHKE , H. H., AND P. L. C OMBETTES (2011): Convex Analysis and Monotone Operator Theory in
   Hilbert Spaces. Springer.

B HAMRA , H. S., N. C OEURDACIER , AND S. G UIBAUD (2014): "A Dynamic Equilibrium Model of
  Imperfectly Integrated Financial Markets," Journal of Economic Theory, 154, 490­542.

B RANDT, M., J. H. C OCHRANE , AND P. S ANTA -C LARA (2006): "International risk sharing is better than
  you think, or exchange rates are too smooth," Journal of Monetary Economics, 53(4), 671­698.

B RONER , F., T. D IDIER , A. E RCE , AND S. L. S CHMUKLER (2013): "Gross Capital Flows: Dynamics and
   Crises," Journal of Monetary Economics, 60(1), 113­133.

C AMANHO, N., H. H AU , AND H. R EY (2019): "Global Portfolio Rebalancing and Exchange Rates," NBER
  Working Paper No. 24320.

C HEN , Z. (2001): "Viable Costs and Equilibrium Prices in Frictional Securities Markets," Annals of
  Economics and Finance, 2(2), 297­323.

C LARK , S. A. (1993): "The Valuation Problem in Arbitrage Price Theory," Journal of Mathematical
  Economics, 22(5), 463­478.

C OEURDACIER , N., AND H. R EY (2013): "Home Bias in Open Economy Financial Macroeconomics,"
  Journal of Economic Literature, 51, 63­115.

D AVIS , S., G. VALENTE , AND E. VAN W INCOOP (2019): "Global Capital Flows Cycle: Impact on Gross
  and Net Flows," NBER Working Paper No 25721.

FAMA , E. F., AND J. D. M AC B ETH (1973): "Risk, Return, and Equilibrium: Empirical Tests," Journal of
  Political Economy, 81(3), 607­636.

F ORBES , K., AND F. WARNOCK (2012): "Capital Flow Waves: Surges, Stops, Flight, and Retrenchment,"
   Journal of International Economics, 88, 235­251.

F RENCH , K. R., AND J. M. P OTERBA (1991): "Investor Diversification and International Equity Markets,"
   American Economic Review, 81(2), 222­226.

                                                  48
G ABAIX , X., AND M. M AGGIORI (2015): "International Liquidity and Exchange Rate Dynamics,"
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(3), 1369­1420.

G HOSH , A., C. J ULLIARD, AND A. P. TAYLOR (2019): "An Information-Theoretic Asset Pricing Model,"
  Working Paper, McGill University.

G IBBONS , M. R., S. A. ROSS , AND J. S HANKEN (1989): "A Test of the Efficiency of a Given Portfolio,"
   Econometrica, 57(5), 1121­1152.

H ANSEN , L. P., J. H EATON , AND E. G. LUTTMER (1995): "Econometric Evaluation of Asset Pricing
  Models," Review of Financial Studies, 8(2), 237­274.

H ANSEN , L. P., AND R. J AGANNATHAN (1991): "Restrictions on intertemporal marginal rates of
  substitution implied by asset returns," Journal of Political Economy, 99(2), 225­262.

H ANSEN , L. P., AND S. F. R ICHARD (1987): "The Role of Conditioning Information in Deducing Testable
  Restrictions Implied by Dynamic Asset Pricing Models," Econometrica, 55, 587­613.

H ARRISON , J. M., AND D. M. K REPS (1979): "Martingales and Arbitrage in Multiperiod Securities
  Markets," Journal of Economic Theory, 20(3), 381­408.

H AU , H., AND H. R EY (2006): "Exchange Rates, Equity Prices, and Capital Flows," Review of Financial
  Studies, 19, 273­317.

H E , H., AND D. M ODEST (1995): "Market Frictions and Consumption-Based Asset Pricing," Journal of
  Political Economy, 103, 94­117.

H E , Z., B. K ELLY, AND A. M ANELA (2017): "Intermediary Asset Pricing: New Evidence from Many Asset
  Classes," Journal of Financial Economics, 126(1), 1­35.

                                       ´ CHAL (2012): Fundamentals of Convex Analysis. Springer
H IRIART-U RRUTY, J.-B., AND C. L EMAR E
  Science & Business Media.

J IANG , Z., AND R. J. R ICHMOND (2019): "Origins of International Factor Structures," Working Paper,
   Northwestern University.

K LEIBERGEN , F., AND Z. Z HAN (2020): "Robust Inference for Consumption-Based Asset Pricing,"
   Journal of Finance, 75(1), 507­550.

KOIJEN , R. S. J., AND M. Y OGO (2020): "Exchange Rates and Asset Prices in a Global Demand System,"
 Working Paper, Chicago Booth School of Business.

KORSAYE , S. A., A. QUAINI , AND F. T ROJANI (2020): "Smart SDFs," Working Paper, University of Geneva.

KOZAK , S., S. N AGEL , AND S. S ANTOSH (2020): "Shrinking the Cross Section," Journal of Financial
 Economics, 135(2), 271­292.

L ETTAU , M., M. M AGGIORI , AND M. W EBER (2014): "Conditional Risk Premia in Currency Markets and
   Other Asset Classes," Journal of Financial Economics, 114, 197­225.

L EWIS , K. K. (1999): "Trying to Explain Home Bias in Equities and Consumption," Journal of Economic
   Literature, 37, 571­608.

LUSTIG , H., AND R. J. R ICHMOND (2020): "Gravity in the Exchange Rate Factor Structure," Review of
  Financial Studies, 33(8), 3492­3540.



                                                  49
LUSTIG , H., N. ROUSSANOV, AND A. V ERDELHAN (2011): "Common Risk Factors in Currency Markets,"
  Review of Financial Studies, 11, 3731­3777.

         (2014): "Countercylical Currency Risk Premia," Journal of Financial Economics, 111(3), 527­
  553.

LUSTIG , H., A. S TATHOPOLOUS , AND A. V ERDELHAN (2019): "The Term Structure of Currency Carry
  Trade Risk Premia," American Economic Review, 109(12), 4142­4177.

LUSTIG , H., AND A. V ERDELHAN (2019): "Does Incomplete Spanning in International Financial
  Markets Help to Explain Exchange Rates?," American Economic Review, 109(6), 2208­2244.

LUTTMER , E. G. (1996): "Asset Pricing in Economies with Frictions," Econometrica, 64(6), 1439­1467.

M AGGIORI , M., B. N EIMAN , AND J. S CHREGER (2020): "International Currencies and Capital
  Allocation," Journal of Political Economy, 128(6), 2019­2066.

M ARTIN , P., AND H. R EY (2004): "Financial Super-Markets: Size Matters for Asset Trade," Journal of
  International Economics, 64(2), 335­361.
                         ^ , AND N.-K. T RAN (2019): "Pricing Risks Across Currency Denominations,"
M AURER , T. A., T.-D. T O
  Management Science, 65(11), 5308­5336.

M ENKHOFF , L., L. S ARNO, M. S CHMELING , AND A. S CHRIMPF (2012): "Carry Trades and Global Foreign
  Exchange Volatility," Journal of Finance, 62(2), 681­718.

M ILESI -F ERRETTI , G.-M., AND C. T ILLE (2011): "The Great Retrenchment: International Capital Flows
  during the Global Financial Crisis," Economic Policy, 66, 285­330.

M IRANDA -AGRIPPINO, S., AND H. R EY (2020): "U.S. Monetary Policy and the Global Financial Cycle,"
  forthcoming, Review of Economic Studies.

N EWEY, W. K., AND K. D. W EST (1987): "A Simple, Positive Semi-definite, Heteroskedasticity and
  Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix," Econometrica, 55(3), 703­708.

PANAYOTOV, G. (2020): "Global Risks in the Currency Market," forthcoming, Review of Finance.

R EY, H. (2015): "Dilemma not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy
   Independence," NBER Working Paper No. 21162.

ROSS , S. A. (1978): "A Simple Approach to the Valuation of Risky Streams," Journal of Business, 3, 453­
 476.

S ANDULESCU , M., F. T ROJANI , AND A. V EDOLIN (2020): "Model-Free International Stochastic Discount
   Factors," forthcoming, Journal of Finance.

S HANKEN , J. (1992): "On the Estimation of Beta-Pricing Models," Review of Financial Studies, 5(1),
   1­33.

S TUTZER , M. (1995): "A Bayesian approach to diagnosis of asset pricing models," Journal of
   Econometrics, 68, 367­397.

VAN N IEUWERBURGH , S., AND L. V ELDKAMP (2009): "Information Immobility and the Home Bias
  Puzzle," Journal of Finance, 64(3), 1187­1215.

V ERDELHAN , A. (2018): "The Share of Systematic Variation in Bilateral Exchange Rates," Journal of
   Finance, 71(1), 375­418.

                                                  50
