                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      NEW-KEYNESIAN TRADE:
UNDERSTANDING THE EMPLOYMENT AND WELFARE EFFECTS OF TRADE SHOCKS

                                   Andrés Rodríguez-Clare
                                       Mauricio Ulate
                                      José P. Vásquez

                                     Working Paper 27905
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27905


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2020




This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant
Number 1561854. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research, the Federal Reserve Bank of San
Francisco, or the Federal Reserve System.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, Mauricio Ulate, and José P. Vásquez. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
New-Keynesian Trade: Understanding the Employment and Welfare Effects of Trade Shocks
Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, Mauricio Ulate, and José P. Vásquez
NBER Working Paper No. 27905
October 2020
JEL No. F10,F16,F66

                                         ABSTRACT

There is a growing empirical consensus that trade shocks can have important effects on
unemployment and nonemployment across local-labor markets within an economy. This paper
introduces downward nominal wage rigidity to an otherwise standard quantitative trade model
and shows how this framework can generate changes in unemployment and nonemployment that
match those uncovered by the empirical literature studying the "China shock." We also compare
the associated welfare effects predicted by this model with those in the model without
unemployment. We find that the China shock leads to average welfare increases in most U.S.
states, including many that experience unemployment during the transition. However, nominal
rigidities reduce the overall U.S. gains from the China shock between one and two thirds. In
addition, there are ten states that experience welfare losses in the presence of downward nominal
wage rigidity but would have experienced welfare gains without it.

Andrés Rodríguez-Clare                          José P. Vásquez
University of California at Berkeley            Princeton University
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                         Princeton, NJ 08540-2009
and NBER                                        jpvc@princeton.edu
andres1000@gmail.com

Mauricio Ulate
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco,
Economics Research,
101 Market Street, Mailstop 1130
San Francisco, CA 94105
mauricioulate@gmail.com
1    Introduction
     In their influential paper, Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013) (henceforth ADH) show that
commuting zones more exposed to the "China shock" experienced significant increases in un-
employment and decreases in labor force participation relative to less exposed regions. In
contrast, the standard quantitative trade model assumes full employment and a perfectly in-
elastic labor supply curve (e.g., Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare, 2014), implying that all the ad-
justment takes place through wages rather than employment. In this paper, we show how
adding downward nominal wage rigidity (DNWR) and home production allows the quantita-
tive trade model to generate changes in unemployment and nonemployment that match those
uncovered by ADH during a transition period. We can then use the augmented model with
DNWR to study the welfare effects of the China shock for the U.S. on aggregate, as well as the
distribution of welfare changes across individual states.
     We start from the standard gravity model of trade with multiple sectors and an input-
output structure as in Caliendo and Parro (2015). We further assume that there are multiple
regions inside the U.S., that there is no labor mobility across regions, and that labor supply is
upward sloping because workers decide whether to engage in home production or participate
in the labor market. The way in which the China shock affects employment here is clear: re-
gions with positive net exports in sectors experiencing the strongest productivity increases in
China (i.e., more exposed to the China shock) suffer a worsening of their terms of trade relative
to less exposed regions. This leads to a relative decline in their real wage and employment,
as some workers exit the labor force to engage in home production. This model, however, re-
quires an extremely large elasticity of substitution between employment and home production
in order to replicate the strong increases in nonemployment in the U.S. regions most exposed to
the China shock documented by ADH. Additionally, this model cannot generate any changes
in unemployment.
     We then add DNWR as in Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2016), so that the wage in each region
has to be greater or equal that  times the wage in the previous period (implying that the wage
can fall by no more than 100(1 - ) percent each year).1 The exact implications of DNWR

1 While   the empirical literature studying the presence of DNWR is vast and sometimes conflicting, several recent


                                                         1
depend on our assumptions regarding monetary policy and the exchange rate system, but our
results are broadly robust to a range of different assumptions for these features. Our baseline
model assumes that all countries have flexible exchange rates vis-´
                                                                  a-vis the dollar, and that the
world nominal GDP in dollars grows at a constant and exogenous rate which we set equal
to zero without loss of generality. A region that is more exposed to China suffers a negative
terms-of-trade shock relative to a less exposed region. In turn, a negative terms-of-trade shock
implies a contraction in labor demand, and if the DNWR is stringent enough (i.e.,  is high
enough) then this leads to a temporary increase in unemployment that subsequently dies out
as nominal wages can adjust downwards. If home production is available to workers, then the
DNWR leads to even bigger declines in employment as more workers prefer to engage in home
production rather than face the possibility of unemployment.
    We quantify the effects of the China shock in our model using the "exact-hat algebra" ap-
proach to counterfactual analysis popularized by Dekle et al. (2007) and extended to a dynamic
context by Caliendo et al. (2019). This methodology ensures that our model perfectly matches
the sector-level input-output and trade data at the beginning of the period of analysis (year
2000), and allows for a transparent calibration. Specifically, we only need to calibrate the trade
elasticity and the parameters governing the elasticity of labor supply ( ) and the importance
of the DNWR (). We select a value of the trade elasticity from the literature, and we calibrate
 and  so that the model matches two key moments from ADH. These moments correspond
to the relative increases in unemployment rates and decreases in labor-force participation rates
experienced by commuting zones that were more exposed to imports from China.
    Our quantitative analysis requires data for sector-level input-output flows as well as trade
flows across all pairs of regions in our sample, which includes U.S. states as local labor mar-
kets. We construct such a dataset by combining multiple data sources, a set of proportionality
assumptions, and implications from the gravity model. The resulting dataset contains 14 sec-
tors (12 of them in manufacturing, one service sector, and one agricultural sector) for 50 U.S.
states plus 36 additional countries and an aggregate rest of the world region during the years


papers have found support for its existence (e.g. Dickens et al., 2007; Daly and Hobijn, 2014; Grigsby et al., 2019;
Hazell and Taska, 2019). We fully acknowledge that labor-market frictions in the real world are significantly
more complex than our simple DNWR. However, we hope to show that the DNWR in our model is a powerful
yet parsimonious way to capture such frictions, which so far have been under-explored in the trade literature.


                                                        2
2000 to 2007, the period used in ADH.
     As is common in the literature, we treat the China shock as a productivity improvement
that varies across sectors in China, and we follow Caliendo et al. (2019) in calibrating these
sector-level productivity shocks so that the model-implied changes in imports from China
match those in the data. We do this each year so that we can trace out the dynamic response
of the economy to the China shock as it unfolded over the period of analysis. Our calibration
leads to a value of  = 0.984, which implies that wages can fall up to 1.6% annually without the
DNWR becoming binding. This value is similar to the one used by Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe
(2016). Our calibration also leads to a value of  = 5.9, implying a labor supply elasticity of
around 2. Despite the fact that labor supply elasticity is the only mechanism in our model to
generate the large effects of the China shock on labor-force participation, our estimate still falls
within a reasonable range.
     The calibrated model generates a significant temporary decline in employment in the re-
gions most exposed to the China shock. For example, Ohio experiences a decline in employ-
ment of 3.5% in 2004, but eventually goes back to a level of employment above the one before
the shock. This is the typical dynamic response we see for the most exposed states, and it
arises from the combination of three forces. First, the China shock that we introduce in the
model (calibrated for the 2001-2007 period) is not constant but grows in strength, peaking in
2004. Second, a shock that requires a decline in the nominal wage to maintain full employ-
ment increases unemployment in the short run under a DNWR, but then this unemployment
erodes quickly as the nominal wage can fall around 1.6% each year. Third, the China shock
leads to increases in the real wage for almost all regions, including most of the ones for which
full employment would require a decline in the nominal wage.2 Since the real wage governs
labor supply, and since there is no unemployment in the long run, this implies an increase in
employment after the economy fully adjusts to the China shock.
     For the U.S. as a whole, the calibrated model implies that the China shock is responsible for
around 0.8 percentage points of unemployment in the U.S. in 2004. Combined with a decline
in labor supply, this leads to an overall decline in the employment to population ratio of 1.8%.
2 This implies that most states experience both an increase in the real wage and an increase in unemployment. This
may seem paradoxical, but it is a natural consequence of a shock that implies both an improvement in the terms
of trade and a decline in the export price index. In Section 4.3, we come back to this and provide more intuition.


                                                        3
However, in parallel to what happens at the state level, by 2008 the employment to population
rate is slightly higher than it was before the shock.
    One benefit of our approach is that we can study the effect of the China shock on welfare,
and in particular explore how this is affected by DNWR. We compute welfare as the present
discounted value of the utility flow in the future, with a discount rate of 0.95 and a utility flow
given by the average real wage across all households in an economy (employed, unemployed,
and in home production). We find that welfare increases in most regions, including many that
experience unemployment during the transition. For the U.S. as a whole, although the China
shock remains beneficial in the presence of nominal frictions, those benefits are smaller with
these frictions. Specifically, DNWR reduces the average U.S. welfare gain from 0.32% to 0.22%
(and the reduction is even larger in some of our extensions). Additionally, there are 10 states
that suffer welfare losses with DNWR but would have experienced welfare gains without it. To
see how DNWR matters for welfare in some of the most affected states, consider again Ohio.
If we compute the welfare effect under the same China shock and the same parameter values
except that we switch off the DNWR (i.e.,  = 0), we see that welfare increases by 8 basis points
in Ohio, rather than decreasing by 8 basis points as in the model with DNWR.
    We study how varying some of the key assumptions in the baseline model affects the above
conclusions, as well as the fit of the model with the non-targeted moments in ADH. Specifically,
we develop four separate extensions where we: introduce mobility frictions between sectors,
consider some of the increases in trade surpluses that occurred in China, use a different ex-
change rate regime for other countries, and examine a different nominal anchor. The most
interesting conclusion that emerges from this analysis is that the model benefits from the ad-
dition of frictions to the mobility of workers between manufacturing and non-manufacturing,
jointly with the assumption that there is DNWR only in manufacturing. These modifications
allow the model to more closely match ADH's results on how exposure to the China shock
affects employment and wages in the manufacturing and non-manufacturing sectors. Interest-
ingly, this variant of the model implies that DNWR leads to an even larger reduction in the
overall U.S. gains from the China shock, which fall from 0.22% in the baseline model to 0.12%.
    Our extensions also show that taking a broader perspective of the China shock so that
it also includes an increase in the U.S. trade deficit (instead of solely an increase in Chinese


                                                 4
productivity) makes the DNWR less binding and weakens the implied employment effects, al-
though the welfare effects do not change much. In addition, when we assume that other coun-
tries have fixed exchange rates vis-a-vis the dollar, the calibration leads to a more stringent
DNWR, with  increasing from 0.984 to 0.989, but the conclusions regarding employment and
welfare do not change. In contrast, if we assume that the nominal anchor is a constant growth
rate of the U.S. nominal GDP instead of the world's nominal GDP, then the model cannot fully
match the ADH findings.3 This last result indicates that taking a narrow view of nominal
frictions that focuses entirely on the U.S. might not be enough to properly capture how the
economy reacts to real trade shocks (we discuss this in Section 5.3).
     We wish to highlight one finding that is relevant for how we think about the exposure mea-
sures that have been used in empirical work. ADH measure a region's exposure to the China
shock using the region's sectoral employment shares as weights for the sector-level shocks. In
the absence of nominal rigidities, however, the theoretically correct exposure measure would
weight the sector-level shocks by the region's sector-level net exports rather than employment.
We find that the ADH employment-weighted measure becomes relevant in a standard multi-
sector gravity model of trade once we add DNWR, since now labor demand has a direct effect
on welfare above and beyond those that go through the standard terms-of-trade channel. This
is suggestive that DNWR, or other frictions that deliver similar effects, should feature more
prominently in trade models, at least when the goal is to understand the adjustment dynamics
associated with trade shocks.
     Our paper follows in the footsteps of a large literature that analyzes the impacts of trade
shocks on different regions or countries. Papers such as ADH, Caliendo et al. (2019), Galle et al.
(2020), and Adao et al. (2019) focus on the effect of the China shock on regions of the U.S. Our
model incorporates nominal rigidities as a mechanism to deliver involuntary unemployment,
which is an uncommon feature in this literature despite its prominence in the empirical papers
studying the China shock. To focus on the role of nominal rigidities on employment dynamics,
our model does not feature costs of switching sectors, which are explored in Caliendo et al.
(2019). We expand on the possible consequences of including such costs in Section 6.5.

3 Although this extension cannot perfectly match the ADH findings, the overall pattern of results is broadly similar

 to the one under the baseline calibration, with the exception that the mean welfare change is smaller.


                                                         5
     Another literature explores the effect of trade on unemployment in models with search and
matching frictions, see e.g. Davidson and Matusz (2004), Helpman et al. (2010), Hasan et al.
(2012) and Heid and Larch (2016). Most recently, Kim and Vogel (2020a,b) introduce search fric-
tions and a labor-leisure choice into a multi-sector trade model where each commuting zone is
treated as a small-open economy affected by the China shock. They study how this model can
match the ADH findings for the effect of the China shock on income per capita decomposed
into the effect on wages, labor supply, and unemployment. We instead focus on DNWR as the
friction that generates unemployment, and emphasize the employment and welfare implica-
tions of the China shock in a model that allows for intermediate goods and general-equilibrium
implications across U.S. states and between these and the rest of the world.4
     More closely related to our paper is Eaton et al. (2013), which studies the extent to which
unmodeled cross-country relative wage rigidities can explain the increases in unemployment
and decreases in GDP observed in countries undergoing sudden stops. Relative to this paper,
our contribution is to show how DNWR can lead to such relative wage rigidities, to extend
the analysis to terms-of-trade shocks in a multi-sector model, and to quantify the effect of the
China shock on unemployment and nonemployment across U.S. states between 2000 and 2007.
     On the side of open-economy macroeconomics, classic contributions such as Clarida et al.
(2002), or various papers by Gali and Monacelli (2005, 2008, 2016), have introduced nominal
rigidities in models with a simplified trade structure. Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2016) uses a
downward nominal wage rigidity to study the effects of trade shocks on a small open economy,
Choudhri et al. (2011) studies the implications of nominal rigidities for the gains from trade in
a two-country model, and Nakamura and Steinsson (2014), Beraja et al. (2016), or Chodorow-
Reich and Wieland (2017) deal with multiple heterogeneous regions in models with nominal
rigidities. None of these papers connect to actual sector-level trade flows and hence cannot be
used for the quantitative analysis of an event like the China shock.
     The rest of the paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 introduces the general framework
that incorporates a rich trade structure with dynamic aspects and nominal rigidities. Section

4 Dix-Carneiro et al. (2020) allow for search and matching frictions in a fully dynamic multi-sector model and
explore the effects on workers originally employed in sectors differently exposed to the China shock. The paper
does not explore the aggregate effects on employment and unemployment, or how such effects matter for welfare
relative to a model without unemployment.


                                                      6
3 describes the data, our calibration of the China shock, and the exposure measure that we
use. Section 4 describes the calibration of parameters  and  , and the main results under our
baseline specification. Section 5 discusses different extensions of the baseline model, such as
incorporating mobility frictions between manufacturing and non-manufacturing, incorporat-
ing changes in deficits as part of the China shock, or changing the nominal anchor or exchange
rate regime. In Section 6, we discuss several miscellaneous topics. Finally, Section 7 concludes.



2     A Quantitative Trade Model with Nominal Rigidities
      We present a multi-sector quantitative trade model with an input-output structure as in
Caliendo and Parro (2015) but extended to allow for multiple periods, an upward sloping la-
bor supply, and downward nominal wage rigidity. In this section, we present an abridged
description of the model, focusing on its non-standard elements and relegating some of the
details to Appendix B.


2.1    Basic Assumptions

      We assume that the United States is composed of multiple economies or "regions." There
are M regions in the U.S., plus I - M regions (countries) outside of the U.S. (for a total of I
regions). To focus on the role of nominal rigidities on employment, we assume that there is
no labor mobility across these regions. This is a reasonable assumption given our focus on the
short to medium term.
      There are S sectors in the economy (indexed by s or k). In each region (indexed by i or j)
and each period t, a representative consumer devotes all income to expenditure Pj,t Cj,t , where
Cj,t and Pj,t are aggregate consumption and the price index in region j in period t, respectively.
Aggregate consumption is a Cobb-Douglas aggregate of consumption across the S different
sectors with expenditure shares  j,s . As in a multi-sector Armington trade model, consumption
in each sector is a CES aggregate of consumption of the good of each of the I regions, with an
elasticity of substitution s > 1 in sector s.
      We allow for the possibility of "broad sectors," indexed with b  1, ..., B. We assume that all
individual sectors within a given broad sector have the same wage, and there is free mobility of

                                                  7
workers across the sectors belonging to a broad sector. In contrast, there are mobility frictions
and hence potentially different wages across different broad sectors. We use the function b(k)
to denote the broad sector b that a given sector k belongs to. The concept of broad sectors
allows us to write a single parsimonious model that can still capture different levels at which
mobility frictions might occur. Our baseline specification assumes free mobility between all
market sectors (i.e., b(k ) = 1 k, a single broad sector), but in the extensions we explore the
consequences of having two broad sectors (one comprising manufacturing and the other one
comprising services and agriculture).
      Each region produces good k with a Cobb-Douglas production function, using labor with
share j,k and intermediate inputs with the shares j,sk , where j,k + s j,sk = 1. Additionally,
region j has a total factor productivity in sector k and time t equal to A j,k,t . We assume perfect
competition, and that regions trade with iceberg trade costs ij,k,t  1 for exports from i to j in
sector k. We also assume that intermediates from different origins are aggregated in the same
way as consumption goods (i.e., CES with elasticity s ). Let Wi,b(k),t denote the wage in region
i, in the broad sector b(k ) that sector k belongs to, at time t. The previous assumptions imply
                                                                               -1                         
                                                                                 ,k,t Wi,b(k),t s Pi,s,t ,
                                                                                         i ,k        i,sk
that the price in region j of good k produced by region i at time t is ij,k,t Ai
where Pi,s,t is the price index of sector s in region i at time t, and that

                                                                                             1-k
                                         I                                 S
                                                                          
                          1-                           -1      i,k                
                         Pj,k,t k   =          ij,k,t Ai ,k,t Wi,b(k),t          Pi,si,,sk
                                                                                        t          .      (1)
                                        i =1                              s =1


For future purposes, note also that

                                                            S
                                                           Pi,si,,st .
                                                                    
                                                 Pi,t =                                                   (2)
                                                          s =1



2.2    Labor Supply

      We denote the total population of region i with Li , which we assume to be time-invariant
given the brief period we consider in our analysis. Agents can either engage in home produc-
tion or look for work in the labor market. If they engage in home production, they receive a
utility flow of µi . If they participate in the labor market, they can be employed in any of the


                                                                8
B broad sectors. The expected real income from participating in broad sector b is denoted by
i,b,t . We denote the number of agents that look for work in broad sector b by                               i ,b,t   and we let
 i ,t   b       i ,b,t / L i   and i,b,t    i ,b,t /  b       i ,b ,t   denote the labor force participation rate and the
participation rate in broad sector b, respectively. This implies that


                                                     i ,b,t      =  i ,t  i ,b,t L i .                                       (3)


      Each agent has utility parameters zb for b  {0, 1, ..., B} so that agent's utility is ln µi +
z0 if choosing home production and ln i,b,t + zb if choosing broad sector b  {1, ..., B}. We
assume that these utility parameters are drawn from a nested Type-I Extreme Value distribution
involving parameters  and  (satisfying    ), so that the cumulative distribution of Z =
( Z0 , Z1 , ..., ZB ) is
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                     /
                                                                                    B
                                H (z) = exp - exp (- z0 ) -                          exp (- zb )         .
                                                                                 b =1


In Appendix B.2 we show that with this setup the following conditions hold

                                                                             i,t
                                                      i ,t =                                ,                                (4)
                                                                         µi + i ,t
                                                                              



and
                                                                                 
                                                                             i ,b,t
                                                           i ,b,t =                     ,                                    (5)
                                                                             i ,t

where

                                                                                    1/
                                                                  B
                                                                 
                                                                        
                                               i ,t                     i ,b,t              .                                (6)
                                                                b =1


Our welfare function will be the exponential of the ex-ante instantaneous utility (before the
utility shocks are realized), which satisfies

                                                                                    1/
                                                   u i ,t  µ     
                                                             i + i ,t                           .

                                                                         9
We consider the exponential of the ex-ante instantaneous utility so that welfare is homogeneous
of degree one with respect to wages (and µi ).


2.3    Downward Nominal Wage Rigidity

      We denote the number of agents that are actually employed in region i and broad sector
b at time t with Li,b,t . In the standard trade model, labor market clearing requires that the
labor used in a broad sector in a region be equal to labor supplied to that broad sector, i.e.
L i ,b,t   s  b L i ,s,t =   i ,b,t .   We depart from this assumption and instead follow Schmitt-Grohe
and Uribe (2016) by allowing for a downward nominal wage rigidity, which might lead to an
employment level that is strictly below labor supply,


                                                    L i ,b,t    i ,b,t .                            (7)


All prices and wages up to now have been expressed in U.S. dollars. In contrast, a given region
faces DNWR in terms of its local currency unit. Letting WiLCU
                                                          ,b,t denote wages in local currency
units, DNWR takes the following form:


                                          WiLCU       LCU
                                            ,b,t  b Wi,b,t-1 ,             b  0.


Denote the exchange rate between the local currency unit of region i and the local currency unit
of region 1 (which is the U.S. dollar) in period t with Ei,t (in units of dollars per local currency
of region i). This implies that Wi,b,t = WiLCU
                                           ,b,t Ei,t , and hence the DNWR in dollars entails


                                                            Ei,t
                                               Wi,b,t            W          .
                                                           Ei,t-1 b i,b,t-1

Since all regions within the U.S. share the dollar as their local currency unit, then Ei,t = 1 and
WiLCU
  ,b,t = Wi,b,t  i  M. This means that the DNWR in states of the U.S. takes the familiar form
Wi,b,t  b Wi,t-1 . For the I - M regions outside of the U.S., the LCU is not the dollar and so the
behavior of the exchange rate impacts how the DNWR affects the real economy. The DNWR in




                                                            10
dollars can then be captured using a country-specific parameter i,b for each broad sector, i.e.:


                                          Wi,b,t  i,b Wi,b,t-1 ,                i,b  0.       (8)


In our baseline specification we assume that all regions outside of the U.S. have a flexible ex-
change rate and so the DNWR never binds. We capture these assumptions by setting i,b =
b  i  M and i,b = 0  i > M. In an extension, we consider an alternative scenario in which
other countries have fixed exchange rates to the U.S. so that i,b = b  i.
       Besides equations (7) and (8), we additionally have the complementary slackness condi-
tion:


                                     (   i ,b,t   - Li,b,t )(Wi,b,t - i,b Wi,b,t-1 ) = 0.     (9)


Since we know that people in broad sector b get the real wage of Wi,b,t / Pi,t with probability
L i ,b,t /   i ,b,t   we can express the real income from working in broad sector b as

                                                                  Wi,b,t Li,b,t
                                                       i ,b,t =                 .            (10)
                                                                   Pi,t i,b,t

This assumes that the income generated in a broad sector is equally shared between all peo-
ple participating in that broad sector, instead of giving zero to unemployed workers and a full
wage to employed workers. This simplifies the calculations and represents a form of risk shar-
ing between households in a given broad sector. It is also worth noting that our setup does not
allow unemployed workers to engage in home production. As we discuss below, this implies
that the threat of unemployment discourages labor force participation, which is a desirable fea-
ture that allows the model to match the ADH targets with a reasonable labor supply elasticity.


2.4          Nominal Anchor

       So far, we have introduced nominal elements to the model (i.e., the DNWR), but we have
not introduced a nominal anchor that prevents nominal wages from rising so much in each
period as too make the DNWR always non-binding. Roughly speaking, we now assume that
each country has a central bank that is unwilling to allow inflation to be too high because of

                                                                    11
associated costs that are left out of the model. In traditional macro models, this is usually
implemented via a Taylor rule, where the nominal interest rate reacts to inflation in order to
keep price growth in check. Instead, we use a nominal anchor that captures the same idea in a
way that naturally lends itself to quantitative implementation in our trade model.
    In particular, we assume that world nominal GDP in dollars grows at a constant rate 
across years,

                          I    B                    I    B
                                     Wi,b,t Li,b,t =      Wi,b,t-1 Li,b,t-1.                   (11)
                         i =1 b =1                 i =1 b =1


Although this nominal anchor might seem simplistic, it nonetheless has some desirable proper-
ties. First, it is flexible enough to allow for unemployment even in the context of two countries
that have a single region each. Second, it can be seen as capturing a given level of world ag-
gregate demand in the context of a global savings glut (or zero lower bound), in the spirit of
papers like Caballero et al. (2015). We further discuss the advantages of this rule as a modeling
device in Section 5.3, where we also discuss the consequences of changing the nominal anchor
to a constant growth of nominal GDP for the U.S. rather than the whole world.
    Consider a shock that requires the relative wage of some region i in broad sector b to fall
in order to maintain full employment in that sector-region. The cause could be, for example, a
negative productivity shock, an increase in productivity in that sector abroad, or a decline in
transfers to the region. If b is low enough, or the exchange rate can depreciate (e.g., i,b is low),
then wages can adjust downwards in the required magnitude to avoid unemployment. Alter-
natively, if  is high enough then again there would be no unemployment, since no downward
adjustment is needed in the wage. However, there are combinations of parameters i,b and 
that can lead to unemployment after the shock, although there would then be a gradual decline
in unemployment as the DNWR and the nominal anchor allow for adjustment year after year.
    We clarify that having multiple regions is not critical for the shock to lead to unemploy-
ment, given our nominal anchor. To see this, imagine that the U.S. were composed of a single
region and that there was a positive productivity shock in the rest of the world. If  was high
enough, then the adjustment could take place without unemployment in the U.S., since wages
in dollars in the rest of the world could increase enough to generate the necessary relative wage


                                                    12
adjustment. However, if  is low and  is high, this full adjustment would not be possible, and
there would be (temporary) unemployment in the U.S.


2.5    Equilibrium

      Let Ri,s,t denote total revenues in sector s of country i. Noting that the demand of industry
k of country j of intermediates from sector s is j,sk R j,k,t and allowing for exogenous deficits as
in Dekle et al. (2007), the market clearing condition for sector s in country i can be written as

                                    I                  B                                   S
                      R i ,s,t =    ij,s,t      j,s    Wj,b,t L j,b,t + Dj,t          +    j,sk R j,k,t   ,   (12)
                                   j =1               b =1                                k =1


where D j,t are transfers received by region j, with  j D j,t = 0, and where sector-k trade shares
in period t are given by

                                                (ij,k,t Ai- 1            S         
                                                                                i,sk 1- k
                                                          ,k,t Wi,b(k),t s=1 Pi,s,t )
                                                                  i ,k

                                   ij,k,t                                                        .            (13)
                                             I              -1      r,k     S         r,sk
                                                                                         1-k
                                             r =1 ( rj,k,t Ar,k,t Wr,b(k),t s=1 Pr,s,t )


In turn, labor market clearing in each region and broad sector b requires that


                                                 Wi,b,t Li,b,t =    i,s Ri,s,t .                              (14)
                                                                   sb


Given last-period wages {Wi,b,t-1 } and last period employment { Li,b,t-1 }, the period t equilib-
rium is a set of wages {Wi,b,t }, employment { Li,b,t }, trade shares {ij,s,t }, country and sector-
country prices indices { Pi,t } and { Pi,s,t }, revenues { Ri,s,t }, and additional labor market vari-
ables (i.e.,   i ,b,t ,   i,b,t , i,t , i,b,t , and i,t ) such that equations (1) - (14) hold.


2.6    Hat Algebra

      Our goal is to use a calibrated version of the model above to compute the employment
and welfare effects of a trade shock. We do this using data for U.S. states as well as other coun-
tries, but without calibrating technology levels and iceberg trade costs along the transition and
without requiring data on nominal wages or available labor (since this would require taking a


                                                                   13
stance on what efficiency units we measure labor in). To do so, we follow the exact hat algebra
methodology of Dekle et al. (2007) and the extension of that methodology to dynamic settings
proposed in Caliendo et al. (2019). Consequently, our counterfactual exercises only require data
on revenues Ri,s,t , value added Yi,b,t  Wi,b,t Li,b,t , trade deficits Di,t , the fraction of workers in
each broad sector i,b,t , and trade shares ij,s,t in period zero (t = t0 ), whatever shocks we are
interested in, and the model's parameters, namely i,b , ,  ,  , {s }, { j,s }, {i,s }, and {i,sk }.
     We use x^ t to denote xt / xt-1 for any variable x. To express the equilibrium system in hats
and only leave it in terms of observable data in period zero, we assume that the economy starts
from a point where every region had full employment.5 The equilibrium system is given by:

                                 I                                                                                      S
    ^ i ,s,t R i ,s,t -1 =
    R                           ^ ij,s,t ij,s,t-1              j,s     W
                                                                       ^ j,b,t L                  ^ j,t D j,t -1
                                                                               ^ j,b,t Yj,b,t-1 + D                +    j,sk R
                                                                                                                             ^ j,k ,t R j,k ,t -1    i,  s
                                j =1                                    b                                              k =1

                                                     ^ -1 W     
                                                            ^ i ,s    S   ^ i,ks 1-s   
                                                       i,s,t i,b(s),t k=1 Pi,k,t )
                                            (^ij,s,t A
               ^ ij,s,t =
                                                                                                                                                     i,  s
                                I
                                r                       ^ -1 W ^         S    ^
                                                                            r,s        1-s r,ks
                                  =1 rj,s,t-1 ( ^rj,s,t A r,s,t r,b(s),t k =1 Pr,k,t )

                                 I                                                 S           1-s
              ^ 1-s =
              Pi ,s,t             ji,s,t-1                      ^ -1 W
                                                        ^ji,s,t A
                                                                  j,s,t j,b(s),t  Pj,k,t
                                                                       ^  j,s     ^ j,ks                                                             i,  s
                                j =1                                              k =1

      ^ i ,b,t L
      W        ^ i,b,t Yi,b,t-1 =           i,s R
                                                ^ i ,s,t R i ,s,t -1                                                                                 i,  b
                                           sb
          t                      t
         L
         ^ i ,b,q   ^ i ,b,q ,                      ^ i,b,t  i,b , Complementary Slackness
                                                    W                                                                                                i,  b
        q =1                    q =1
                                                                        
                                                ^ i,t
                                                                     ^ i ,b,t
                                                                     
                   ^ i ,b,t =                                                                                                                        i,  b
                                                                
                                1 -  i ,t -1 +  i ,t -1 ^ i,t ^ i ,t
                                ^ i ,b,t L
                                W        ^ i ,b,t
               ^ i ,b,t =
                                                                                                                                                     i,  b
                                  ^    ^
                                 Pi,t i,b,t

                                  i ,b,t -1 
                                                     
                   ^ i ,t =
                                            ^ i ,b,t                                                                                                i
                                 b
                                 S
                                P
                    ^i,t =      ^ i ,s ,
                    P            i ,s,t                                                                                                             i
                                s =1
               I                                                I
               W        ^ i,b,t Yi,b,t-1 =    Yi,b,t-1 .
               ^ i ,b,t L                                                                                                                           single
              i =1 b                                          i =1 b


                                                                                             ^ i ,s,t ,
For each period t, we use this system of equations to solve for the quantities of interest ( R
^ ij,s,t , and P                       ^ i ,b,t , L
               ^i,s,t for all i and s; W          ^ i ,b,t , ^ i,b,t , and ^ i,b,t for all i and b; and P
                                                                                                        ^i,t and ^ i,t for
5 Assuming   that the U.S. had full employment in the year 2000 is not problematic, since that year was the peak
 of a business cycle, with an unemployment rate of just 4%. This is the lowest unemployment rate observed in
 the U.S. in the last 40 years (except for the period from 2018 onward). The existence of 4% unemployment is
 consistent with our assumption of "full employment" because the concept of unemployment in our model is that
 of "cyclical" unemployment, i.e., the unemployment in excess of the natural rate of unemployment.


                                                                                          14
all i) given the objects that we already know from the previous period (Yi,b,t-1 , ij,s,t-1 , Di,t-1 ,
                                                     -1              t -1
R i ,s,t -1 ,  i ,t -1 ,  i ,b,t -1 , { ^ i ,b,q } t         ^                                                    ^        ^
                                                   q=1 and { Li,b,q }q=1 for all i, j, s) and the time t shocks ( Ai,s,t , Di,t
and ^ij,s,t for all i, j, s). Thus, starting at t = 1 we can solve this system with information on Yi,0 ,
ij,s,0 , Di,0 , Ri,s,0 , i,0 and i,b,0 for all i, j, s, b (assuming that we depart from a steady state where
Li,0 =    i,0 )
                                   ^ i,s,1 , D
                  and the shocks ( A         ^ i,1 and                                     ^ i,b,1 , L
                                                       ^ij,s,1 for all i, j, s). We obtain W         ^ i,b,1 and      i,b,1   for
all i and b. From the previous elements we can also obtain Yi,b,1 , ij,s,1 , Di,1 , Ri,s,1 , i,1 , and i,b,1
for all i, j, s, b. We can proceed like this for all other periods to solve the system forward while
requiring only period zero information and the shocks hitting the economy.
      Our general equilibrium model also allows us to compute the welfare effects of the shock.
                                  1/
From ui,t            µ    
                      i + i ,t         and i,t = i,t /(µ    
                                                        i + i,t ) we can express the change in instanta-
                 ^ i ,t = 
neous utility as u        ^ i1/ 
                              ,t ^ i,t . To provide our welfare calculations, we combine this expression
for instantaneous utility with a standard lifetime utility function which is time-separable with
discount factor .



3     Data, Calibration and Exposure to the China Shock

3.1      Data Description

      We use trade and production data for 50 U.S. states, 36 additional countries, and an aggre-
gate rest of the world region, for a total of 87 regions from 2000 to 2007. We consider 14 sectors:
12 manufacturing sectors, one service sector, and one agricultural sector. All sectors are clas-
sified according to the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS). We provide a
brief description of the data here and relegate additional details to Appendix A.
      For each region j and each sector k, our model requires data to compute the share of labor
in production j,k , the share of intermediates from all other sectors j,sk s, and the aggregate
consumption shares  j,k . We use data from the BEA (for U.S. states) and from WIOD to calculate
the share of value-added in gross output of region j, which in our model is equivalent to j,k .
We also scale the relative importance of each U.S. state in the total value added of the U.S.
so that the sum of value added across states matches the aggregate value-added of the U.S.
according to WIOD. We compute j,sk as the share of purchases of sector k coming from sector


                                                             15
s (the input-output coefficient) using WIOD data.6
       Our model also requires data on bilateral trade flows for all sectors and all regions in our
sample in order to compute deficits, revenue, and trade shares for the year 2000. We also
require the bilateral trade flows (combined with the input output coefficients) to infer the  j,k 's.
We construct the bilateral trade flow dataset in four steps. In the first step, we take sector-level
bilateral trade between countries directly from WIOD.
       In the second step, we use the Import and Export Merchandise Trade Statistics, a dataset
compiled by the U.S. Census Bureau, to compute ­ for manufacturing and agriculture ­ the
sector-level bilateral trade flows between each U.S. state and each of the other countries in our
sample. The U.S. Census data on sector-by-state-by-country exports starts in 2002, and the data
on imports starts in 2008. We use these starting years to project our bilateral trade matrix for
previous years until 2000 by assuming that the importance of each state in the total exports
(imports) to (from) other countries in each sector remains constant at the 2002 (2008) levels. We
use a proportionality rule for the bilateral trade flows between the U.S. and other countries to
match the values from WIOD in each sector. We provide more details on this in Appendix A.3.
       In the third step, we follow Caliendo et al. (2019) to calculate the bilateral trade flows in
manufacturing among U.S. states by combining WIOD and the Commodity Flow Survey (CFS).
We first compute the bilateral expenditure shares across regions and sectors from the CFS, and
then we use a proportionality rule to assign the total U.S. domestic sales from WIOD according
to those bilateral shares. The bilateral trade flows matrix for the 50 U.S. states then match the
total U.S. domestic sales from WIOD in each sector.
       In the fourth and last step, we combine data for region-level production and expenditure
in services from the Regional Economic Accounts of BEA, WIOD data, and data on bilateral
distances to construct the trade flows in services among all regions consistent with a gravity
structure. We follow a similar gravity approach for the case of trade flows in agriculture using
data from the Agriculture Census, the National Marine Fisheries Service Census, and WIOD.
By construction, the bilateral trade flows in services and agriculture match the aggregates of
trade in services and agriculture between all countries (including the U.S.) and the total pro-
duction of U.S. services and agriculture consumed by the U.S. The details of this procedure are

6 We   assume a common input-output matrix for all U.S. states, which is equal to the one of the U.S. as a whole.


                                                         16
explained in Appendix A.2.4.


3.2      Calibration of the China Shock and Exposure Measure

        We focus on the effect of the China shock as captured by a set of productivity shocks in
                 ^ China,s,t } for the manufacturing sectors (i.e. s  12).7 Inspired by ADH, and
China given by { A
following Caliendo et al. (2019) and Galle et al. (2020), we calibrate these productivity shocks
to match the changes in U.S. imports from China predicted from the changes in imports from
China to other high-income countries.8
        We decompose the total productivity shock in sector s and time t into a component coming
from a sector-level productivity increase that is constant from 2000 to 2007 and a component
                                                                                    ^ China,s,t =
coming from a productivity increase over time that is constant across sectors, i.e. A
^1        ^2                                                                   ^1
A China,t AChina,s . This means we have to estimate 19 parameters. We choose { AChina,t } and
 ^2
{A China,s } to match two targets. The first target is the vector of annual predicted changes in U.S.
imports from China in all manufacturing sectors combined. We obtain the predicted changes
from the following regression:


                                    XC,US,t = a + b1  XC,OC,t +  t ,


where  XC,US,t is the change in U.S. imports from China between year t - 1 and year t in all
manufacturing sectors,  XC,OC,t is the change in imports from China by the other high-income
countries between year t - 1 and year t in all manufacturing sectors, and b1 is the coefficient of
interest. We denote the predicted values from this regression by { XC,US,t }.9
        The second target is the vector of predicted changes in U.S. imports from China between
2000 and 2007 across sectors. We obtain this vector from the following regression

                                   2007-2000        2007-2000
                                  XC ,US,s   = b2  XC ,OC,s   +  s,


7 For the service and agriculture sectors, we assume that there was no change in Chinese productivity.
8 We  use the subset of ADH countries that are also present in the 2013 version of the WIOD, namely Australia,
  Germany, Denmark, Spain, Finland, and Japan. New Zealand and Switzerland are included in the "other high-
  income countries" category of ADH but are not included in WIOD.
9 This regression only has seven data points, but it still has a high R2 of 0.87.



                                                     17
        2007-2000
where  XC ,US,s   is the change in U.S. imports from China between 2000 and 2007 in sector s,
  2007-2000
 XC ,OC,s   is the change in imports from China by the other high-income countries between
2000 and 2007 in sector s, and b2 is the coefficient of interest. The predicted values from this
                          2007-2000 10
regression are denoted { XC ,US,s  }.
                    ^1
        We choose { A                 ^2
                      China,t } and { AChina,s } such that the total productivity changes in China
 ^ China,s,t } deliver changes in imports in our model that simultaneously match the 7 values
{A
                                       2007-2000 11
of { XC,US,t } and the 12 values of { XC ,US,s  }.
        Besides the China shock, there are some other parameters that we still need to set. We
assume that the trade elasticity s is constant across sectors and takes the value of 6, consistent
with the trade literature (e.g. Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare, 2014). For inter-temporal compar-
isons when computing welfare, we use a discount factor  of 0.95 (at the annual level).
        The calibration of the key model parameters below is based on matching moments that
capture the relative effect of the China shock on labor force participation and unemployment.
These moments come from regressions of changes in these variables across regions differen-
tially exposed to the China shock, as captured by an exposure measure that is analogous to the
one proposed by ADH. Specifically,

                                                                             2007-2000
                                                    VAi,s,2000  XC,US,s
                                                        S
                                    Exposurei                           ,                                                     (15)
                                               s =1
                                                    VAi,2000 RUS,s,2000

where RUS,s,2000 is total U.S. production in sector s in the year 2000, VAi,s,2000 is value-added
of region i in sector s in year 2000 (corresponding to i,s Ri,s,2000 in the model), VAi,2000 
                     2007-2000
s VAi,s,2000 , and  XC ,US,s   is the predicted 2000-2007 change in U.S. imports in sector s from



10 We   exclude the constant in this regression because it can lead to negative predicted imports from China, which
   is impossible. While the regression only has 12 observations, it has an R2 of 0.99.
11 The multiplicative nature of our decomposition, A        ^ China,s,t = A
                                                                          ^1        ^2
                                                                            China,t AChina,s , implies that their level is not iden-
   tified. For example, if we multiply all the A     ^2                                                      ^1
                                                      China,s by a constant c and we divide all the AChina,t by c, then we
   would have the same A   ^ China,s,t . Thus, to proceed, we use the normalization S A            ^2      = 1. Correspondingly,
                                                                                       s=1 China,s
                                                                                                           2007-2000,model
  the model is only able to produce changes                                    2007
                                                      in imports that satisfy t=2001  XC model =
                                                                                          ,US,t    S
                                                                                                   s=1  XC,US,s            .
                                                                                                    S       2007-2000
  This condition is automatically satisfied by        the actual changes, i.e. 2007
                                                                                t=2001  X C,US,t =  s =1  X C,US,s    , but
  not necessarily by the predicted changes, due to the lack of a constant in the second regression. We adjust the
                                                                                    S      2007-2000
  predicted changes in manufacturing so that they satisfy: 2007 t=2001  XC,US,t = s=1  XC,US,s       , this adjustment
  is very small. In all of our applications we are able to match our targets with an accuracy greater than 99.9%.


                                                                18
China as in ADH and explained above.12 Besides the calibration, we will also use this exposure
measure to present the results of the model for non-targeted variables such as manufacturing
and non-manufacturing employment, as well as for welfare, so that we can see how these pre-
dictions vary across states differentially exposed to the China shock.



4        Effects of the China Shock under the Baseline Specification

4.1        Calibration of DNWR and Labor Supply Elasticity

        For our baseline specification, we assume that there is a single broad sector in the labor
market. This implies that we do not need to calibrate the parameter  , which governs the
degree of mobility between different broad sectors, although we do need to take a stand on  ,
which governs labor supply choice. We also assume that that all countries outside the U.S. have
a flexible exchange rate that adjusts in such a way that they retain full employment, implying
that i = 0 for all i > M. We do not calibrate  and  separately ­ since only their relative value
matters ­ and instead assume that  is 1, so that the burden of adjustment falls entirely on , as
in Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2016).
        We choose  and  simultaneously to match two critical empirical estimates obtained by
ADH. The first one is that a $1,000 per worker increase in import exposure to China increases
the unemployment to population rate by 0.22 percentage points. The second one is that the
same rise in import exposure increases the labor force non-participation to population rate by
0.55 percentage points.13 In broad terms,  governs the amount of unemployment generated
by exposure to China for a given  , while  governs the fall in the labor force generated by
exposure to China for a given .
        The calibration results in values of  = 0.984 and  = 5.9. Figure 1 provides an illustration
12 One
     difference between our exposure measure and the one in ADH is the use of value-added instead of
 employment shares as weights. However, note that in our model, labor is the factor of value added, and
 hence VAi,s,2000 = Wi,b(s),2000 Li,s,2000 . If there is a single broad sector then Wi,b(s),2000 = Wi,2000 s and hence
    VAi,s,2000   L
            = Lii,,s
    VAi,s,2000
                     ,2000
                   s,2000
                           . We re-normalize our exposure measure to have the same mean as the ADH measure for
   comparability purposes.
13 These results correspond to the ones in Panel B of Tables 5 in ADH. Following ADH, we also take the 2006-2008

   averages of unemployment and labor force participation in our estimation. We note that although ADH run
   their regressions at the level of commuting zones rather than states, when we run the same regressions at the
   state level we get very similar results ­ see discussion in Section 6.4.


                                                         19
of how the identification of  and  works. Panel (a) of that figure shows a scatter plot of the
increase in unemployment against the exposure to China for the calibrated level of  = 5.9
and different levels of . We see that a higher  leads to a steeper slope in the regression of
unemployment on exposure to China (the coefficient is reported in the legend for convenience).
For the calibrated parameter value of  = 0.984, the coefficient obtained in the regression is 0.22,
which is the target that we obtained from ADH. Similarly, panel (b) of Figure 1 shows a scatter
plot of the decrease in labor force participation against the exposure to China for the calibrated
level of  = 0.984 and different levels of  . We see that a higher  leads to a steeper slope in the
regression of labor force participation on exposure to China (the coefficients are also reported
in the legend). For the calibrated parameter value of  = 5.9, the coefficient obtained in the
regression is 0.55, which is the target that we obtained from ADH.
     Our estimate for  falls squarely in the range advocated by Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2016)
who coincidentally also obtain an annual  of 0.984 (after "normalizing"  to one as we do).14
This estimate implies that wages can fall up to 1.6% annually. On the other hand, since the
labor force participation is around 2/3, our estimate for  implies a labor supply elasticity of
approximately 2.15 This elasticity is relatively high compared to the common intertemporal
micro estimates in the literature (Chetty et al., 2012; Martinez et al., 2019; Tortarolo et al., 2019).
More recently and for the case of the U.S., Mui and Schoefer (2020) nonparametrically measure
the global extensive-margin aggregate labor supply curve. They find non-constant elasticities
along the curve, with smaller values of around 0.6 for large perturbations (consistent with the
micro evidence), but larger values of around 3 for minor deviations. Overall, they find that for
the case of local fluctuations, the curve appears well approximated by elasticities that are well
above the micro-estimates and much closer to our calibrated value.




14 Using  a set of countries that excludes the U.S., Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2016) obtain a quarterly value of
    = 0.996. This value corresponds to an annual  of 0.984. However, they end up using a  of 0.96 in their paper
   to be conservative.
15 Here we have used the fact that, in our model, labor force participation is l =                      ln(l / L)
                                                                               L     +µ , implying that  ln  =
    (1 - l / L ) .


                                                       20
                               6
                                                                                    delta=0.980, Coeff=0.00
                                                                                    delta=0.982, Coeff=0.07
                               5                                                    delta=0.984, Coeff=0.22
                                                                                    delta=0.986, Coeff=0.43
    Increase in Unemployment                                                        delta=0.988, Coeff=0.60
                               4


                               3


                               2


                               1


                               0


                                    0           1           2          3            4           5             6
                                                                Exposure to China
                                        (a) Unemployment increase vs. exposure for different deltas
                               5

                               4

                               3
Decrease in LFP




                               2

                               1

                               0

                               -1

                                                                                    kappa=3.90, Coeff=0.39
                               -2                                                   kappa=4.90, Coeff=0.48
                                                                                    kappa=5.90, Coeff=0.55
                               -3                                                   kappa=6.90, Coeff=0.63
                                                                                    kappa=7.90, Coeff=0.70
                               -4
                                    0           1           2          3            4           5             6
                                                                Exposure to China
                                             (b) LFP decrease vs exposure for different kappas

                                            Figure 1: Illustration of the Identification of  and 


                                                                     21
4.2      Comparison of Cross-Sectional results with ADH

      We now use the calibrated model to study the effects of the China shock across the different
U.S. states. We first obtain the changes in wages, employment, unemployment, labor force
participation, and real wages for all the 87 regions included in our model. Then we run OLS
regressions across U.S. states of the changes in the variables of interest on the exposure measure
in Equation (15). We present the resulting coefficients in Table 1, along with the analogous
coefficients from ADH.
      Column (1) of Table 1 reports the results of ADH.16 The first two rows correspond to our
targeted regression coefficients. As mentioned above, these coefficients indicate that an ad-
ditional $1,000 of exposure to the China shock leads to an increase in the unemployment to
population share by 0.22 percentage points and an increase the labor force non-participation
to population ratio by 0.55 percentage points. The coefficients in the third and fourth rows
imply that additional exposure to China decreases the manufacturing employment to popu-
lation share by 0.59 percentage points and the non-manufacturing employment to population
share by 0.18 percentage points (this result is not significantly different from zero). Finally,
the coefficients in the fifth and sixth rows show that additional exposure to China lowers non-
manufacturing wages by 0.76 percent and increases manufacturing wages by 0.15 percent (this
result is not significantly different from zero).
      Column (2) of Table 1 presents the results of our baseline model. We focus on the results
related to employment and wages in this section, and discuss the welfare effects in Section 4.4.
Columns (3) and (4) present results for versions of the model that incorporate mobility frictions
between manufacturing and non-manufacturing, which we discuss in Section 5.
      Our results in column (2) show that exposure to China measured as in ADH leads to a
fall in manufacturing and non-manufacturing employment of 0.32 percentage points and 0.45
percentage points, respectively. These are moments that we did not target in our calibration.17
Our results from the baseline model understate the fall in manufacturing employment and
overstate the fall in non-manufacturing employment. As we discuss in Section 5, the model can

16 Specifically,
             we use the ADH estimates presented in their panel B of Table 5, and panel B of Table 7.
17 The
     only restriction is that the coefficients have to add up to 0.77 since this is the sum of the targeted unemploy-
  ment and NILF coefficients.


                                                         22
     Table 1: Employment, wage, and welfare effects of exposure to China across U.S. regions
     and associated parameters generating them

                                                  ADH        Baseline      MF       DNWRM
                                                   (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)
      Change in Population Shares
         Unemployment (targeted)                  0.221         0.221       0.221        0.221
         NILF (targeted)                          0.553         0.553       0.553        0.553
         Mfg Employment                          -0.596        -0.320      -0.269       -0.555
         Non-mfg Employment                      -0.178        -0.453      -0.505       -0.219
      Percentage Changes
         Mfg Wage                                 0.150        -0.577      -0.397       -0.027
         Non-mfg Wage                            -0.761        -0.577      -0.652       -1.201
      Welfare
         Welfare vs exposure                                   -0.091      -0.096       -0.109
         Mean welfare change                                    0.218       0.267        0.120
         Mean welfare change no DNWR                            0.315       0.367        0.355
      Parameters
                                                                5.898       5.642       5.623
                                                                  Inf       5.642       5.623
         Mfg                                                    0.984       0.982       0.992
         Non-Mfg                                                0.984       0.982       0.000
     Notes: The changes for the first four coefficients (the employment results) are measured
     from 2000 to an average of 2006-2008, multiplied by 10/7 to turn into decadal changes, and
     the shares of employment are measured as percentage of the population. Wages are sim-
     ply measured in percentage change (between 2000 and 2006-2008), still turned into decadal
     changes. Welfare is the present value of per period utility change.  is the parameter that
     governs substitution between home and market production,  is the one that governs sub-
     stitution between manufacturing and non-manufacturing and the 's govern the DNWR.
     Column 1 reproduces the ADH results from their Tables 5 (panel B, first row) and 7 (Panel
     B, columns 1 and 4), stars denote significance, one star for 10%, two for 5%, and three for
     1%. Column 2 gives the results in our baseline model with no mobility frictions. Column
     3 incorporates mobility frictions and has the same delta in both broad sectors. Column 4
     keeps mobility frictions but imposes the DNWR only in manufacturing. In column (2)  is
     reported as "Inf" because the baseline model does not incorporate mobility frictions, which
     can be interpreted as implying that the elasticity between broad sectors is infinite.



match these two ADH moments better if we allow for mobility frictions across manufacturing
and non-manufacturing, and assume that the DNWR only applies to the manufacturing sector.
    Regarding the effect of exposure to China on wages, our baseline model without mobility
frictions displays the same impact on manufacturing and non-manufacturing wages by design.
However, given this restriction, the model still performs relatively well, since the fall in wages


                                                 23
of 0.57 percent that we find in our model is very close to the weighted average of the ADH
results using employment shares as weights.


4.3      Aggregate Employment Effects

      One of the advantages of our general equilibrium model is that we can go beyond cross-
sectional estimates to obtain the aggregate effects of the China shock on employment and other
variables. In Figure 2, we plot three variables related to the labor market as an average across
all U.S. states. The top panel plots the cumulative change in employment over population.
This variable falls by 1.8% from 2000 to 2004 and subsequently recovers to end roughly 1%
higher in 2010. In the middle panel, we plot the cumulative change in labor force participation
over population. This variable falls by 1% from 2000 to 2004 before recovering to end the
period roughly 1% higher.18 Finally, in the bottom panel, we plot the cumulative change in
unemployment. This variable increased by 0.8 percentage points from 2000 to 2004, falling
back to zero in 2010, a result of the fact that in our calibration there are no shocks after 2007.19
      It is interesting to note that the effect of the China shock on labor force participation re-
verses sign throughout the transition. On impact, the shock leads to a temporary decline in
participation, stemming from the fact that unemployment discourages participation due to the
risk of participating in the labor market but not being able to obtain a job. However, when the
China shock stops hitting the economy, and the nominal wage has room to fully adjust, labor
force participation ends up increasing. This increase happens because, in the absence of nom-
inal rigidities, the China shock is a positive terms-of-trade shock for the U.S., which translates
to a higher real wage and an increase in labor supply.
      The results imply that most states experience both a long-run increase in the real wage
and a temporary increase in unemployment. This may seem paradoxical, but it is a natural
consequence of a shock that implies both an improvement in the terms of trade and a decline
in the export price index. To see this more clearly, consider a small open economy and imagine
that the price index of its exports falls while the price index of its imports falls even more.

18 The final cumulative change in employment and labor force participation must be the same because all unem-
   ployment disappears in the long run.
19 We view this feature of the model as desirable, since it is hard to square a permanent unemployment effect of

   the China shock with the historically low levels of unemployment observed in the U.S. between 2016 and 2019.


                                                      24
                                                     Cumulative change in US emp.



         US change in emp., in %
                                             1

                                           0.5

                                             0

                                           -0.5

                                            -1

                                           -1.5

                                            -2
                                             2000   2002   2004        2006   2008   2010
                                                                  Year
                                                     Cumulative change in US LFP
         US change in LFP, in %




                                             1


                                           0.5


                                             0


                                           -0.5


                                            -1
                                             2000   2002   2004        2006   2008   2010
                                                                  Year
                                                    Cumulative change in US unemp.
                                             1
               US change in unemp., in %




                                           0.8


                                           0.6


                                           0.4


                                           0.2


                                             0
                                             2000   2002   2004        2006   2008   2010
                                                                  Year
Figure 2: Paths of changes in different employment-related variables for the U.S. average


                                                                  25
Since the terms of trade have improved, the real wage and employment would increase in the
absence of nominal frictions. However, the fact that the price index of its exports has fallen
requires the nominal wage to decline, and if this decline is higher than 1 - , there would be
temporary unemployment.
      We illustrate this mechanism via Figure 3. Both panels in the figure have the nominal
wage in the vertical axis and employment in the horizontal axis.20 Panel (a) illustrates the
situation when there is no DNWR. The China shock leads to a fall in labor demand illustrated
by a movement from L D to L D . However, the China shock also leads to a fall in prices, which
increases the real wage and leads to an increase in labor supply from LS to LS . The final result
is a fall in the nominal wage from W0 to W  , a fall in prices from P0 to P (not illustrated), an
increase in the real wage from W0 / P0 to W  / P (prices fall more than wages), and an increase
in the amount of labor supplied from L0 to L .
      Panel (b) of Figure 3 shows the adjustment in the presence of DNWR assuming that 3 W0 <
W  < 2 W0 . In the first year, the wage only falls from W0 to W1  W0 and employment falls
from L0 to L1 , as determined by the demand curve. Since the wage does not fully adjust in
the first year, the fall in prices is also smaller than in the frictionless case, and hence the labor
supply curve only moves from LS to L1
                                    S . The gap between the labor supplied at point A and

labor demanded L1 is the level of unemployment. In the second year wages adjust further
                                                           S , employment increases from
down (to W2  W1 = 2 W0 ), the labor supply curve moves to L2
L1 to L2 , labor supplied moves from point A to point B, and unemployment decreases. In the
third year, wages finally adjust fully and there is no longer unemployment. Notice that the
final equilibrium of the economy is the same with and without DNWR, and it involves higher
labor supply, a higher real wage, and no unemployment.


4.4        Welfare Effects

      We find that U.S. states more exposed to the China shock experience lower model-implied
welfare gains: a $1,000 per worker increase in exposure to China decreases welfare by around
9 basis points (this is the coefficient displayed in Table 1, column (2), row 7). Figure 4 presents
a scatter plot of the percentage change in welfare across states against exposure to China, while
20 Since   the nominal wage is in the vertical axis, movements in prices lead to a shift in the labor supply curve.


                                                           26
                       W

                                                                           LS
                                                                            S
                                                                           LINT

                                                                            S
                                                                           LINT

                      W0
                                                                           LS
              W1 = W0

             W2 = 2 W0

                      W                                                    LD

                                                                 LD

                                             L1     L2L0 L                      L
                                  (a) Case without DNWR
                       W

                                                                           LS
                                                                            S
                                                                           L1

                                                                            S
                                                                           L2

                      W0
                                                                            S
                                                                           L3
              W1 = W0
                                                     A
             W2 = 2 W0
                                                         B
                      W                                                    LD

                                                                 LD

                                             L1     L2       L                  L
                                   (b) Case with DNWR

Figure 3: Illustration of wage and employment effects, with and without DNWR. The nom-
inal wage is in the vertical axis, hence price movements results in shifts in the labor supply
curve. Employment is in the horizontal axis.


                                             27
Figure 5 displays a welfare map across the 50 U.S. states. There are 37 states that gain from the
China shock while 13 states experience losses. Of these 13 states, only 3 experience a worsening
of their terms of trade, which imply a lower steady state real wage. The other 10 states that
suffer losses actually experience improvements of their terms of trade, but these are dominated
by large temporary increases in unemployment due to the DNWR.
    The unemployment and labor-force participation margins play very different roles in de-
termining these welfare changes: increases in unemployment due to a binding DNWR lead to
worse welfare outcomes, while changes in labor-force participation allow regions to mitigate
negative shocks and benefit more from positive shocks. To understand the role of DNWR, we
use a model that has no DNWR but where we still match the overall effect of the China shock
on employment (i.e., the sum of the first two rows of column 1 of Table 1, amounting to 0.77).
This implies a halving of the effect of exposure to China on welfare (from 9 basis points to 4.5
basis points). To understand the role of the labor-force participation margin, we can set  = 0
(which implies that households cannot reallocate from home production to employment), and
recalibrate  so as to match the effect of exposure to China on unemployment (i.e., the 0.22 in
the first row of column 1 of Table 1). This leads to an increase in the effect of exposure to China
on welfare from 9 basis points to 11 basis points.
    When we consider the U.S. as a whole, and measure overall welfare by the population-
weighted average across U.S. states, we see that the China shock leads to an increase in welfare
of 22 basis points. This is true even though we match the unemployment effects captured by
ADH, which have sometimes been interpreted as implying that the China shock had adverse
overall welfare effects.
    It is interesting to compare the results of our baseline model against those from a model
without nominal rigidity (i.e., with  = 0) and with  recalibrated in order to match a 0.77 effect
of exposure on the share of the population that is not employed. In this alternative version of
the model, all but 3 states experience welfare gains from the China shock, and the U.S. as a
whole experiences gains of 32 basis points. This is comparable to the gains obtained in recent
papers studying the same setting (Caliendo, Dvorkin, and Parro, 2019; Galle, Rodriguez-Clare,
and Yi, 2020). However, to match our 0.77 target, the model without DNWR requires a value
of  of approximately 46, implying an unrealistically high labor supply elasticity of around 15.


                                                28
                                           1


                                         0.8
            Welfare change, in percent
                                         0.6


                                         0.4


                                         0.2


                                           0


                                         -0.2


                                         -0.4
                                                0          1         2          3            4        5            6
                                                                         Exposure to China

                                                Figure 4: Welfare change vs exposure to China across U.S. states


    Finally, Table 2 shows the different welfare changes in the model with and without DNWR,
for several values of the discount factor . For  = 0.95, the model without DNWR overesti-
mates the welfare gains by approximately 33% relative to our baseline model. For  = 0.99 this
overestimation is just 8%, while for  = 0.91 it is 56%.



5    Extensions
    In this section we discuss several extensions of the baseline model. First, we introduce
mobility frictions between manufacturing and non-manufacturing. Second, we discuss how to
introduce some of the increases in trade surpluses that happened in China between 2000 and
2007 as an integral part of the China shock. Finally, we analyze how our baseline results change
under a different exchange rate regime for other countries, or a different nominal anchor. For
                                                                   ^ China,s,t }, following the
each of these alternative models we recalibrate the China shock, { A
procedure described in Section 3.



                                                                              29
                                                                                                     (.5,1]
                                                                                                     (.25,.5]
                                                                                                     (0,.25]
                                                                                                     [-.35,0]


          Figure 5: Welfare across U.S. states for calibrated parameter values in the baseline model


5.1       Mobility Frictions between Manufacturing and Non-Manufacturing

      Our baseline specification assumes a single broad sector, which implies free mobility be-
tween all sectors and a single wage for all workers, as shown in column (2) of Table 1. We now
explore the implications of mobility frictions in our model, by allowing for two broad sectors
with costly mobility between them. The first broad sector is composed of all manufacturing
sectors, and the second one is composed of the remaining non-manufacturing sectors.21
      Besides the parameters  and , we now also need to calibrate the parameter  governing
the elasticity of switching between the two broad sectors. We could also calibrate two different
 parameters, one for each broad sector. We perform two separate exercises in the model with
mobility frictions, where we make different assumptions regarding the additional parameters
to be calibrated.
      In the first exercise, the manufacturing (Mfg) and non-manufacturing (Non-Mfg) broad
sectors have the same DNWR parameter, i.e., M f g = Non- M f g , while in the second one only
the broad manufacturing sector faces DNWR, (i.e., M f g > 0 and Non- M f g = 0). For parsi-
mony, we impose that  =  in both exercises, which represents a natural benchmark where

21 This
     means that b(s) = 1  s  12, and b(s) = 2  s > 12. Manufacturing sectors (1-12) are part of the broad
  manufacturing sector, while services and agriculture (13 and 14) make up the non-manufacturing broad sector.


                                                     30
            Table 2: Welfare gains from the China shock across different discount factors

                                      =0         calibrated     % decrease
                                       (1)            (2)          (3)
                          0.99        0.381          0.349         8.48
                          0.97        0.351          0.279        20.59
                          0.95        0.324          0.218        32.61
                          0.93        0.298          0.166        44.46
                          0.91        0.274          0.120        56.12
     Notes: This table displays the average welfare gains from the China shock, for the U.S. as
     a whole, across different values of the discount factor . Column (1) displays the gains in
     percent when the DNWR is inactive ( = 0). Column (2) displays the gains in percent for
     our calibrated  value of 0.984. Finally, column (3) displays the percentage decrease in the
     welfare gain when going from  = 0 to the calibrated .



mobility frictions across sectors are the same as those between home and market production.
We thus calibrate two parameters in each exercise: the labor elasticity parameter ( =  ) and
the DNWR parameter (M f g = Non- M f g in the first exercise and M f g in the second one). We
use those parameters to match the same two ADH targets as in the baseline calibration.
    Column (3) of Table 1 presents the results of the first exercise. Relative to our baseline
model, we find that  falls to 0.982 while  remains relatively similar, at 5.64. As expected, the
presence of mobility frictions results in different wage responses in the different broad sectors.
In particular, we find that the impact of exposure to China on the wage in non-manufacturing is
almost twice the one in manufacturing (approaching the ADH empirical pattern). However, the
sectoral employment changes move in the wrong direction: the coefficient of exposure to China
on non-manufacturing employment becomes more negative and the one for manufacturing
gets closer to zero (moving away from the ADH pattern). The welfare results in this exercise are
overall more favorable than in the baseline model: both with and without DNWR the economy
experiences more welfare gains from the China shock.
    Intuitively, mobility frictions lead to a stronger required decline in the manufacturing
wage, since manufacturing is the sector most negatively affected by the China shock. This
leads the manufacturing wage to hit the lower bound imposed by the DNWR in most U.S.
states (in 44 states in 2007), limiting the variation in the manufacturing wage across states more
and less exposed to the China shock. In contrast, the non-manufacturing wage hits the DNWR


                                                 31
less often (in 30 states in 2007) and this allows for a higher slope in the relationship between
exposure and the wage change in non-manufacturing.
    Column (4) of Table 1 presents the results of the second exercise. The calibrated  is almost
the same as in column (3), but the calibrated  of 0.992 is higher than before. A higher value
of  is intuitive, because the DNWR only applies to the manufacturing sector. Consequently,
it needs to bind more strongly in order to match the required response of unemployment to
exposure. In this exercise the responses of the employment shares to exposure in each broad
sector are very close to the ones in ADH, even though these moments were not targeted in
the calibration. The wage responses are also similar to ADH, with the manufacturing wage
exhibiting a coefficient that is very close to zero and the non-manufacturing wage responding
strongly to exposure (actually this responds too much relative to ADH). Overall, the results
in column (4) of Table 1 are very close to the results obtained by ADH and hence this model
provides a good benchmark to understand the effects of trade shocks on unemployment, labor
force participation, wages, and welfare. Using this version of the model, we find that the U.S.
experiences an average welfare gain of 12 basis points (weighing each state by its population),
which is only around one-third of what the model without DNWR would predict.
    Given the improved performance of the version of the model in which there is DNWR only
in the manufacturing sector, it is worth discussing whether this is a realistic assumption. There
are a few papers documenting a substantial degree of heterogeneity in wage rigidity across
sectors and occupations for different contexts (Radowski and Bonin, 2010; Du Caju et al., 2012).
More recently and for the U.S., Hazell and Taska (2019) explore this heterogeneity using a
dataset containing wages for new vacancies with specific job descriptions for each establish-
ment. Their paper finds that production workers face a higher degree of DNWR than workers
in non-production occupations. Several elements could explain this fact, for example stronger
unionization in manufacturing relative to services. However, we prefer to interpret the model
with DNWR only in manufacturing as a rough way to capture forces pushing for reallocation
of labor from manufacturing to services. Even with the same DNWR in the two sectors, these
forces would make the DNWR in manufacturing more likely to be binding.




                                               32
      Table 3: Employment, wage, and welfare effects of exposure to China across U.S. regions
      and associated parameters generating them (continued)

                                           Baseline     Def. Low    Def. High     Fixed ER     U.S. NA
                                             (2)           (5)         (6)           (7)         (8)
 Change in Population Shares
    Unemployment (targeted)                    0.221        0.221         0.221        0.221      0.142
    NILF (targeted)                            0.553        0.553         0.553        0.553      0.553
    Mfg Employment                            -0.320       -0.331        -0.376       -0.299     -0.260
    Non-mfg Employment                        -0.453       -0.443        -0.398       -0.474     -0.435
 Percentage Changes
    Mfg Wage                                  -0.577       -0.553        -0.442       -0.582     -0.634
    Non-mfg Wage                              -0.577       -0.553        -0.442       -0.582     -0.634
 Welfare
    Welfare vs exposure                       -0.091       -0.088        -0.075       -0.086     -0.129
    Mean welfare change                        0.218        0.232         0.299        0.216      0.011
    Mean welfare change no DNWR                0.315        0.333         0.419        0.299      0.236
 Parameters
                                               5.898        6.034         6.761       5.992       8.639
                                                 Inf          Inf           Inf         Inf         Inf
    Mfg                                        0.984        0.985         0.988       0.989       1.000
    Non-Mfg                                    0.984        0.985         0.988       0.989       1.000
      Notes: All definitions are the same as the ones in Table 1. Column 2, which contains the re-
      sults from the baseline specification, repeats Column 2 from Table 1 to facilitate comparison.
      Column 5 gives the results from our baseline model where we introduce a modest increase
      in Chinese surplus as part of the China shock, while in column 6 this increase is larger. Col-
      umn 7 gives the results when other countries have fixed exchange rates relative to the U.S.
      and column 8 gives the results when the baseline nominal anchor is replaced by a nominal
      anchor which indicates that U.S. GDP grows at a constant rate.



5.2    Changing Deficits as Part of the China Shock

      In the previous versions of our model, we kept the deficits for all regions constant in terms
of world GDP. However, it is plausible that part of the increase in Chinese surpluses that oc-
curred between 2000 and 2007 could be part of the China shock. In this section, we explore what
happens if, besides a Chinese productivity increase, the China shock also entails an increase in
the Chinese surplus, which has to be offset by a rise in the deficits of other regions. In particu-
lar, we perform two separate exercises where we explore different assumptions regarding how
we treat the increase in the Chinese surplus.
      In the first exercise, we only incorporate the increase in Chinese surpluses that occurred


                                                   33
because China's GDP increased relative to world GDP (i.e., we keep the surplus to GDP ratio
constant in China), while in the second exercise we incorporate the changes in the Chinese
surplus observed in the data. An increase in the surplus of China implies an equal change in
the combined deficits of the other countries, since total deficits must always sum to zero. We
keep the deficits of all other countries besides the U.S. unchanged in terms of world GDP in
both exercises, thus having the U.S. deficit offset the whole increase in China's surplus. We
distribute this increased deficit across U.S. states according to their shares in U.S. GDP.
        The results for these two exercises are shown in Table 3, which has the same structure as
Table 1 (the first column repeats Column (2) in Table 1, to facilitate comparisons of the new
results with those in the baseline). Column (5) presents the results of the first exercise, while
column (6) shows the results from the second exercise. Column (5) is labeled "Def. Low", be-
cause the U.S. deficit increases moderately (i.e., around 10% in total over the 2000-2007 period),
while column (6) is labeled "Def. High", because the U.S. deficit rises substantially (i.e., around
57% in total over the 2000-2007 period).
        The results in column (5) are very similar to those of our baseline calibration, although
manufacturing employment falls slightly more, wages fall marginally less, and  and  both
increase slightly. We also find that welfare reacts less to exposure and that the welfare increase
is higher compared to our baseline model.22 The higher gain happens because, in the presence
of trade costs, a transfer from abroad leads to a worldwide shift in demand towards domestic
goods and this in turn improves the recipient's terms of trade. The changes from the base-
line model to column (5) are amplified in column (6), because the U.S. deficit grows more in
response to the China shock, but the overall pattern is the same.
        More importantly, the changes in trade imbalances in both exercises require an increase in
the wage in U.S. states relative to China, thereby relieving the pressures caused by the pro-
ductivity increase in China and making the DNWR less binding. This is reflected in a smaller
increase in U.S. unemployment: whereas the U.S. 2007 unemployment rate corresponding to
column 2 is 0.95%, the one corresponding to column 5 is 0.9% and the one corresponding to
column 6 is 0.7%.
22 Asin Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare (2014), we measure welfare as real income rather than real expenditure.
  This avoids attributing a positive direct gain to the foreign transfer. Taking into consideration the direct gain
  would risk treating deficits as a gift and assuming away their future costs.


                                                        34
5.3    Other Exchange Rate Regimes and Nominal Anchors

      So far, we have assumed that all countries outside of the U.S. have a fully flexible ex-
change rate with respect to the U.S. dollar. Adjustments in their exchange rate then ensure that
the DNWR never binds, and hence countries outside of the U.S. never experience any unem-
ployment. Additionally, our nominal anchor assumed that the world nominal GDP grows at a
constant rate. In this section, we consider the consequences of making different assumptions
for these features, presenting two exercises. The first exercise imposes that all other countries
have a fixed exchange rate with respect to the U.S. dollar. Thus, compared to the baseline, we
will no longer have countries devaluing their currencies relative to the U.S. dollar, implying
less of a need for the wage to fall in the U.S., and hence lower unemployment in U.S. labor
markets. The second exercise modifies the nominal anchor, assuming that U.S. nominal GDP
(instead of world nominal GDP) grows at a constant rate. Here the DNWR will only prevent
the necessary adjustments in the relative wages across U.S. states, but not between U.S. states
and China, implying weaker effects.
      In the first exercise, a fixed exchange rate implies that now all countries face a potentially
binding DNWR, Wi,b,t  b Wi,b,t-1          i. The nominal anchor is still the one in our baseline
model, implying that world GDP grows at a rate  = 1. Column (7) of Table 3 presents the
results of this exercise. Overall, our results are remarkably robust to the new assumption re-
garding the exchange rate regime. The most notable change is that  increases from 0.984 to
0.989. This increase in  occurs because the other countries "absorb" part of the China shock,
so a higher  is needed in the U.S. to match the target response of unemployment to exposure.
All other results are very close to the ones in our baseline model.
      In the second exercise, the new nominal rule, in changes, is given by

                                    M                    M
                                   W      ^ i,t Yi,t-1 =   Yi,t-1 .
                                   ^ i ,t L
                                   i =1                  i =1


Column (8) of Table 3 presents the results of the model with this nominal rule. In this case, it is
not possible to match both ADH targets simultaneously, even when setting  = 1. The reason
is that now the DNWR only imposes limits to the adjustments in relative wage changes across


                                                 35
U.S. states, and the China shock only requires mild changes in such relative wages.23
        At first pass, a U.S. nominal anchor might seem like a more natural approach than the
world nominal anchor used in our baseline specification. However, the fact that the baseline
specification works better to explain the effects of the China shock, indicates that perhaps some
nominal features cannot be captured by the U.S. nominal anchor. For example, suppose that
China wanted to avoid large nominal wage increases to control inflation and also wanted to
avoid appreciations to preserve competitiveness (a practice they are widely regarded as having
pursued during the 2000-2007 period). Such a scenario would require a fall in the U.S. wage in
dollars that would then hit the DNWR. This is something that can be parsimoniously captured
(albeit in a reduced form) with the world nominal anchor, but not with the U.S. nominal anchor.
Another type of nominal features that are not present with the U.S. nominal anchor, but are
captured in a reduced-formed but parsimonious manner by the world nominal anchor, are
those related to the "Dominant Currency Paradigm" described by Gopinath et al. (2020).



6       Discussion

6.1      Different Exposure Measures

        The measure of exposure to China that we have been using throughout the paper (defined
in Equation 15) follows the one in ADH. This measure is a Bartik instrument where the "shift
component" is given by the predicted change in imports from China to the U.S. in a sector and
the "share component" is given by the share of employment (or value-added) in that sector in
that region. This exposure measure cannot fully capture the welfare effects of the China shock,
because it misses the impact through consumer prices.24
        As we show in Appendix C, in a simple neoclassical environment with an upward slop-
ing labor supply curve but without nominal rigidities, a sufficient statistic for the first-order

23 Itis also worth noting that, with  = 1, the unemployment generated by the China shock stays in the respective
   states forever, so in this case, the model displays "permanent" unemployment effects. Consequently, the welfare
   gains from the China shock are much lower, as the DNWR leads to the loss of over 90% of the gains that would
   accrue without rigidities.
24 Consider for example a region that did not produce a good at all (and hence would have a zero value-added

   share) but consumed it in a positive amount. This region would benefit from an increase in Chinese productivity
   in that sector, even though the ADH measure would imply a zero exposure of that sector to the shock.


                                                       36
changes in employment resulting from the China shock would use net exports as the "share"
component, as in

                                                                          2007-2000
                                          TXi,s,2000 - TMi,s,2000  XC,US,s
                                          S
                      ExposureiNX                                            ,                             (16)
                                     s =1
                                                   Ri,2000        RUS,s,2000

where TXi,s,2000 are the total sales of region i in sector s in year 2000, and TMi,s,2000 is total
expenditure of region i on sector s in year 2000. This captures the effect of the shock on the
economy's terms of trade, which in turn affects the equilibrium real wage and employment
according to labor demand and supply elasticities. In contrast, when the wage does not adjust
because of the DNWR, the labor or value-added shares become relevant, since the change in
employment is determined entirely by the shift in the demand curve. Of course, in a more
realistic situation where wages are sometimes fixed due to the DNWR but can eventually adjust
to their frictionless level, then both measures of exposure are expected to be relevant.
        To illustrate this point, we regress the state-level changes in welfare and employment gen-
erated by the model on both exposure measures (and a constant), with and without the DNWR.
When there is no DNWR, we expect that only the net export exposure measure would be sig-
nificant, while when there is DNWR we expect both exposure measures to be significant.
        The results are reported in Table 4. Columns (1) and (3) reveal that, without DNWR, only
the net export exposure measure is significant (at the 1% level) for employment and welfare,
while ADH exposure is not significant. In contrast, columns (2) and (4) show that in the model
with DNWR both the ADH exposure measure and the net export exposure measure are signifi-
cant. These results indicate that a mechanism similar to DNWR is likely to be active in the U.S.
economy, and this is what leads to the ADH exposure measure being relevant.25


6.2      Quantifying Job Losses

        In this section we attempt to put some numbers to the employment changes that we have
documented in previous sections of the paper. Recall that ADH find a cross-sectional estimate
25 Inour framework, nominal rigidities lead to a separate effect of labor demand on employment over and above
  those that would come through terms-of-trade effects. Adao et al. (2019) obtain similar effects through a more
  general reduced-form specification of the labor market where labor supply is a function of the wage and the
  consumption price entering separately rather than through the real wage.


                                                      37
     Table 4: "Horse race" between different exposure measures in the baseline model with and
     without DNWR

                              (1)                (2)                (3)                  (4)
                       Welf. No DNWR        Welf. DNWR        Empl. No DNWR         Empl. DNWR
   Constant                   0.539***            0.564***            1.799***            3.305***
                             (0.059)             (0.069)             (0.200)             (0.808)
   ADH Exposure              -0.022              -0.046**            -0.048              -0.855***
                             (0.019)             (0.022)             (0.064)             (0.261)
   NX Exposure               -0.088***           -0.107***           -0.312***           -0.879***
                             (0.019)             (0.022)             (0.064)             (0.261)
   N                            50                 50                  50                  50
   R squared                   0.408              0.473               0.409               0.444
   Mean dep. var.              0.247              0.159               0.849              -1.255
     Notes: This table shows the results of regressing several variables of interest on a constant,
     ADH exposure, and net export exposure. The exposure variables are described in the text.
     The dependent variables are: welfare change from the China shock in the baseline model
     without DNWR (column 1), welfare change from the China shock in the baseline model
     with DNWR (column 2), percentage change in total employment between 2000 and 2007 in
     the baseline model without DNWR (column 3), and percentage change in total employment
     between 2000 and 2007 in the baseline model with DNWR (column 4).



indicating that a $1,000 per worker increase in import exposure to China leads to a decrease
in the employment to population ratio of 77 basis points (22 basis points from increased un-
employment and 55 basis points from reduced labor force participation). We start by using
the ADH estimate in a naive calculation that assumes that a U.S. region with zero ADH ex-
posure would have no employment changes (meaning that the cross-sectional regression has
an absolute intercept of zero). This calculation implies that the China shock generated em-
ployment losses of 0.77 · 2.63 · 220 million = 4.4 million jobs (where 2.63 is the mean exposure,
and 220 million is approximately the U.S. population over 16 years between 2000 and 2007).
However, according to our model, U.S. states with zero ADH exposure to the China shock in-
crease their employment because they experience a positive terms-of-trade shock. This means
that the cross-sectional regression of employment on exposure to China has a negative inter-
cept. In particular, the intercept in the regression is approximately -1.5. A back-of-the-envelope
calculation would add 1.5 · 220 = 3.3 million jobs because of the intercept. Combining the inter-
cept number of 3.3 million jobs gained with the cross-sectional estimate of 4.4 million jobs lost,


                                                  38
would indicate that the net effect is a loss of 1.1 millions jobs.
      The previous discussion is based on a simple regression in order to compare with ADH
and discuss the importance of the intercept in the regression. However, with our full general
equilibrium model we do not need to perform such simplified calculations, and we can com-
pute the actual G.E. effects of the China shock in 2007. Our model implies that 1.28 millions
jobs were lost by 2007 due to the China shock. This number is similar to the 1.1 million estimate
obtained from our back-of-the-envelope calculations incorporating a non-zero intercept.
      It is important to point out that in all of these estimates we stop the accounting of job losses
in 2007. If we continue the analysis into further years, we would obtain that the China shock
actually led to a net job gain in the U.S., since labor force participation is roughly 1% higher
once the China shock completely dissipates.


6.3    Search and Matching vs. DNWR

      While we have focused on DNWR as a way to generate unemployment in an otherwise
standard quantitative trade model, we acknowledge that another approach would be to add
search and matching frictions in the labor market. This has been done by papers like Kim and
Vogel (2020a), Kim and Vogel (2020b), Galle et al. (2020) and Dix-Carneiro et al. (2020). As
shown in Kim and Vogel (2020b), if the cost of posting vacancies is in terms of the final good,
then a deterioration of the terms of trade leads to a decline in the real wage and an increase
in unemployment. Broadly speaking, this is as if the economy moved downwards along an
upward sloping "pseudo labor-supply curve." The problem with this approach, however, is
that ­ as shown above ­ only three U.S. states experience a deterioration of their terms of trade,
implying that unemployment would actually fall in most states (see Galle et al., 2020). In con-
trast, DNWR can lead to temporary increases in unemployment even in states that experience
improving terms of trade


6.4    States vs. Commuting Zones

      As discussed in previous sections of the paper, we have used the 0.22 and 0.55 response-
to-exposure coefficients from ADH when calibrating our model. One concern is that the cross-


                                                  39
sectional regressions in ADH are done at the commuting-zone level, while our analysis is at
the state level. The different sources of variation might lead to different response-to-exposure
coefficients. To alleviate this concern, we ran the same ADH regressions but at the state rather
than the commuting-zone level. Using actual (not model-based) data on state-level unemploy-
ment and labor force participation, we regressed the change in unemployment and the change
in the fraction of the population not-in-the-labor-force between 2000 and 2007 (where 2007 is
measured as an average between 2006 and 2008 like in ADH and turned into decadal changes)
on exposure to China. We obtain a response-to-exposure coefficient on unemployment of 0.25
at the state level, compared to the 0.22 obtained in ADH at the commuting-zone level. The 95%
confidence interval for the 0.25 estimate is between 0.15 and 0.35, which comfortably includes
the 0.22 point estimate obtained in ADH. These two estimates are very close, indicating that
the usage of the ADH targets for the state-level analysis does not seem to be problematic.
      For the fraction of the population not-in-the-labor-force, we obtain a response-to-exposure
coefficient of 0.37 at the state level, compared to the 0.55 obtained in ADH at the commuting-
zone level. The two estimates are not as close as in the unemployment case, but the 95% con-
fidence interval for the 0.37 estimate is between 0.16 and 0.58, which includes the 0.55 point
estimate obtained in ADH. Given these results, we decided to use the ADH results as targets
for our calibration rather than our own (necessarily less precise) state-level estimates. Our
analysis would not change substantially if we used the state-level estimates instead.


6.5    Costs of Mobility Across Sectors

      Workers do not incur in any costs of reallocation between home production and work
in our baseline model, or between sectors in our extension with mobility frictions. Allowing
for such costs would imply that agents' reallocation decisions would now depend on their
expectations about future shocks. If agents where myopic and never expected the China shock
to hit (even after it has already occurred in past years), our conclusions would not change.
On the other extreme, if (as in Caliendo et al., 2019) agents had perfect foresight, then some
workers would preemptively leave the manufacturing sector at the beginning of the 2000-2007
period. For a given value of , this would decrease unemployment in manufacturing, and so a
higher  would be required to match the same ADH coefficients.

                                                40
7    Conclusion
    In this paper we have added downward nominal wage rigidity to an otherwise standard
quantitative trade model to study the path of adjustment in employment after a trade shock.
Qualitatively, even a trade shock that improves an economy's terms of trade can lead to unem-
ployment if it leads to a contraction in the economy's labor demand relative to overall nominal
demand.
    We calibrate the model to match the reduced-form evidence in Autor et al. (2013), and find
that the China shock is responsible of up to 0.9 percentage points of the increase in unemploy-
ment in the U.S. over the period 2000-2007. This unemployment increase can go as high as 3
percentage points for the states affected the most. In spite of this increase in unemployment,
the U.S. as a whole still gains from the China shock. However, such gains amount to between
one third and two thirds of the gains without nominal rigidities, and there are 10 states that
experience welfare losses despite the improvement in their terms of trade.
    We acknowledge that the way we have captured nominal forces and trade imbalances in
our model is simplistic relative to the state of the art in macroeconomics. A more satisfac-
tory approach from a macroeconomic perspective would model monetary policy by adding a
Taylor Rule with a zero lower bound, forward-looking agents making savings and investment
decisions, and international financial flows affecting exchange rates, among other features. We
have instead chosen to capture these forces via simple mechanical rules so that we can have a
rich trade structure with many countries and sectors while still being able to conduct the quan-
titative analysis in a transparent way. Our hope is that this serves to identify the key elements
that future models need to incorporate.
    It is also important to emphasize that our welfare analysis is conducted at a fairly aggregate
level. In particular, we do not capture the possibly large losses accruing to households expe-
riencing unemployment spells in the absence of an appropriate safety net. Such large losses
have been documented by many authors recently, for example Autor et al. (2014) and Pierce
and Schott (2020). Thus, our results should be interpreted with caution; the decline in the gains
from the China shock could be larger if our analysis were conducted at a more granular level.



                                               41
References
A DAO , R., C. A RKOLAKIS , AND F. E SPOSITO (2019): "Spatial linkages, global shocks, and local
  labor markets: Theory and evidence," Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

A UTOR , D. H., D. D ORN ,   AND    G. H. H ANSON (2013): "The China Syndrome: Local Labor
  Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States," American Economic Review, 103,
  2121­68.

A UTOR , D. H., D. D ORN , G. H. H ANSON ,      AND    J. S ONG (2014): "Trade Adjustment: Worker-
  Level Evidence," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129, 1799­1860.

B ERAJA , M., E. H URST,   AND   J. O SPINA (2016): "The Aggregate Implications of Regional Busi-
  ness Cycles," Working Paper 21956, National Bureau of Economic Research.

C ABALLERO , R. J., E. FARHI ,    AND   P.-O. G OURINCHAS (2015): "Global Imbalances and Cur-
  rency Wars at the ZLB," Working Paper 21670, National Bureau of Economic Research.

C ALIENDO , L., M. D VORKIN ,      AND    F. PARRO (2019): "Trade and Labor Market Dynamics:
  General Equilibrium Analysis of the China Trade Shock," Econometrica, 87, 741­835.

C ALIENDO , L.   AND   F. PARRO (2015): "Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of NAFTA,"
  Review of Economic Studies, 82, 1­44.

C HETTY, R., A. G UREN , D. M ANOLI ,     AND   A. W EBER (2012): "Does Indivisible Labor Explain
  the Difference Between Micro and Macro Elasticities? A Meta-analysis of Extensive Margin
  Elasticities," NBER macroeconomics Annual, 27, 1­56.

C HODOROW-R EICH , G.      AND   J. W IELAND (2017): "Secular Business Reallocation and Business
  Cycles," Unpublished Manuscript.

C HOUDHRI , E. U., H. FARUQEE ,      AND   S. T OKARICK (2011): "Trade Liberalization, Macroeco-
  nomic Adjustment, and Welfare: How Costly Are Nominal Rigidities," IMF Economic Review,
  59, 455­487.



                                                  42
C LARIDA , R., J. G ALI ,    AND   M. G ERTLER (2002): "A simple framework for international mon-
  etary policy analysis," Journal of Monetary Economics, 49, 879­904.

C OSTINOT, A.    AND   A. R ODRIGUEZ -C LARE (2014): Trade Theory with Numbers: Quantifying the
  Consequences of Globalization, Elsevier, vol. 4 of Handbook of International Economics, 197­261.

D ALY, M. C.   AND   B. H OBIJN (2014): "Downward Nominal Wage Rigidities Bend the Phillips
  Curve," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 46, 51­93.

D AVIDSON , C.   AND   S. J. M ATUSZ (2004): International trade and labor markets: Theory, evidence,
  and policy implications, WE Upjohn Institute.

D EKLE , R., J. E ATON , AND S. K ORTUM (2007): "Unbalanced Trade," American Economic Review,
  97, 351­355.

D ICKENS , W. T., L. G OETTE , E. L. G ROSHEN , S. H OLDEN , J. M ESSINA , M. E. S CHWEITZER ,
  J. T URUNEN ,   AND    M. E. WARD (2007): "How Wages Change: Micro Evidence from the
  International Wage Flexibility Project," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21, 195­214.

D IX -C ARNEIRO , R., J. P ESSOA , R. R EYES -H EROLES ,   AND   S. T RAIBERMAN (2020): "Globaliza-
  tion, Trade Imbalances, and Labor Market Adjustment," Working Paper.

D U C AJU , P., C. F USS ,   AND   L. W INTR (2012): "Sectoral Differences in Downward Real Wage
  Rigidity: Workforce Composition, Institutions, Technology and Competition," Journal for
  Labour Market Research, 45, 7­22.

E ATON , J., S. K ORTUM ,     AND    B. N EIMAN (2013): "On Deficits and Unemployment," Revue
  Economique, 64, 405­420.

FALLY, T. (2015): "Structural gravity and fixed effects," Journal of International Economics, 97,
  76­85.

G ALI , J. AND T. M ONACELLI (2005): "Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Volatility in a Small
  Open Economy," Review of Economic Studies, 72, 707­734.

------ (2008): "Optimal Monetary and Fiscal Policy in a Currency Union," Journal of Interna-
  tional Economics, 76, 116­132.

                                                   43
------ (2016): "Understanding the Gains from Wage Flexibility: The Exchange Rate Connec-
  tion," American Economic Review, 106, 3829­68.

G ALLE , S., A. R ODRIGUEZ -C LARE , AND M. Y I (2020): "Slicing the Pie: Quantifying the Aggre-
  gate and Distributional Effects of Trade," Working Paper 23737, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

G OPINATH , G., E. B OZ , C. C ASAS , F. J. D EZ , P.-O. G OURINCHAS , AND M. P LAGBORG -M LLER
  (2020): "Dominant Currency Paradigm," American Economic Review, 110, 677­719.

G RIGSBY, J., E. H URST,   AND   A. Y ILDIRMAZ (2019): "Aggregate Nominal Wage Adjustments:
  New Evidence from Administrative Payroll Data," NBER Working Papers 25628, National
  Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

H ASAN , R., D. M ITRA , P. R ANJAN , AND R. N. A HSAN (2012): "Trade liberalization and unem-
  ployment: Theory and evidence from India," Journal of Development Economics, 97, 269­280.

H AZELL , J.   AND   B. TASKA (2019): "Downward Rigidity in the Wage for New Hires," Working
  Paper.

H EAD , K. AND T. M AYER (2002): Illusory border effects: Distance mismeasurement inflates estimates
  of home bias in trade, vol. 1, Citeseer.

H EID , B.   AND   M. L ARCH (2016): "Gravity with unemployment," Journal of International Eco-
  nomics, 101, 70­85.

H ELPMAN , E., O. I TSKHOKI ,     AND    S. R EDDING (2010): "Inequality and unemployment in a
  global economy," Econometrica, 78, 1239­1283.

K IM , R. AND J. V OGEL (2020a): "Trade and welfare (across local labor markets)," Working Paper.

------ (2020b): "Trade shocks and labor market adjustment," Working Paper.

M ARTINEZ , I. Z., E. S AEZ ,   AND   M. S IEGENTHALER (2019): "Intertemporal Labor Supply Sub-
  stitution? Evidence from the Swiss Income Tax Holidays," Working Paper.



                                                  44
M UI , P. AND B. S CHOEFER (2020): "Reservation Raises: The Aggregate Labor Supply Curve at
  the Extensive Margin," Working Paper.

N AKAMURA , E.   AND   J. S TEINSSON (2014): "Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evidence
  from US Regions," American Economic Review, 104, 753­92.

P IERCE , J. R. AND P. K. S CHOTT (2020): "Trade liberalization and mortality: evidence from US
  counties," American Economic Review: Insights, 2, 47­64.

R ADOWSKI , D. AND H. B ONIN (2010): "Downward Nominal Wage Rigidity in Services: Direct
  Evidence from a Firm Survey," Economics Letters, 106, 227­229.

S CHMITT-G ROHE , S.   AND   M. U RIBE (2016): "Downward Nominal Wage Rigidity, Currency
  Pegs, and Involuntary Unemployment," Journal of Political Economy, 124, 1466­1514.

T ORTAROLO , D., G. C RUCES ,   AND   V. C ASTILLO (2019): "It Takes Two to Tango: Labor Re-
  sponses to an Income Tax Holiday in Argentina," Working Paper.




                                              45
For Online Publication


Appendix

A      Data Construction
      In this appendix section, we provide details on the construction of the data we briefly
described in Section 3.1. We divide this appendix into three parts. Appendix A.1 describes all
data sources. Appendix A.2 discusses how we combine the different data sources to compute
an internally consistent bilateral trade-flow matrix for all sectors for the years when all the data
is available. There is limited availability for the state×sector-level trade data coming from the
CENSUS. Data for exports at the state×sector-level starts in 2002 and data for imports starts
in 2008. Finally, Appendix A.3 discusses how we use the previous step to construct a bilateral
trade-flows for the years before full data availability.


A.1     Data Description and Sources

      List of sectors: We use a total of 14 sectors. The list includes 12 manufacturing sectors,
one catch-all services sector, and one agriculture sector. We follow Caliendo et al. (2019) in the
selection of the 12 manufacturing sectors. These are: 1) Food, beverage, and tobacco products
(NAICS 311-312, WIOD sector 3); 2) Textile, textile product mills, apparel, leather, and allied
products (NAICS 313-316, WIOD sectors 4-5); 3) Wood products, paper, printing, and related
support activities (NAICS 321-323, WIOD sectors 6-7); 4) Mining, petroleum and coal products
(NAICS 211-213, 324, WIOD sectors 2, 8); 5) Chemical (NAICS 325, WIOD sector 9); 6) Plastics
and rubber products (NAICS 326, WIOD sector 10); 7) Nonmetallic mineral products (NAICS
327, WIOD sector 11); 8) Primary metal and fabricated metal products (NAICS 331-332, WIOD
sector 12); 9) Machinery (NAICS 333, WIOD sector 13); 10) Computer and electronic products,
and electrical equipment and appliance (NAICS 334-335, WIOD sector 14); 11) Transportation
equipment (NAICS 336, WIOD sector 15); 12) Furniture and related products, and miscella-



                                                 46
neous manufacturing (NAICS 337- 339, WIOD sector 16). There is a 13) Services sector which
includes Construction (NAICS 23, WIOD sector 18); Wholesale and retail trade sectors (NAICS
42-45, WIOD sectors 19-21); Accommodation and Food Services (NAICS 721-722, WIOD sec-
tor 22); transport services (NAICS 481-488, WIOD sectors 23-26); Information Services (NAICS
511-518, WIOD sector 27); Finance and Insurance (NAICS 521-525, WIOD sector 28); Real Es-
tate (NAICS 531-533, WIOD sectors 29-30); Education (NAICS 61, WIOD sector 32); Health
Care (NAICS 621-624, WIOD sector 33); and Other Services (NAICS 493, 541, 55, 561, 562, 711-
713, 811-814, WIOD sector 34).26
     List of countries: We use data for 50 U.S. states, 37 other countries including a constructed
rest of the world. The list of countries is: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Brazil, Canada,
China, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, India, Indonesia, Italy, Ireland, Japan, Lithuania, Mexico, the Netherlands, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, Russia, Spain, the Slovak Republic, Slovenia, South Korea, Sweden, Tai-
wan, Turkey, the United Kingdom, and the rest of the world.
     Data on bilateral trade between countries: World Input-Output Database (WIOD). Re-
lease of 2013. We use data for 2000-2007. We map the sectors in the WIOD database to our
14 sectors in the following way: 1) Food Products, Beverage, and Tobacco Products (c3); 2)
Textile, Textile Product Mills, Apparel, Leather, and Allied Products (c4-c5); 3) Wood Products,
Paper, Printing, and Related Support Activities (c6-c7); 4) Petroleum and Coal Products (c8); 5)
Chemical (c9); 6) Plastics and Rubber Products (c10); 7) Nonmetallic Mineral Products (c11); 8)
Primary Metal and Fabricated Metal Products (c12); 9) Machinery (c13); 10) Computer and Elec-
tronic Products, and Electrical Equipment and Appliances (c14); 11) Transportation Equipment
(c15); 12) Furniture and Related Products, and Miscellaneous Manufacturing (c16); 13) Con-
struction (c18), Wholesale and Retail Trade (c19-c21), Transport Services (c23-c26), Information
Services (c27), Finance and Insurance (c28), Real Estate (c29- c30); Education (c32); Health Care
(c33), Accommodation and Food Services (c22), and Other Services (c34); 14) Agriculture and
Mining (c1-c2). We follow Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare (2014) to remove the negative values
in the trade data from WIOD.

26 Theonly difference with respect to Caliendo et al. (2019) in the definition of manufacturing sectors is that we
 include Mining (NAICS 211-213) together with Petroleum and Coal Products (NAICS 324) in our sector 4.


                                                       47
    Data on bilateral trade in manufacturing between U.S states: We combine the 2002 and
2007 Commodity Flow Survey (CFS) with the WIOD database. The CFS records shipments
between U.S states for 43 commodities classified according to the Standard Classification of
Transported Goods (SCTG). We follow Caliendo et al. (2019) and use CFS 2007 tables that cross-
tabulate establishments by their assigned NAICS codes against commodities (SCTG) shipped
by establishments within each of the NAICS codes. These tables allow for mapping of SCTG to
NAICS.
    Data on bilateral trade in manufacturing and agriculture between U.S states and the rest
of the countries: We obtain sector-level imports and exports between the 50 U.S. states and
the list of other countries from the Import and Export Merchandise Trade Statistics, which is
compiled by the U.S. Census Bureau. This dataset reports imports and exports in each NAICS
sector between each U.S. state and each other country in the world. Data for exports at the
state×sector level starts in 2002. Data for imports at the state×sector level starts in 2008.
    Data on sectoral and regional value added share in gross output: Value added for each of
the 50 U.S. states and 14 sectors can be obtained from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA)
by subtracting taxes and subsidies from GDP data. In the cases when gross output was smaller
than value added we constrain value added to be equal to gross output. For the list of other
countries we obtain the share of value added in gross output using data on value added and
gross output data from WIOD.
    Data on services expenditure and production: We compute bilateral trade in services us-
ing a gravity approach explained in Appendix A.2.4. As part of this calculations we require
data on production and expenditure in services by region. We obtain U.S. state-level services
GDP from the Regional Economic Accounts of the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). We ob-
tain U.S. state-level services expenditure from the Personal Consumption Expenditures (PCE)
database of BEA. Finally, for the list of other countries we compute total production and ex-
penditure in services from WIOD.
    Data on agriculture expenditure and production: We also compute bilateral trade in agri-
culture using a gravity approach explained in Appendix A.2.4. To get production in agricul-
ture for the U.S. states we combine the 2002 and 2007 Agriculture Census with the National
Marine Fisheries Service Census to get state-level production data on crops and livestock and


                                                48
seafood. We infer state-level expenditure in agriculture from our gravity approach explained
in Appendix A.2.4. Finally, for the list of other countries we compute total production and
expenditure in agriculture from WIOD.
         Data on population and geographic coordinates: As part of the gravity approach to com-
pute bilateral trade in services, we also need to compute bilateral distances between regions.
We follow the procedure used in the GeoDist dataset of CEPII to calculate international (and
intranational) bilateral trade distances. We thus require data on the most populated cities in
each country, the cities' coordinates and population, and each country's population. We obtain
this information from the United Nations' Population Division website. In particular, we use
the population of urban agglomerations with 300,000 inhabitants or more in 2018, by country,
for 2000-2007. For Austria, Cyprus, Denmark, Estonia, Hungary, Ireland, Lithuania, Slovakia
and Slovenia we use the two most populated cities.27 For the case of U.S. states, we use pop-
ulation and coordinates data for each U.S county within each U.S state. The data for the U.S.
counties comes from the U.S. CENSUS.


A.2        Construction of Bilateral Trade Flows Between Regions

         We follow the notation from Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare (2014) and omit the time sub-
scripts t that are relevant in our quantitative model. Define Xij,ks as sales of intermediate goods
from sector k in region i to sector s in region j, and Xij,kF as the sales of sector k in region i to
the final consumer of region j. Our final objective is to construct a bilateral trade flows matrix
between all regions in our sample with elements equal to Xij,k = s Xij,ks + Xij,kF . This matrix
allows us to compute the trade shares ij,k , and the sector-level revenues R j,k = l X jl ,k for each
region, which are crucial elements in our hat algebra described in Section 2.6.
         As additional definitions, take Ej,k = i Xij,k as the total expenditure of region j in sector
k, Fj,k = i Xij,kF as the final consumption in region j of sector k, Fj = k Fj,k as the total final
consumption of region j, and X j,ks = i Xij,ks as the total purchases that sector s in region j
makes from sector k. We construct the matrix of Xij,k in four parts explained below. With some
abuse of notation, we refer to a region i as a U.S. state (country) by using the notation i  US
(i / US).
27 For   the specific case of Cyprus, the cities' information comes from the country's Statistical Service.


                                                            49
A.2.1   Part 1: Bilateral Trade between Countries

    In the first part we focus on the case where both i and j are countries. Thus, we simply take
         W IOD , where X W IOD are the bilateral trade flows that come directly from the WIOD
Xij,k = Xij ,k          ij,k
database without any further calculations.


A.2.2   Part 2: Manufacturing Trade between U.S. States and Countries

    For the second part, we combine Census and WIOD data to calculate the trade flows be-
tween each of the 50 U.S. states and the other 37 country regions. We scale state-level imports
and exports data from the Import and Export Merchandise Trade Statistics to match the U.S.
totals in WIOD. More precisely, the exports (imports) of state i to (from) country j in manufac-
turing sector k are computed as a proportion of WIOD's U.S. export (imports) to (from) country
j in sector k. This proportion is equal to the exports (imports) of state i to (from) country j in
sector k relative to the total U.S. exports (imports) to (from) country j in sector k.
                         census be the bilateral trade flows between regions i and j, in sector k,
    Mathematically, let Xij ,k
according to the Import and Export Merchandise Trade Statistics database. Define the share of
sector k exports of state i to country j relative to the total U.S. exports of sector k as:

                                                         census
                                                        Xij
                                         census             ,k
                                        yij ,k            census    .
                                                     hUS Xhj ,k

Analogously, define the share of sector k imports of state j to country i as:

                                                         census
                                                        Xij
                                         census             ,k
                                        eij ,k             census   ,
                                                     l US Xil ,k


then we define our object of interest:
                                    
                                    ycensus XW IOD
                                    
                                                            i  US,  j / US
                                       ij,k   US j,k
                          Xij,k =                                            .
                                    ecensus XW IOD
                                    
                                                            i / US,  j  US
                                      ij,k    i US,k




                                                       50
A.2.3   Part 3: Manufacturing Trade among U.S. States

    In the third part we focus on manufacturing bilateral trade between U.S. States. For this,
we combine WIOD Data for the total trade of the U.S. with itself, and the closest Commodity
Flow Survey (CFS) for each year. We first compute the shares that each state i exports to state j
in sector k represent in the total trade of sector k according to CFS. Then, we calculate the total
exports of state i to state j in sector k as WIOD's U.S. trade with itself in sector k multiplied by
the share computed in the previous step.
                            CFS as the bilateral trade flows between state i and state j, in
    Mathematically, define Xij ,k
manufacturing sector k, according to the CFS. We first construct:

                                          CFS
                                         Xij
                            CFS              ,k
                           xij ,k           CFS
                                                         (i  US, & j  US),
                                       h l Xhl ,k

                                                CFS X W IOD  (i  US, & j  US ).
then we define our object of interest: Xij,k = xij ,k US,US,k


A.2.4   Part 4: Trade in Services and Trade in Agriculture

    We compute bilateral trade flows for services and agriculture separately using a gravity
structure that matches WIOD totals for trade between countries (including the U.S.).
Theory. Start with the standard gravity equation (for simplicity, we remove the subscript of
the sector):
                                                             -
                                                    wi ij
                                          Xij =                  Ej ,
                                                     Pj

                         -                                                   wi ij   -
where Pj- = i wi ij          . We know that  j Xij = Ri and hence  j          Pj         Ej = Ri . This
implies wi- i
            -
              = Ri , where i- =  j ij
                                   -              ~j  P- and 
                                      Pj Ej . Let P    j
                                                             ~ i  - , and 
                                                                  i
                                                                               -
                                                                          ~ij  ij .
Given Ej , { Ri }, and                      ~j and 
                       ~ij , one we can get P      ~ i for all regions from the following

system:


                                            ~j =  
                                            P     ~ij ~ -1 R i
                                                        i
                                                    i
                                           ~ i =
                                                    ~ -1 E j
                                                ~ij P                                              (17)
                                                     j
                                                    j



                                                        51
                 ~j , 
The solution for P    ~ i is unique up to a constant (Fally, 2015). This indeterminacy requires a
                              ~1 = 100 in each exercise. Then one can compute our outcome
normalization. We thus impose P
of interest Xij from


                                         Xij = ~ij ~ -1 P
                                                        ~ -1 R i E j .                         (18)
                                                     i   j


Computation of the bilateral resistance ~ij . To solve the gravity system, we must first compute
~ij i, j. We proceed by assuming the following functional form:


                                                   
                                         ~ij =  0ij distij1 exp  ij ,
                                                          
                                         


where ij is an indicator variable equal to 1 if i = j, and  ij is an idiosyncratic error term.  1
captures the standard distance elasticity and  0 captures the additional inverse resistance of
trading with others versus with oneself.
    To calculate distij , we follow the same procedure used in the GeoDist dataset of CEPII to
calculate international (and intranational) bilateral trade distances. The idea is to calculate the
distance between two countries based on bilateral distances between the largest cities of those
two countries, those inter-city distances being weighted by the share of the city in the overall
country's population (Head and Mayer, 2002).
    We use population for 2010 and coordinates data for all U.S. counties, and all cities around
the world with more than 300,000 inhabitants. For those countries with less than two cities of
this size, we take the largest cities. Coordinates are important to calculate the physical bilateral
distances in kms between each county r in state i and county s in state j (drs r  i , s 
j and i, j = 1, ..., 50), and define dist (ij) as:

                                                                                  1/
                                                        popr        pops
                           dist (ij) =                  popi        pop j
                                                                             
                                                                            drs        ,       (19)
                                           ri sj


where poph is the population of country/state h. We set  = -1.
    Given our definition of ~ij we can write the gravity equation between countries in the




                                                        52
following way.
                                        ij
                                 Xij =  0 distij1 exp  ij 
                                                          ~ -1 P
                                                               ~ -1 R i E j .
                                                            i   j


Taking logs we can write the previous equation as:


                               ln Xij = io + jd + ~ 0 ij +  1 ln distij +  ij ,                          (20)


where ~ 0 = ln  0 and the s are fixed effects. We first estimate the equation above separately

for services and agriculture using a 2000-2011 panel of bilateral trade flows between countries
from WIOD. We present our OLS estimation results in Table 5. Columns (1) and (2) refer to
the estimated coefficients for the case of services and agriculture, respectively. Both regres-
sions include year-by-origin and year-by-destination fixed effects. We take these estimates and
compute the bilateral resistance term in each sector as ^
                                                        ~ij = exp( ^
                                                                   ~ 0 ij + ^ 1 ln distij ).

                 Table 5: Estimation of Own-Country Dummy and Distance Elasticity


                                                      (1)            (2)
                          Dep. Var.: ln Xij,t      Services      Agriculture


                          ij                       7.357            4.143
                                                    (0.126)          (0.145)
                          ln distij                -0.376          -1.745
                                                    (0.037)          (0.020)

                          Year×Orig.                  Yes             Yes
                          Year×Dest.                  Yes             Yes

                          Observations               17,328          17,328
                          Adjusted R2                 0.66            0.76

     Notes: This table displays the OLS estimates of specifications analogous to the one in equa-
     tion (20). The outcome variable ln Xij,t is the log exports of country i sent to country j. The
     own-country dummy ij is defined as an indicator function equal to one whenever country i
     is the same as country j. Finally, ln distij is the log distance between country i and country j.
     This variable is computed according to equation (19). Robust standard errors are presented
     in parenthesis. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1%.




                                                     53
Trade in Services: As inputs, we need total expenditures in services for each region ( Ei ), as well
as total production in services ( Ri ). For the case of countries we take this directly from WIOD.
For the case of U.S. states we take these variables from the Regional Economic Accounts of the
Bureau of Economic Analysis. We scale the state-level services production and expenditures so
that they aggregate to the U.S. totals in WIOD.
    We incorporate the information on bilateral trade in services between countries (including
the U.S.) that comes from WIOD to the gravity system of equation (17) by first writing the
system as:


                              ~j =
                              P               ~ij 
                                                  ~ -1 R i +
                                                    i                  ~ij 
                                                                           ~ -1 R i
                                                                             i
                                       i/US                     i US
                              ~i =                ~ -1 E j +
                                              ~ij P
                                                   j                  ~ij P
                                                                          ~ -1 E j .
                                                                           j
                                       j/US                    jUS


                ~j  1-      i /US Xij
Then, we define                Ej     for j   / US (the share of imports of region j / US coming
                   ~          /US Xij
from the U.S.) and  i     1 - j   Ri    for   i/ US (total exports of region i / US to other regions
not in the U.S.). Using these two definitions and substituting ~ij = Xij    ~j Y -1 X -1 whenever
                                                                         ~ iP
                                                                                i     j
i, j / US in the previous system of equations we have the final system we solve for services:


                                    ~j =
                                    P          ~ij ~ -1 R i
                                                     i               j  US
                                                i
                                   ~i =            ~ -1 E j
                                               ~ij Pj                i  US
                                                j

                                 ~ jP
                                    ~j =              ~ij 
                                                          ~ -1 R i
                                                            i          j/ US
                                               i/US
                                ~ 
                                   ~
                                  i i =                   ~ -1 E j
                                                      ~ij P
                                                           j          i/ US
                                               j/US


                               ~j , 
    Once we find solutions for P    ~ i , we compute the final bilateral trade matrix according

to equation (18).

Trade in Agriculture: As inputs, we need total expenditures in services for each region ( Ei ),
as well as total production in agriculture ( Ri ). For the case of countries we take this directly
from WIOD. For the case of U.S. states we compute total production ( Ri ) by combining data
from the Agriculture Census and the National Marine Fisheries Service Census. We scale the

                                                      54
state-level agriculture production so that it aggregates to the U.S. total in WIOD. However,
it is not possible to find state-level agriculture expenditure for U.S. states. To overcome this
data unavailability, we combine the U.S. input-output matrix (j,ks ) together with the shares of
value-added in gross production (i.e., the labor share) (j,k ) in order to compute a value of ( Ei )
that is consistent with the full bilateral trade matrix for all regions and all sectors.
     In order to describe our procedure, note that the total expenditure of region j in sector k
( Ej,k ) could be written as:
                                          E j,k =   ~ j,ks R j,s + Fj,k ,
                                                     s

where ~ j,ks = j,ks (1 - j,s ). We make two assumptions. First, we assume that ~ j,ks = ~ US,ks
 j  US, which means that we assume common input-output matrix and value-added shares
across U.S. states and equal to the ones of the U.S. as a whole. Second, when j  US we assume
               Fj                                   FUS,k
that Fj,k =   FUS FUS,k   = Fj k , where k           FUS .   This second assumption relies on the identical
Cobb-Douglas preferences across U.S. states. Using these two assumptions we get that:


                            Fj = Ej,k -  ~ j,ks R j,s +               E j ,r -  ~ j,rs R j,s   .
                                         s                   r =k              s


Substituting the previous equation in the definition of Ej,k for the agriculture sector (k = AG),
and j  US we find:

                                                          AG
                     Ej, AG =   ~ j, AG s R j,s +
                                                  1 -  AG 
                                                                             E j ,r -  ~ j,rs R j,s   ,
                                s                                   r = AG            s


which can be computed using state-level production of all sectors and state-level expenditure
data of all other sectors (excluding agriculture), combined with the U.S.-level input-output
matrix, value-added shares, and sector-level consumption shares.
     Once we obtain the state-level expenditure values in agriculture, we can proceed with the
gravity system in equation (17). As in the case of services, we incorporate the information on
bilateral trade in agriculture between countries (including the U.S.) that comes from WIOD.
We also incorporate the bilateral trade in agriculture between U.S. states and other countries
coming from the Import and Export Merchandise Trade Statistics. Thus, we only need to focus


                                                          55
   ~j
on P     jUS
                and ~i
                          i US
                                 .
              = 1-                   Xij
      Define i      j/US             Ri    for i  US (the share of sales of state i that stay in the U.S.) and
                 Xij
j = 1 -    i /US Ej,k   for j  US (the share of purchases of state i that come from the U.S.). The
final system we solve for agriculture becomes:


                                             ~j = iUS 
                                           j P        ~ij ~ -1 Ri ,  j  US
                                                            i
                                        ~                   ~ -1 Ej , i  US
                                       i i       =  jUS ~ij Pj


                                            ~j , 
      As before, once we find solutions for P    ~ i , we compute the bilateral trade in agriculture

between U.S. states according to equation (18).


A.3     Projection of Bilateral Trade Flows between Regions

      Since the Import and Export Merchandise Trade Statistics data for exports starts in 2002
and for imports starts in 2008, the bilateral trade flows between regions for the years before the
data starts cannot be computed directly from the data. In this section, we adapt our computa-
tion method to take into account this issue. All previous procedures with the exception of the
manufacturing, agriculture, and mining trade between U.S. states and countries remains the
                                                            base as the matrix X
same. For the exception case we proceed as follows. Denote Xij ,k                ij,k for the first

year where the exports or imports data is available (the base year). Define the share of exports
of U.S. State i in sector k, going to country j in the base year as:

                                                    base
                                                   Xij
                                      base             ,k
                                     yij ,k         base
                                                                 i  US , j / US.
                                               hUS Xhj ,k


Similarly, define the share of imports of U.S. state j in sector k, coming from country i in the
base year as:
                                                    base
                                                   Xij
                                      base             ,k
                                     eij ,k          base
                                                                 i / US , j  US.
                                               l US Xil ,k




                                                            56
Finally for each sector k in manufacturing or agriculture; and any year before the base year
define:                              
                                     ebase XW IOD
                                     
                                                                i / US,  j  US
                                       ij,k     i US,k
                          Xij,k =                                                             .
                                     ybase XW IOD
                                     
                                                                i  US,  j / US
                                        ij,k    US j,k




B     Model Details

B.1     Production

      Here we elaborate on the way the Input-Output loop works. There are I regions and S sec-
tors, and to produce output in each region and sector firms need to combine labor with all the
sectoral aggregates (the version of them available in that region). Specifically, the technology
to produce the differentiated good of industry s in region i at time t is

                                                S                                   S
                                       -i,s            -
                                                i,ksi,ks                           ,t  Mi,ks,t ,
                                                                                i ,s      i,ks
                          Yi,s,t =    i,s                         A i ,s,t L i ,s
                                               k =1                                k =1


where Mi,ks,t is the quantity of the composite good of industry k used in region i to produce
in sector s at time t, i,s is the labor share in region i, sector s, i,ks is the share of inputs that
sector s uses from sector k in region i, and 1 - i,s = S
                                                       k=1 i,ks . The resource constraint for the

composite good produced in region j, sector k, at time t is

                                                                  S
                                       M j,k ,t = C j,k ,t +      Mj,ks,t .
                                                                 s =1


In turn, the resource constraint for good s produced by region i at time t is

                                                          I
                                            Yi,s,t =      ij,s,t Yij,s,t .
                                                       j =1


The composite in sector k is produced according to

                                                                        k
                                                          I      k -1   k-1

                                                          Yij,k,t
                                                                 k
                                       M j,k ,t =                              .
                                                         i =1


                                                          57
Now let's move to the equations in terms of the prices and values. Let's start with prices. Let
Pi,s,t be the price of Mi,s,t and pij,s,t be the price of Yi,s,t in j at time t. Recall that the wage can
vary between different sectors in the same region because of mobility frictions, so let Wi,s,t be
the nominal wage in region i, sector s, at time t. We know that

                                                                            S
                                                    ,s,t Wi,s,t  Pi,k,t ,
                                                  -1        i ,s      
                                                                    i,ks            
                                       pii,s,t = Ai
                                                                         k =1
                                       pij,s,t = ij,s,t pii,s,t ,
                                                                                1/(1-s )
                                                             I
                                       Pj,s,t =                   p1 -s
                                                                   ij,s,t                     ,
                                                           i =1


Combining the last three equations we obtain:

                                                                                                  1-s
                                               I                                S
                              Pj1 -s
                                                             -1
                                                                             
                                                                     i,s             i,ks
                                ,s,t   =             ij,s,t Ai ,s,t Wi,s,t          Pi,k ,t             ,
                                           i =1                              k =1


which, for each time period t, is a system of I × S equations in I × S unknowns that can be
used to solve for the Pj,s,t 's given the trade costs (ij,s,t 's), technologies ( Ai,s,t 's), wages (Wi,s,t 's),
labor shares (i,s 's) and input output coefficients (i,ks ), note that we do not allow the labor
shares and input output coefficients to vary with time. This system of I × S equations in I × S
unknowns is well behaved and can be solved using contraction mapping techniques, where
you start with a guess for the I × S prices (denoted PIj,s,t ), and obtain a new guess (denoted
PEj,s,t ) as follows:

                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                  1-s       1-s
                                           I                                S
                          PEj,s,t =                        -1
                                                             ,s,t Wi,s,t  PIi,k,t
                                                                      
                                                                     i ,s     i,ks     
                                                   ij,s,t Ai                                            
                                        i =1                             k =1


We iterate until the difference between PE and PI is very small and this provides a solution to
the system. This is a similar method to the one followed in Caliendo and Parro (2015). Getting
back to the description of the setup of the model, the price of final output in region j at time t




                                                                 58
is given by

                                                                           S
                                                                         Pj,s,t .
                                                                                     j,s
                                                         Pj,t =
                                                                        s =1


Now let's move on to resource constraints in value. Multiplying the resource constraint for
M j,k,t by Pj,k,t we get
                                                                                S
                                        Zj,k,t = Pj,k,t Cj,k,t +                Pj,k,t Mj,ks,t ,
                                                                               s =1

where Zj,k,t  Pj,k,t M j,k,t denotes the total expenditure of region j in industry k at time t. Let
ij,k,t be the share of that expenditure spent on imports from i,

                                                                      pij,k,t Yij,k,t
                                                    ij,k,t                            .
                                                                         Z j,k ,t

We know that

                                                                                                           1-k
                              1-                 1-                            -1             S     
                                                                                 ,k,t Wi,k,t s=1 Pi,s,t
                                                                                         i ,k       i,sk
                            pij,k,tk          pij,k,tk                 ij,k,t Ai
                ij,k,t =        1- 
                                        =        1- 
                                                         =                                                           .
                           l plj,k,tk        Pj,k,t k        I                     -1       r,k     S     r,sk 1-k
                                                             r =1          rj,k,t Ar      W
                                                                                     ,k ,t r ,k ,t      P
                                                                                                    s =1 r ,s,t


Let Ri,k,t = pii,k,t Yi,k,t represent the sales of good k by region i at time t. Multiplying the resource
constraint for Yi,k,t above by pii,k,t we get

                                                                  I
                                            pii,k,t Yi,k,t =      ij,k,t pii,k,t Yij,k,t ,
                                                                 j =1


and hence
                                                                  I
                                                   R i ,k ,t =    ij,k,t Zj,k,t .
                                                                 j =1

Plugging in from the resource constraint above for Zj,k,t we then have

                                             I
                              R i ,k ,t =    ij,k,t          Pj,k,t Cj,k,t +  Pj,k,t M j,ks,t        .
                                            j =1                                           s




                                                                      59
Note that
                                                Pj,k,t M j,ks,t = j,ks R j,s,t .

Additionally, the total amount available for consumption in region j at time t is the sum of three
things, total labor income which includes rebates from the government (denote it Ij,t ) and the
deficit (denoted D j,t ). So we get


                                             Pj,k,t Cj,k,t =  j,k Ij,t + D j,t ,


hence
                                       I
                        R i ,k ,t =    ij,k,t          j,k Ij,t + D j,t +  j,ks R j,s,t   .
                                      j =1                                         s

For each time period t, this is a linear system of I × S equations in I × S unknowns that can
be used to solve for the Ri,k,t 's given the trade shares (ij,k,t 's), Cobb-Douglas shares ( j,k 's),
labor incomes ( Ij,t 's), deficits ( D j,t 's), government revenues (Gj,t 's), and input output coeffi-
cients (j,ks ). Since this is a linear system in the R's, it is relatively easy to solve. Of this total
production ( Ri,k,t ), we know that a fraction i,k is payed to labor, so we can write:


                             Wi,b,t Li,b,t = Wi,b,t  Li,s,t =              i,s Ri,s,t
                                                          sb             sb



B.2     Labor Supply

      We ignore region and time subscripts here, so that we are effectively focusing on a single
region and period. Each agent has a discrete choice between home production with utility flow
µ and work in broad sector b  {1, ..., B} with real wage b . For ease of notation, we think
of home production as broad sector 0, so that the set of broad sectors is now {0, 1, ..., B}, and
we use 0 = µ. Each agent has utility parameters zb for b  {0, 1, ..., B} so that agent's utility
is ln b + zb if she chooses broad sector b. We assume that these utility parameters are drawn
from a nested Gumbel distribution so that the cumulative distribution of Z = ( Z0 , Z1 , ..., ZB ) is
                                                                                             
                                                                                         /
                                                                        B
                     H (z) = exp - exp (- z0 ) -                        exp (- zb )          ,    (21)
                                                                       b =1


                                                              60
with 0     .28
      Imagine that an agent is maximizing ln b + zb (over choice of b). Below we show that the
probability that the agent chooses b  {1, ..., B} is given by

                                                                               /
                                                                   B      
                                                   b
                                                                   b =1  b
                                      ~b =
                                              B                                       /
                                                                                          .                   (22)
                                              b =1  b   +  B     
                                                      0    b =1  b


Moreover, the exponential of the expectation of the maximized value is

                                                                                                   1/
                                                                                               /
                                                                               B
                                                                               b
                                                                                      
                          exp ( E(max ln b + Zb )) = e 0
                                                       
                                                         +                                              ,     (23)
                                                                              b =1


where  is the Euler-Mascheroni constant.
      The result in Equation (22) further implies that the probability of choosing b  {1, ..., B} is

                                                                   B        /
                                               B                   b =1  b
                                              ~b =
                                                               B                /
                                              b =1           +
                                                             0 b =1  b


while the probability of choosing b  {1, ..., B} conditional on not choosing b = 0 is

                                                                       
                                                   ~     
                                                b  b = B b  .
                                                       b =1  b

This implies that ~ b =  · b . Of course, we also have that the probability that the agent
chooses b = 0 is
                                                   B                      0
                                    ~0 = 1 -           ~b =
                                                       
                                                                       B               /
                                                                                              .
                                                b =1          0    +   b =1  b

      We now prove the result in Equation (22). Without loss of generality, we derive the proba-
bility that 1 = arg maxb ln b + Zb . This is the same as the probability that zb  ab + Z1 for all




                                                                                                     B +1
28 This   conditions is sufficient to ensure that the density function is positive everywhere in z  R+    .


                                                              61
b, where ab  ln (1 /b ). Thus,

                                        
                             ~1 =
                                            H1 ( a0 + z, z, a2 + z, ..., a B + z)dz.                                         (24)
                                        -


From (21) we get

                                                                       /  -1
                                               B
              H1 (z0 , z1 , ..., z B ) =       exp (- zb )                      exp (- z1 )
                                             b =1
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                        /
                                                                             B
                                    ·   exp - exp (- z0 ) -                   exp (- zb )                   ,
                                                                            b =1


and hence


            H1 ( a0 + z, z, a2 + z, ..., a B + z) =  A - exp (- z) exp (- a1 )

                                                        ·   exp (- [exp (- a0 ) - A ] exp (- z)) ,                           (25)


where
                                                                           1/
                                                    B
                                        A           exp (- ab )                 .
                                                   b =1

Plugging into (24) and integrating we get

                                                                                              /  -1
                                                                 B
                              A -                                b =1 exp ( -  ab )
                ~1 =
                                               =                                                        /
                                                                                                            .
                       exp (- a0 ) + A                                     B
                                                    exp (- a0 ) +          b =1 exp ( -  ab )


Plugging in for ab  ln 1 /b and simplifying we get

                                                                 B        /
                                              1
                                                                 b =1  b
                                 ~1 =
                                           B                                         /
                                                                                         .
                                           b =1  b   +  B  
                                                   0    b =1 b


Generalizing to b  1 leads to the result in Equation (22).
    To establish the result in Equation (23), we again assume that the choice is b = 1. The prob-
                                                                                 (1/1 ) exp x
ability that maxb ln ( Zb b )  x and 1 = arg maxb Zb b is                       0                H1 ( a0 z, z, a2 z, ..., a B z)dz.


                                                            62
Using (25) and integrating we then have

           (1/1 ) exp x                                           A -
                          H1 ( a0 z, z, a2 z, ..., a B z)dz =    -      exp - (exp x )- 1
                                                                                           -
                                                                                          a0 + A               .
       0                                                        a0 + A 


This implies that

                                                                1 A -         
  E(max ln ( Zb b ) | arg max Zb b = 1) =                            -            x (exp x )- -1 1
                                                                                                    -
                                                                                                   a0 + A
                                                                ~ 1 a0
                                                                       + A   -

                                                          ·     exp - (exp x )- 1
                                                                                   -
                                                                                  a0 + A           dx,


                 ~1 =              A - 
and hence, using                  -
                                 a0 + A
                                          , we have

                                                                       
       E(max ln ( Zb b ) | arg max Zb b = 1) =                            x (exp x )- -1 1
                                                                                            -
                                                                                           a0 + A
                                                                      -
                                                                 ·    exp - (exp x )- 1
                                                                                         -
                                                                                        a0 + A           dx.


So we need to know

                                                                             
                  x T (exp x )- -1 exp - T (exp x )- dx =                        xd exp - T (exp x )- .
              -                                                              -


But note that

                                              -                                      -                         -
                  -           -1/                            1                                           1
   T (exp x )         = T           exp x         =     exp - ln T exp x                 = exp x - ln T            .
                                                             

This is the Gumbel distribution with location parameter µ = ln T 1/ and scale parameter  = 0.
But we know that the expectation of a variable distributed Gumbel with µ and  is µ + ,
where  is the Euler-Mascheroni constant, hence we have

                                                                                 1
                                            xd exp - T (exp x )- = ln T  + .
                                       -


This implies that

                      
                           x (exp x )- -1 1
                                             -
                                            a0 + A exp - (exp x )- 1
                                                                      -
                                                                     a0 + A                              dx
                      -


                                                                 63
                    -                        1/
            = ln 1 a0 + A                          +


and hence
                                                         -                                                  1/
                  E(max Zb b | arg max Zb b = 1) = ln 1 a0 + A                                                       + .

Substituting for A and ab , we then have
                                                                                                                                1/ 
                                                                                                                            /
                                                                                                B
  E(max Zb b | arg max Zb b = 1) = ln 1 (1 /0 )- +                                              ( 1 /  b ) -                       +
                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                              b =1



and hence
                                                                                                              1/ 
                                                                                                          /
                                                                                            B
                                                                                            b
                                                                                                      
             E(max Zb b | arg max Zb b = 1) = ln 0
                                                   +                                                             +
                                                                                                               
                                                                                           b =1



Of course, this implies that

                                                                                                         1/
                                                                                                   /
                                                                                     B
                                                                                     b
                                                                                           
                          exp ( E(max Zb b )) = e 0
                                                  
                                                    +                                                            .
                                                                                    b =1



B.3     Equilibrium and Utility

      In this model, the equilibrium system in each period t is described by equations (1) - (14).
After introducing equations (4) and (5) into equation (3), we can express the equilibrium as
follows:

                                I                                                                 S
                  R i ,s,t =    ij,s,t          j,s    Wj,b,t L j,b,t + Dj,t               +     j,sk R j,k,t                    i,  s
                               j =1                      b                                      k =1

                                      (ij,s,t Ai- 1                       
                                                                    i,ks 1- s
                                                ,s,t Wi,b(s),t k Pi,k,t )
                                                        i ,s

                 ij,s,t =                                                                                                        i,  s
                               I              -1             r,s         1-s r,ks
                               r =1 ( rj,s,t Ar,s,t Wr,b(s),t k Pr,k,t )
                                                                                    1-s
                                I                                     S
                     -s
                                                                   
                                                        j,s                j,ks
                 Pi1
                   ,s,t   =             ji,s,t A-  1
                                                j,s,t Wj,b(s),t           Pj,k,t                                                 i,  s
                               j =1                                k =1




                                                                   64
                 Wi,b,t Li,b,t =        i,s Ri,s,t                                                                      i,  b
                                       sb

                        L i ,b,t        i,b,t , Wi,b,t    i,b Wi,b,t-1 , CS                                             i,  b
                                                 
                                          i,t i,b,t
                          i ,b,t   =              Li                                                                    i,  b
                                       µi + i ,t i ,t
                                             

                                       Wi,b,t Li,b,t
                        i ,b,t =                                                                                        i,  b
                                        Pi,t i,b,t

                                        i ,b,t
                                               
                          i ,t =                                                                                       i
                                        b
                                        S
                                        Pi,si,,st
                                               
                          Pi,t =                                                                                       i
                                       s =1
       I                                   I
        Wi,b,t Li,b,t =    Yi,b,t-1                                                                                    single
      i =1 b                             i =1 b


The equilibrium in changes is then the one described in the main text. Recall that in our setup
we can express instantaneous utility as:

                                                              1/
                                   u i ,t  µ     
                                             i + i ,t               = (i,t /i,t )1/ = i,t i-
                                                                                           ,t
                                                                                             1/
                                                                                                .


The change in utility can then be expressed as:

                                                                               -1/
                                                            ^ i,t
                                                                                                                       1/
    ^ i ,t =
    u          ^ i ,t 
                      ^ i-
                         ,t
                           1/
                                =^ i ,t                                              = 1 -  i ,t -1 +  i ,t -1 ^ i,t        .
                                               1 -  i ,t -1 +  i ,t -1 ^ i,t



C     Exposure measures
    Consider an economy producing a set of homogeneous goods across sectors s = 1, ..., S
with prices ps . Labor is the only factor of production that is mobile across sectors, and there
are decreasing returns to labor in each sector so that qs = Fs (ls ) with Fs (·) > 0 and Fs (·) < 0.
Preferences are given by U (c) - V (l ), where l  s ls , U (c) is homogeneous of degree one, and
V (·) > 0 and V (·) > 0. We are interested in the effect of a foreign shock on employment in
two different cases. In the first case the wage w is fixed and labor is fully determined by labor
demand (we assume that labor supply is higher than labor demand at the fixed wage w), while


                                                                       65
in the second case the wage is fully flexible and clears the labor market. Below we show that
                                          Fs (ls )ls                                  V (l )l
further assuming that (ls )  -             Fs (ls )
                                                       =  for all s and µ(l )         V (l )
                                                                                                = µ, then in the case of a
fixed wage we have
                                                         1  ps qs
                                            d ln l =
                                                          s  I
                                                                  d ln ps                                               (26)

while in the case of flexible wages we have

                                                 1               ps qs - ps cs
                                                 +µ 
                                      d ln l =                                   d ln ps ,                              (27)
                                                    s                  I

where I  s ps qs . Thus, if the wage is fixed and if we know the log changes in prices result-
                                                                                                        ps qs
ing from the foreign shock then we can interact them with revenue shares,                                 I ,   to construct
a Bartik-style sufficient statistic for the first order effect on employment. In contrast, if the
wage fully adjusts to equalize labor supply and demand, then the appropriate weights (share
components in the Bartik measure) for the price changes are instead given by net exports as a
share of GDP, to capture the implied terms-of-trade effects. If the economy is small, then prices
are exogenous and one could further replace d ln ps by the underlying Chinese productivity
shocks.
    Let's start with the case where w is fixed. Fully differentiating the equilibrium condition
ps Fs (ls ) = w implies

                                                                 d ln ps
                                                   d ln ls =               ,
                                                                  s ( ls )

                   Fs (ls )ls
where (ls )  -      Fs (ls )
                              .   We then have

                                                                      d ln ps
                                                 d ln l =    ms  s ( ls )
                                                             s

              ls
where ms      s ls
                   .   Assuming that  s (ls ) =  we know that ps qs / I = ms and hence we get (26).
    Now let's consider the case with a flexible wage. The equilibrium is given by w, l ,  and
{ls , cs }s such that the following equations hold


                                                 ps Fs (ls ) = w                                                        (28)


                                                                 66
                                                   Us
                                                         =  ps                            (29)
                                                   cs
                                                  V (l ) = w                              (30)

                                                   ls    = l                              (31)
                                                   s

                                           ps cs         =         p s f s ( l s ).       (32)
                                              s                    s


Differentiating equation (30) yields


                                      µ(l )d ln l = d ln  + d ln w,

               V (l )l
where µ(l )    V (l )
                       .   This implies that

                                                             d ln (w/ P)
                                                  d ln l =               ,                (33)
                                                                 µ(l )

with P  1/. Next, totally differentiating equations (28) and (31) yields


                                        d ln ps - d ln ls = d ln w

                                                   ms d ln ls          = d ln l .
                                                   s


Combined, the previous two equations imply


                                      ms d ln ps - d ln l = d ln w,

which combined with (33) implies (after some rearranging)

                                                        µ
                                d ln (w/ P) =
                                                       µ+      ms d ln ps - d ln P    .   (34)


But equation (29) implies that

                                                  Us
                                                  cs
                                                     cs =   ps cs .
                                          s                s




                                                             67
Since U (c) is h.d.g. 1 this implies U (c) =  s ps cs . Totally differentiating this equation yields

                             Us
                             cs
                                dcs =       ps cs       d +   ps dcs +   cs dps .
                         s                   s                         s                  s


Using equation (29) this implies


                          ps dcs =  ps cs               d +   ps dcs +   cs dps ,
                         s                  s                          s              s


which, after simplifying, implies


                                       d ln P = d ln (1/) =                 s d ln ps ,                                (35)
                                                                           s

            ps cs
where s     s ps cs
                    .   Plugging into (34) and combining with (33) we get

                                                  1
                                                 µ+ 
                                     d ln l =        (ms - s ) d ln ps .


                                                     s ( ls ) ls
Finally, note that ms         ls
                              s ls
                                     =  wls
                                      s wls
                                              = pspF               .   Using (ls )  -
                                                                                              Fs (ls )ls
                                                                                                           = , we know that
                                                  s s Fs ( ls ) ls                             Fs (ls )
Fs (ls )  ls
           1- and F ( l ) 
                   s s
                                         - , hence
                               (1 -  ) l s

                                          ps Fs (ls )     ps qs     ps qs
                                  ms =                  =         =       .
                                          s ps Fs (ls )   s ps qs    I

On the other hand, using (32) we have

                                                    ps cs     ps cs
                                             s              =       .
                                                    s ps cs    I

Combined, the last three displayed equations imply (27).




                                                             68
