                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            ORGANIZING CRISIS INNOVATION:
                             LESSONS FROM WORLD WAR II

                                        Daniel P. Gross
                                       Bhaven N. Sampat

                                      Working Paper 27909
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27909


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2020




We thank Ashish Arora, Pierre Azoulay, Wes Cohen, Scott Stern, and participants at the 2020
NBER Summer Institute for comments. We also thank Harvard Business School and the NBER
Innovation Policy grant (2016) for financial support. This material is based upon work supported
by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 1951470. All errors are our own. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Daniel P. Gross and Bhaven N. Sampat. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Organizing Crisis Innovation: Lessons from World War II
Daniel P. Gross and Bhaven N. Sampat
NBER Working Paper No. 27909
October 2020
JEL No. H12,H56,N42,N72,O31,O32,O38

                                          ABSTRACT

World War II was one of the most acute emergencies in U.S. history, and the first where the
mobilization of science and technology was a major part of the government response. The U.S.
Office of Scientific Research and Development (OSRD) led a major research effort to develop
technologies and medical treatments that not only helped win the war, but also transformed
civilian life, while laying the foundation for postwar science policy. Scholars and policymakers
often make broad appeals to the World War II innovation model in other crises. In this essay we
describe exactly how it worked. We do so first through a general overview of how OSRD
approached several questions that may confront any crisis innovation effort: priority setting,
selecting and engaging researchers, a funding mechanism, coordinating research efforts, and
translation to practice. Next we present case studies of the radar, atomic fission, penicillin, and
malaria research programs, illustrating how the principles applied in specific contexts, but also
heterogeneity. We conclude by discussing lessons from OSRD, such as what makes crisis
innovation policy different, how crisis innovation policy approaches may vary, and the limits to
generalizing from World War II for contemporary crises.


Daniel P. Gross
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
100 Fuqua Drive
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
daniel.gross@duke.edu

Bhaven N. Sampat
Department of Health Policy and Management
Columbia University
722 W 168th Street, Room 486
New York, NY 10032
and NBER
bns3@columbia.edu
1    Introduction

From war to disease to climate change, crises both natural and man-made have punctuated human
history. Since crises present new problems, policymakers often turn to science and technology for
solutions. The pressures of a crisis can be fertile ground for innovation, and few moments in history
exemplify both the depth of crises and the power of science and technology more than World War
II. Anticipating an eventual entry into the war, but fearing that the U.S. military was significantly
behind the technological frontier of warfare, a group of prominent American scientists approached
President Franklin Roosevelt in June 1940 with a proposal to create a National Defense Research
Committee--later reorganized into the Office of Scientific Research and Development (OSRD)--to
apply scientific research to military problems. Between 1940 and 1945, the OSRD grew from a
one-page proposal to a 1,500 person, multi-billion dollar federal agency engaging tens of thousands
of scientists around the country in research to support the war effort.

Led by Vannevar Bush, the OSRD was an experiment then without precedent: large-scale funding
of research by the U.S. government. Over the course of the war, the OSRD's vast research effort
produced major advances in technology and medical treatments to support the Allied forces. What
made the OSRD's problem distinctive from non-crisis research was its urgency, and the importance
of speeding not only the research but also downstream activities to get new technology into the
field. As James B. Conant (President of Harvard and one of the top OSRD administrators) wrote,
"The basic problem of mobilizing science during World War II was [one] of setting up rapidly an
organization or organizations which would connect effectively the laboratory, the pilot plant, and
the factory with each other and with the battlefront" (Conant 1947).

The first question OSRD faced was priority-setting, i.e., what to fund. The OSRD's priorities were
demand-driven, focused on solving specific military problems, and led by input from the Armed
Services. The bulk of its work was applied in nature, and while basic studies were sometimes needed,
the urgency of the crisis meant that it mostly had to take basic science as given and to put it to
work. Its approach stands in sharp contrast to much of peacetime funding that followed at agencies
such as NSF and NIH, where most of the research is investigator-initiated, often fundamental, and
scientists have a more dominant role in shaping the agenda.

A second issue was finding and engaging the most capable researchers. To support this activity,
the OSRD maintained a directory of potential contractors and took seriously the issue of making
their involvement incentive compatible. To avoid disrupting universities by relocating their staff,
much of the work was done using university facilities, offering indirect cost recovery on a nominally
"no gain, no loss" basis. The leaders of the OSRD divisions themselves were typically volunteers,


                                                 1
but contemporary accounts suggest that participation in wartime research was generally through
a spirit of volunteerism, powered by a belief in the need to defeat a common enemy. Stewart
(1948) wrote that the wartime crisis atmosphere meant "the best scientific talent of the country
was available," and Conant (1947) also pointed to "the ordeal of battle" as a source of cohesion
and cooperation above that normally possible in peacetime.

The decision to outsource research, rather than perform it directly, was precedent-setting. To do
so, the OSRD invented the R&D contract, which balanced specificity with the flexibility to explore,
accounted for the intrinsic uncertainty of research, and could be amended as the demands of the
war evolved. In the end, it effectively procured research services, rather than any specific output.
Because results from this work were often patentable, it also developed a novel, contractual patent
policy that balanced private incentives with the public interest.

As the principal agency mobilizing research for war, the OSRD was also responsible for coordinating
research efforts. In many cases--especially in medical research--OSRD funded multiple rivalrous
approaches to the same problem. Parallel R&D, a portfolio approach, may have been particularly
important where speed was an important consideration and solution uncertainty was high. But
as (if not more) important was coordination with the military, other U.S. scientific agencies, and
the broader Allied research effort. In cases where there were there were spillovers between research
projects, OSRD facilitated information sharing. It also established field offices in Britain, and sent
scientists to the battlefield to see military problems first-hand.

A final issue was translation to practice: the OSRD's work needed to be advanced from laboratory
prototypes to reliable, mass-produced units in the field. It had specific offices to assist in getting
new technology from bench to battlefield, with small-batch initial production runs, field tests, and
even battlefield deployment. Tight links between the researchers and users enabled rapid feedback
and continual tweaking to ensure the technology met the needs in the field. Because the military
was the main user, it was also easier to make changes to established practices to accommodate new
technology than it may have been otherwise. And because of the way its contractual patent terms
were written, there was no risk of technology transfer hold-ups.

In the space of five years, this effort produced major developments in a wide range of technologies
including radar, electrical engineering, jet propulsion, optics, chemistry, and atomic fission--where
the latter would eventually become the Manhattan Project. The OSRD's Committee on Medical
Research, the first serious government funding effort in the life sciences, helped support the mass
production of pencillin, influenza and other vaccines, the malaria treatment chloroquine, new ap-
proaches to managing wartime hardships such as sleep and oxygen deprivation, cold temperatures,
nutrient deficiencies, and psychological stress, and new techniques for treating injuries and wounds.

                                                   2
Beyond its immediate impacts on the war and on science, the OSRD also created the template
for federal R&D procurement and laid the foundation for postwar science policy, and in recent
research, we found that it also shaped the direction of U.S. innovation in the post-war period and
stimulated the growth of technology hubs around the country.

Vannevar Bush offered an overarching perspective of the OSRD's work and achievements:


     "It was the function of [OSRD] to channelize and focus an amazing array of variegated
     activities, to co-ordinate them both with the military necessities which they were de-
     signed to help to meet and with the requirements of the powerful industrial structure on
     which their effective application relied. In the contracting system which it developed, in
     the methods for safeguarding the public interest through sound patent policy which it
     created, in the means for effective and cordial liaison with co-operating agencies which
     it effected, and in a dozen other ways, the office brought to being a pattern of adminis-
     tration which aptly met a new and unique need and which stands as a richly suggestive
     guide for other undertakings." (Bush, quoted in Stewart 1948)


Like Bush, scholars and policymakers have cited World War II as a model for crisis innovation (e.g.,
Navarro 2020, Markey and Slavin 2020, Lindee 2020, Azoulay and Jones 2020). But what does this
mean, beyond large amounts of R&D funding? In this paper we describe how the OSRD model
worked, and assess the features of the model that may be generalizable, but also those that may
have been idiosyncratic to the specific context in which it operated.

This paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 recounts the origins of the OSRD and provides a quanti-
tative overview of the operation. Section 3 describes the challenges it faced as a crash innovation
program, and its approach to solving them--the "OSRD model". Section 4 provides case studies of
specific OSRD research programs, which illustrate heterogeneity at the program level. In Section 5,
we describe the OSRD's immediate and long-run impacts--on the war, on scientists, and on science
itself. Section 6 concludes by drawing lessons for future crises, discussing both the generalizable
and distinctive features of the World War II era.



2    An Overview of the OSRD

In 1940, the war in Europe (which began with Germany's invasion of Poland in September 1939)
was merely a newspaper headline to most of the American public. However, recognizing that the
country was at imminent risk of being drawn into the war after the failure of the Maginot line


                                                 3
in France, and that the U.S. "was pathetically unprepared from the standpoint of new weapons"
(Stewart 1948), a cadre of high-ranking scientists and science administrators approached President
Roosevelt to propose that the U.S. put scientists to work on preparations for war. This outreach, led
by Vannevar Bush (President of the Carnegie Institute of Washington and former Vice President and
Dean of Engineering at MIT) with the support of Karl Compton (President of MIT), James Conant
(President of Harvard), and Frank Jewett (President of the National Academy of Sciences and of
Bell Labs), resulted in a meeting with President Roosevelt in mid-June, a letter from Roosevelt on
June 15 requesting Bush to be the head of a new National Defense Research Committee (NDRC),
and an order on June 27, 1940 formally creating the NDRC.

Led by the aforementioned four scientists plus Richard Tolman (CalTech physicist), Conway Coe
(the U.S. Patent Commissioner), and one representative from each of the Army and the Navy,
the NDRC was tasked to "coordinate, supervise, and conduct scientific research on the problems
underlying the development, production, and use of mechanisms and devices of warfare," and was
funded directly out of the President's discretionary budget. It was authorized to perform research
as well as to contract with firms, individuals, and scientific institutions for research--and its work
was to supplement (rather than supplant) that of the Armed Services and other agencies like the
National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA).

NDRC began with a grand mission but only eight staff (the committee members themselves) and no
precedent to follow. At its first meeting on July 2, 1940, the committee organized into five divisions
by subject (Table 1), with subsections for individual military-scientific problems (Appendix Table
A.1), and concurrently began recruiting other top scientists (largely from committee members'
personal networks) to fill the new agency's ranks. It also made the decision that it would contract
out research rather than performing it directly. For its time, this was a radical move. Although
there had been previous attempts at large scale government support of research, tensions between
scientists' desire for autonomy and taxpayers' need for accountability had stalled the idea (Geiger
1993), and the urgency of an impending war forced a resolution.


                                              [Table 1 about here]


Over the next year, the NDRC initiated over 200 contracts for research in radar, physics, optics,
chemical engineering, and atomic fission, engaging many of the country's top academic and indus-
trial institutions in its work.1 But it was also limited by its emphasis on research, over engineering
and development; its focus on instruments of warfare, versus other critical pursuits; and a lack
1
    Atomic energy research was undertaken by the NDRC at the explicit request of Roosevelt, who had been informed
    of its military potential. The atomic fission research program is described in depth in Section 4.


                                                         4
of coordination with researchers at other agencies, including the military and NACA. Military
medicine was a particularly important gap: Hoyt (2006), for example, notes that "In nearly every
war prior to World War II, more men in the U.S. armed forced have died from disease than bat-
tle wounds." As such, the ability to outperform the enemy in treating common diseases such as
malaria, influenza, and bacterial infection could provide major battlefield advantages.

The NDRC's early successes persuaded Roosevelt to expand the organization, and on June 28,
1941, Executive Order 8807 created the OSRD as the successor to the NDRC to address these
deficiencies and be the central agency organizing civilian science for war, with Vannevar Bush at
the helm (Appendix Figure A.1 reproduces the executive order).2 Now funded by Congressional
appropriations, the OSRD subsumed the NDRC and added a Committee on Medical Research
(CMR), which was also organized into divisions by subject matter, and led by scientific experts.3
Whereas the role of the original NDRC (in 1940) was to "engage in research which would establish
the practicability and usefulness" of new instruments of war and convey them to the military, which
could then develop and manufacture them, the OSRD was a combined research and development
organization, with more resources devoted to development as the war progressed.

The NDRC branch of OSRD underwent a handful of changes over the course of the war, especially
as the scope of its work grew. In December 1942, the NDRC reorganized into 18 core divisions, two
panels, and two special sections (S-1 and T); one more division and a handful of new committees
were introduced over the next three years (see Table 2 for a list). These divisions covered a wide
range of subjects and varied equally widely in scale. The two largest divisions were Radar (14)
and Rocket Ordnance (3), with the majority of funding going to MIT and CalTech, respectively, to
support major research labs such as MIT's Radiation Lab (the "Rad Lab"), which was the locus
of radar research, employed over 4,000 people at its peak, and remains an institutional legend, or
CalTech's Jet Propulsion Lab, which still exists today. The NDRC also directed the atomic fission
research program until it was transferred to the Army in mid-1943.


                                                [Table 2 about here]
2
  It was not an inevitability that this research would happen within OSRD. In the early 1940s, various groups were
  politicking to be in charge of wartime medical research, and some had already started thinking about medical research
  funding before the war. Bush was initially reluctant to take on medical research (he observed in his autobiography
  that "medical men tend to have more feuds than the rest of the population"), and agreed only once assured he
  would have Roosevelt's backing in any inter-agency conflicts (Bush 1970).
3
  In addition to NDRC and CMR, the OSRD included an Advisory Council, which coordinated research activities
  across the government. It later added an Administrative office (responsible for business operations, including contract
  management), a Scientific Personnel office (to manage personnel shared by the OSRD and other government agencies,
  and to handle personnel issues for employees of OSRD and its contractors, especially draft deferments), an Office of
  Field Service (to create field offices, and deploy staff to study field problems and assist in ongoing training and the
  use of OSRD devices in combat operations), and a Liaison office (for coordinating research efforts and the exchange
  of scientific information with research agencies of Allied countries), which we discuss below.


                                                           5
Despite having one-tenth the budget of NDRC, CMR was similarly important to the war effort.
It was charged with mobilizing medical researchers and identifying "the need for and character
of contracts to be entered into with universities, hospitals, and other agencies conducting medical
research activities," and was equally radical for its time.4 Though the National Institute of Health
(NIH) had existed since 1930, its budget was small and mostly spent in its own labs. Private
foundations had previously funded medical research through block grants, and later (after the
Depression made these financially infeasible) through grants to specific researchers. But as we
discuss below, these were different in important ways from the CMR model, including their focus
on fundamental research. The CMR also drove a major shift in emphasis in medical research, away
from problems of peacetime to specific wartime medical needs.

CMR piggybacked on a committee structure created by the National Research Council's Division
on Medical Sciences (DMS) a year earlier in anticipation of war, organized around "problems with
which the Services expected to be confronted" (Richards 1946). In cases where not much was
known the NRC had hoped to launch investigations, but it never had a budget. Once CMR was
funded, in worked closely with the DMS (under contract) to set priorities and evaluate propos-
als. CMR was chaired by A.N. Richards, a pharmacologist and administrator at the University
of Pennsylvania, and its secretariat included three other civilian members--Lewis Weed (Johns
Hopkins and the National Academy of Sciences), Alphonse Dochez (Columbia) and Baird Hastings
(Harvard)--and representatives of the Army, Navy, and Public Health Service. Though there was
some internal reorganization over the war, CMR's main divisions were General Medicine, Surgery,
Aviation Medicine, Physiology, Chemistry, and Malaria.

The OSRD, including NDRC and CMR, grew to be a large agency, with 850 full-time paid employees
and 1,500 total personnel at its peak (Stewart 1948). Table 2 lists its research divisions, along with
total contract authorizations issued for the periods shown. These divisions operated relatively
independently, and were effectively the operating units of the OSRD. Each was led by a division
chief and further comprised of subsections with section chiefs.5

In concurrent research (Gross and Sampat 2020), we have compiled data on all OSRD contracts from
the agency's official records at the U.S. National Archives. In Table 3 we list the top industrial and
university contractors, where it is evident that OSRD funding was concentrated in a small number
of firms and universities. Table 4 shows that the concentration was even greater across states, with
ten states accounting for 90% of both NDRC and CMR spending.
4
  Chester Keefer, the "penicillin czar", later described it as "a novel experiment in American medicine, for planned
  and coordinated medical research had never been essayed on such a scale" (Keefer 1969).
5
  Bush claimed that this hierarchy supported the OSRD's efficient operation, and assisted him in his advisory role to
  President Roosevelt: by his own recounting, it allowed questions from Roosevelt to be transmitted down the OSRD
  chain of command and an answer returned (Bush 1970).


                                                         6
                                            [Tables 3 and 4 about here]


Though the OSRD was established nearly six months before the attack on Pearl Harbor, once the
U.S. was officially at war it embarked on a scientific sprint that lasted into the middle of 1945. The
OSRD's budget immediately grew many-fold, from $6.2 million in 1940-1941 to $39.6 in 1941-1942,
and $142.5 million in 1942-1943. By the end of the 1945-1946 fiscal year, the OSRD had spent over
$536 million on R&D, across over 2,500 contracts--including 1,500 contracts let by the NDRC,
570 by the CMR, and roughly 100 for research on atomic fission before it was spun out into the
Manhattan Project to develop an atomic weapon.6 Figure 1 illustrates the collective focus of its
work, using words in the titles of OSRD patents and publications.


                                                [Figure 1 about here]



3       The OSRD Model

From its inception, the organization faced several of the core questions that any crash innovation
program must address. What are specific problems that urgently need solving where R&D may be
useful? What firms, institutions, and scientists should be put to work on solving them, and how?
Should they be allowed to work from their home institutions, or organized into larger units? How
(and how much) will they be paid? Who will own the intellectual property rights over their work?
What will motivate top firms and scientists to contribute to the public cause? How should efforts
be coordinated, and who will do the coordinating? How will research results progress to technology
development, large-scale production, and ultimately deployment?

We aggregate these questions into following six categories:

      1. Priority-setting (i.e., what to support?)
      2. Selection of contractors (whom to support?)
      3. A funding mechanism (how to support it?)
      4. Incentives for participation
      5. Coordination of research efforts
      6. Translation to practice



6
    The OSRD's total expenditure is equivalent to nearly $8 billion in 2020 dollars, and one to two orders of magnitude
    more than the U.S. government as a whole was previously investing in science.


                                                            7
The urgency of war necessitated careful, early decisions but also the flexibility to adapt, especially
as the OSRD expanded and its research (and the war itself) progressed. Over the next several pages,
we describe how OSRD approached each of these issues. We focus on OSRD policy in the form it
evolved into over the course of the war, and on what we understand (from contemporaries) to have
been its general approach to funding and administering its expansive civilian research effort. As
we will see in Section 4, at a deeper level there was not one model but rather many, since different
problems sometimes necessitated custom solutions.


3.1       Priority setting

A basic question facing any R&D funding program is what research areas to fund, through which
mechanisms, and at what stages of maturity (e.g., basic research, applied research, development,
or even testing). The NDRC and CMR took distinct approaches to identifying and funding specific
research priorities, though they also had common features, such as their focus on applied research
over basic science and collaboration with end users in the military.

At the NDRC, ideas for research projects could come from within the OSRD, the military services,
or an Allied government. It was the job of the OSRD's individual sections to workshop these ideas
and formulate a basic proposal, including a plan of action, potential contractors, and its anticipated
cost and duration. These proposals were then voted on by the committee at weekly meetings, and its
recommendations were forwarded to Bush, who made final funding decisions. Urgent requests could
also be taken directly to Bush and authorized on the spot. According to Stewart (1948), this mix
of autonomy and review gave the NDRC's research divisions the flexibility to use their imagination
to dream up solutions to military problems--such as high-resolution aerial photography, electronic
fire control, or infrared night vision goggles--while also ensuring their ideas passed the scrutiny of
other experts and were consistent with the rest of the OSRD research agenda and the demands
(and constraints) of the war effort overall. Bush later recalled "most of the worthwhile programs
... originated at grass roots, in the sections where civilians who had specialized intensely met with
military officers who knew the problem in the field" (Bush 1970).

CMR did things a bit differently, receiving proposals from individual laboratories, which were then
evaluated by NRC committees in consultation with medical officers from the Army and Navy, and
approved by Bush.7 On occasion, CMR members also made "missions" to the front-line, which it
viewed as helpful to identifying research priorities (Stewart 1948).

7
    When there were specific problems where it wanted research done but for which it was not getting proposals, CMR
    members actively reached out to researchers "whom it regarded as most suitable" directly (Stewart 1948). However,
    most CMR research was investigator-proposed, rather than internally proposed.


                                                           8
In both cases, research divisions staffed by leading civilian scientists determined research priorities,
with input and in some cases collaboration from military users. The committees would then assess
scientific feasibility. For problems with high solution uncertainty, both the NDRC and CMR funded
multiple rivalrous approaches, such as in the atomic fission and penicillin research programs (see
Section 4). And in most cases, their focus was on applied research and development, small-batch
production, and testing to meet military needs, not fundamental work. As Conant explained, the
time for basic research is before a crisis, and since time was of the essence, "the basic knowledge
at hand had to be turned to good account" (Conant 1947).8


3.2    Selection of contractors

The second question the NDRC faced from the get-go was who would do the work. To build a
roster of potential contractors, one of its first undertakings (in the summer of 1940) was to survey
academic institutions to gather data on their facilities, research personnel, and ongoing research.
This list proved to be an essential resource throughout the war--colloquially known as "the Bible"
(Baxter 1946)--and was updated by the OSRD's business office as new research facilities came to its
attention. A similar survey of industrial facilities was made after Pearl Harbor, to be used especially
for late-stage technology development in between laboratory trials and large-scale production (with
the idea that the contractor might later double as manufacturer).

The NDRC's research divisions were tasked with finding suitable contractors and placing contracts.
The agency followed four guidelines in selecting contractors: (i) prioritization of ability to deliver
outstanding results as fast as possible ­ especially organizations requiring the least new personnel,
equipment, or facilities to do the work; (ii) for devices which may later go into production, avoidance
of contractors in local areas already overloaded with war production contracts or labor shortages;
(iii) spreading work across contractors, as feasible; and (iv) all else equal, reducing cost.9 Once
chosen, the division heads worked with contractors to develop formal proposals to be reviewed by
8
  Also worth noting is that Bush was deliberate in choosing what research problems the OSRD would not pursue.
  These choices were driven largely by Bush's view of where the agency could have the most impact. For example,
  materials science was not a focus of OSRD research, and was instead relegated to the Office of Production Research
  and Development at the War Department. Bush similarly kept the OSRD out of what were primarily production
  problems, such as scaling up production of natural penicillin, instead focusing the OSRD's efforts on synthesizing
  penicillin and running clinical trials for its application to specific diseases.
9
  Members of the NDRC specifically recognized the long lags in going from a kernel of an idea to its deployment in
  the battlefield, due to the research and development, mass production, delivery, and user training required, making
  speed of the essence. As Stewart (1948) writes: "The time interval between the inception of an idea and the use
  of the finished product upon the battlefield would normally run into several years. There was ever present in the
  minds of the Committee the possibility that the need would arise before the equipment could be completed. There
  was thus a sense of urgency in the selection of contractors ... the need for speed hung like a sword over the head of
  the Committee and speed meant that problems should be assigned to those institutions with the facilities and the
  manpower which promised the best results in the shortest possible time."


                                                          9
the committee, which sought assurances that "the work would be well done" (Stewart 1948)--which
could be founded in the strength of the proposal, the reputation of the researcher or institution, or
both. Though the NDRC's leadership (correctly) predicted that the institutional and geographic
concentration of its funding and cost of its programs might expose it to criticism (Stewart 1948),
the urgency of the crisis made performance its top priority.

Because the CMR solicited proposals rather than proposing the work itself, its process was neces-
sarily different. Once received, these proposals were sent to the NRC Division of Medical Sciences,
where 33 committees (with 221 elite medical researchers) reviewed applications. Peer review was
an "unprecedented approach" at the time, and CMR represented "the first sustained, large-scale
exercise of the function in a biomedical context" (Mandel 1996). Based on the review feedback, the
DMS gave each application a letter grade and submitted these reviews back to CMR. Typically,
not always, CMR funded what the DMS recommended.


3.3   The contract mechanism

OSRD was willing to fund projects which it perceived to have high upside but uncertain payoffs,
with the intent of putting "the best scientific imaginations in the country" on problems of military
importance. There was also a desire to not impose excessive oversight that might interfere with
scientists' ability to take risks and exercise judgment. Yet it was also important to ensure that
researchers remained focused on the true military objectives.

One of the organizational innovations of the NDRC was the development of contractual terms that
could balance these needs. No strong precedent precedent existed for government R&D grants or
contracts prior to World War II, but A. Hunter Dupree (1970) would later call the R&D contract
"one of the great inventions of the NDRC-OSRD" and "the glue which held the whole system
together." Broadly speaking, the OSRD attempted to design contracts to limit "micro-managing"
researchers, within broad constraints. Fox (1987) notes that although these were nominally con-
tracts, they were "part contract and part grant," as it was research, not specific deliverables, that
was being purchased. Though there was monitoring and feedback, once awarded principal inves-
tigators had considerable latitude, an approach Vannevar Bush called "giving a man his head."
Bush further explained "this is more than a matter of scientific freedom ... it is entirely possible
to give a man his head and yet to specify by agreement with him his objectives" (quoted in Hoyt
2006). Stewart (1948) described the performance clause as follows:

      [It] was a relatively simple provision. The contractor agreed to conduct studies and
      experimental investigations in connection with a given problem and to make a final

                                                 10
      report of his findings and conclusions to the Committee by a specified date. This clause
      was deliberately made flexible in order that the contractor would not be hampered in
      the details of the work which he was to perform. The objective was stated in general
      terms; no attempt was made to dictate the method of handling the problem.

Because rapid mobilization was a priority, the organization also tried to limit the lags caused by
contract negotiation and execution. Bush (1970) reported "Once a project got batted into form
which the section would approve, with object clearly defined, the research men selected, a location
found ... and so on, prompt action followed." Projects could be reviewed within a week, and letters
of intent could be sent out so work could begin.10 Contracts were written for short periods (e.g.,
six months), with the "informal understanding that they would be extended if the progress of the
work warranted." Even reimbursement of expenses was made easy.

In fields where military need could be divided into unrelated, discrete challenges (as in chemistry
or medicine), contracts were drawn widely, including to individual scientists and their personal
labs. However, when the need was for entire new systems (like radar or rockets), the OSRD often
concentrated resources geographically and institutionally, including funding the creation of entire
major research centers such as the Rad Lab. In still other cases (most prominently at the CMR,
e.g., in the search for malaria drugs) OSRD played a coordinating role between efforts already
underway in firms and universities, with limited formal contracting or funding.


3.4    Incentivizing participation

With the U.S. conscripting >10 million men into the military, nearly every scientist had friends
and family members deployed. The importance of producing technology to help U.S. soldiers,
sailors, and aviators survive in battle was thus much greater than an academic exercise. A sense
of urgency, common purpose, and shared destiny permeated American society--especially among
civilians supporting the war effort--and it made available "the best scientific talent of the country"
(Stewart 1948), who were able to work long hours with intensity.11

Nonetheless, OSRD needed to re-orient the research efforts of large swaths of scientists and engi-
neers. This was disruptive, both to profit-oriented firms, and to scientists and universities, some of
whom were wary of bureaucratic control. Its indirect cost recovery policy and patent policy, each
of which would be precedent-setting, were designed to help do so.
10
   Contractors "almost invariably started work under letters of intent which preceded the signing of contracts by weeks
   or months" (Stewart 1948), ensuring that negotiations would not slow progress.
11
   Conant (1947) later reflected, "human beings outdo themselves when their friends and relatives are facing battle."
   By October 1941, OSRD research had already involved 78 percent of America's top physicists and 52 percent of its
   top chemists, as measured in American Men of Science (Stewart 1948).


                                                          11
Overhead

Because the research was contracted out, it would use existing infrastructure at universities and
firms. From its inception, contracts were written on a "no gain, no loss" basis, but the committee
also recognized that in addition to regular research expenses, "there is a substantial indirect cost of
a going concern which must be allocated as a part of the cost of a particular operation" (Stewart
1948). The NDRC decided to allow for "overhead" expenses amounting to 50% of labor costs for
university contractors, and 100% for industrial contractors. These indirect cost rates were later
amended to a sliding scale for universities, declining as more contracts were placed with a given
institution. The OSRD likewise transitioned to a system of "direct" reimbursement of indirect costs
at industrial contractors, whose cost accounting methods could explicitly specify the OSRD share of
overhead. In a postwar review of overhead costs at the largest academic and industrial contractors,
OSRD cost accountants determined that roughly 50% of contractors had received excess overhead
payments, 10% were undercompensated, and 40% broke even.

Patents

The invention of the R&D contract introduced other novel challenges, especially in the assignment
of intellectual property rights. The contract terms initially adopted by the NDRC gave itself the
sole power to determine whether or not to file a patent application on inventions which resulted
from the contracted research, and the power to determine disposition of title and any rights to use.
This reflected the idea that the public should own the fruits of publicly-funded research. However,
this left contractors "completely subject to the judgment of the Government as to the disposition
of rights to inventions made under NDRC contracts" (Stewart 1948). Several firms refused to sign
contracts with this provision. Stewart (1948) summarized the problem:

      [The] NDRC "was asking America's leading companies to take their best men off their
      own problems and put them (at cost) on problems selected by NDRC, and then leave it
      to NDRC to determine what rights, if any, the companies would get out of inventions
      made by their staff members ... These companies had acquired a great deal of `know-
      how' as a result of years of effort and the expenditure of their own funds, often in large
      amounts. The research they were being asked to undertake was in many cases in line
      with their regular work ... and might result in some cases in inventions they might be
      expected to make at some future date at the appropriate place in their own programs. In
      some cases the Government contract involved minor adaptations of past inventions made
      by the contractors, and in such cases the contribution to the final product attributable
      to the work financed by the Government was relatively insignificant. But under the

                                                  12
         patent clause thus far offered by NDRC a company might be excluded from using
         its inventions under an NDRC contract in its own business, and might even find its
         competitors licensed by the Government while licenses were refused to it.


After extended negotiations, the NDRC crafted new language which gave the contractor first rights
to patent inventions produced under contract, and provided the government with an irrevocable,
royalty-free license to make and use the invention for military, naval, and national defense purposes
(notably, the NDRC was unsuccessful at negotiating a license that extended to all government uses).
Contractors were required to report all inventions to the NDRC prior to contract settlement, and in
the event that they elected not to file a patent application on any given invention, the government
could do so, providing the contractor with a nonexclusive royalty-free license in return. Because
of its lengthy terms, this patent clause became known as the "long form" clause, and it was used
with the overwhelming majority of industrial contractors.12

The NDRC (and later, OSRD) continued using a variant of its original patent clause--now called
the "short form" clause--in specific categories of contracts, giving the government presumption of
title where it supplied significant equipment, personnel, and even training to support the work.
The short form clause became standard for major OSRD-funded laboratory research programs
hosted at academic institutions, such as the research efforts in radar (MIT), rockets (CalTech),
and submarine detection (Columbia). CMR contracts were also subject to the short form patent
clause. Research contracts in the field of atomic energy were initially written under the long form
clause but were converted to the short form clause after it became apparent that the research might
result in the development of an atomic weapon. These decisions were uncontroversial at the time,
since in medicine there were strong norms militating against patenting, especially patenting public
research, and in the other cases, the government's interest in controlling the intellectual property
rights was clear. Still, in exceptional cases, CMR nevertheless tailored its patent policy in order to
motivate participation by qualified firms (see Section 4).


3.5       Coordinating research efforts

One of the OSRD's explicit responsibilities was to coordinate research with other U.S. agencies and
Allied governments. OSRD also coordinated across research it directly supported: for example, the
CMR organized meetings of investigators to facilitate their cooperation, duplicated and circulated
12
     There were also concerns about allowing firms to own patents resulting from publicly-funded research, especially
     among New Deal Democrats concerned with concentration of economic power. Bush acknowledged these concerns
     but argued that letting firms keep patents was important for ensuring their participation in the wartime effort, and
     the free government use license would be sufficient for wartime purposes. See Sampat (2020).


                                                            13
non-confidential progress reports among the community, and (with the help of the various NRC
committees) monitored progress and identified which projects "should be prosecuted with vigor"
versus "terminated or not recommended for renewal" (Stewart 1948). NDRC divisions working on
related problems could also share members, but for security reasons, information sharing across
divisions was restricted to that which was necessary to the work.

Coordinating research across U.S. government agencies was the job of the OSRD's Advisory Council,
which consisted of the Director of the OSRD, the Chairmen of the NDRC and CMR, the Chairman
of NACA, and representatives from the Army and Navy. The Advisory Council was foremost a
venue where these agencies could interact. When their work overlapped or bore conflicting demands,
or when it seemed collaboration may be valuable, it convened ad-hoc expert committees to make
recommendations on how to proceed. In some cases, research programs begun by one agency might
be transferred to another, the most notable being the NDRC's atomic fission program being spun
out into the Manhattan Project when it became a weapons development project. Concurrent with
his appointment as OSRD Director, Bush also served as the Chairman of Joint Committee on New
Weapons and Equipment at the Joint Chiefs of Staff, which advised the military on the use of new
weapons and ensured that the scientific perspective would remain close to military strategy, and as
a member of NACA, and all of Bush, Conant, and Tolman were active advisors to the Manhattan
Project--strengthening the OSRD's ties to these other agencies.

Close relations with the military were paramount to the OSRD's research efforts. It worked with the
military representatives in its leadership committee to pick research priorities, and with representa-
tives on the OSRD Advisory Council to avoid duplication. Day-to-day coordination on individual
research projects was performed by division-specific military liaison officers. These liaison officers
supported the quick exchange of information, field tests, and at the late stages of development, the
transition to manufacturing. As Stewart (1948) describes it, their job was "to speed the project
from initiation to the final stage of large-scale Service procurement."

International coordination (primarily with Great Britain, but also other Commonwealth countries)
began shortly after the NDRC was created. Scientific exchange between the American and British
first took place in the fall of 1940 with a British mission to the U.S. led by Sir Henry Tizard
(accompanied by representatives of the British and Canadian military, and the National Research
Council of Canada), in which the British shared data, blueprints, and prototypes of a wide range
of technologies being developed in England, in exchange for the same from the U.S. The most
important event in the Tizard mission was the conveyance of the cavity magnetron, which Baxter
(1946) called "the most valuable cargo ever brought to our shores." This was the essential input
to radar development, and the cornerstone of the U.S. radar research program. Other exchanges

                                                 14
took place on the proximity fuze and the feasibility of an atomic weapon, both of which became
important OSRD research programs. The Tizard mission, on its own, may have been the highest-
impact scientific event for either country at any point in the war.

From this point forward, international collaboration was a prominent feature of the research effort.
The OSRD established a "field office" in London, whose staff was the conduit for information to
flow between American and British researchers, and the British similarly established an office in
Washington, DC. The OSRD's London field office eventually evolved into a formal Liaison division,
which managed scientist exchanges (U.S. scientists visiting England or vice versa) in addition to
transmitting scientific reports. American radar research labs also established branches in England,
near their British counterparts, putting American and foreign scientists in direct contact with each
other and enabling them to coordinate their research programs.


3.6   Getting the ideas into practice

The process of bringing new technology "into operation against the enemy," as Bush described
it, proceeded in stages. "For a newly conceived device, these stages involve primary research,
engineering development, initial production for extended field tests, and engineering for quantity
production. For devices that have gone through these stages, as well as for older devices which are
being adapted into new forms or for new uses, there are also the stages of production, installation,
maintenance, development of tactics, training and use" (Baxter 1946).

Translation to practice thus involved several key steps, including initial production runs, field tests,
and production at scale. Bush established an internal Engineering and Transition Office to bridge
the divide between R&D and manufacturing. When a device being developed in the lab was ready
for testing, it was the responsibility of this office to find a manufacturer which could produce enough
units for a field test--which could range from a single unit (e.g., for radar) to thousands (e.g., for
rockets). In doing so, it was necessary to ensure that manufacturers could match the specifications
and performance of prototypes from the lab. Other basic considerations included the availability
of facilities, supply of materials (especially given the materials shortages imposed by the war), and
the ability to scale up manufacturing if the tests were successful.

Field tests were (quite literally) conducted in the field of battle. Without the support of experts,
military testers frequently imposed self-designed tests, misused the device, or simply drew the
wrong conclusions, and the OSRD eventually found it necessary to have some scientists accompany
OSRD technology into the field (Baxter 1946). This type of field testing was the initial purpose of
the OSRD's Office of Field Service, but the division later evolved to also support the deployment


                                                  15
and proper use of finished OSRD technology in the theater of war--including (i) ensuring that
technology was not distrusted by military users if it experienced bugs or was not properly deployed
in their first attempt, and (ii) ensuring that it was not overextended (by being used in settings or
jobs for which it was not designed and would not actually work).

CMR was also active in development, evaluation, and implementation. Even when there was initial
evidence of the therapeutic benefits of new treatments from theory or animals, a key question was
whether they worked in humans. Many of its contracts involved testing (e.g., of antimalarials, or an
influenza vaccine), sometimes on prisoners and institutionalized populations--practices that would
today not be permitted. In some cases, where it expected there could be pushback or negative
publicity (e.g., testing of gonorrhea treatments on prisoners), CMR worked with contractors to
develop protocols (Rothman 1991). Members of the Army and Navy also helped arrange field
trials on soldiers and reported back results. This user perspective helped facilitate bi-directional
feedback, and ultimately utilization. In some cases, CMR helped support manufacturing as well--
most famously in the penicillin program, as we discuss in Section 4.



4     Example OSRD Research Programs

Although the OSRD had a predominant model for identifying research priorities and supporting the
work, there were also differences in how individual research programs were run. We illustrate the
OSRD's work with four case studies: radar (and radar countermeasures), atomic fission, malaria,
and penicillin. What these projects had in common was (i) an urgent military demand, (ii) questions
over who would do the work, how the work would be done, and how to get the results into the
field, and (iii) a foundation in existing basic science. But they also differed in several ways, such as
in the division of labor and organizational structures, the pursuit of serial versus parallel research
efforts, and policies around patent rights and information sharing.

Table 5 summarizes these programs, where this heterogeneity can be seen. The table also shows,
however, that although these programs were different in many ways, they all made clear choices in
the categories of decisions we outlined above, choosing either to engage end-to-end or to outsource
certain activities and functions to a partner organization.


4.1   Radar and radar countermeasures

When war broke out in Europe, Germany quickly established air supremacy in its invasions of
Poland and France as well as the London Blitz. The results of these campaigns made it clear that

                                                  16
defeating Germany would require breaking its hold of the skies. Radar--a technology for detecting
fast-moving or distant objects not visible to the naked eye, including ships and aircraft obscured
by fog or darkness--was thus a focus of the OSRD's work from its inception. Much of the basic
science of radar (namely: transmitting, reflecting, and receiving radio waves) was well known before
the war broke out, though the technology was too primitive at ultra-high frequencies to be useful
in military applications.13 Section D-1 of the NDRC, colloquially the Microwave Committee, was
established with the specific objective to study the application of microwaves (radio waves <10 cm
in length) to detection problems, guided by Alfred Lee Loomis (an independent inventor, physicist,
and wealthy financier who was running a private experimental radar laboratory from his home prior
to joining the NDRC), and staffed by academic and industrial scientists and engineers from various
institutions with experience in the field of microwave radiation.

Concurrently with American efforts, British scientists were also investing in improving radar, for
defense against German attack. When the Tizard mission demonstrated the cavity magnetron
to U.S. researchers at Loomis' Tuxedo Park laboratory in the fall of 1940, it jump-started what
would grow to be the NDRC's most significant research project.14 In October 1940, in light of the
possibilities that radar presented and at the urging of the Tizard mission, the NDRC's Microwave
Committee voted to create a radar research laboratory at MIT. The institute was chosen over other
contenders for four reasons: the presence of a handful of scientists with experience in the microwave
field, its ability to attract more academic scientists to work on the radar problem, its proximity
to the sea, and the possibility of using Boston's Municipal Airport for testing. Research at MIT
began on November 10, 1940, several months before the NDRC contract with the university was
finalized, under direction of Lee A. DuBridge, a physicist from the University of Rochester. The
lab was quickly staffed up with other scientists, largely physicists and electrical engineers, academic
and industrial, faculty and students and recent graduates alike.

Baxter (1946) describes the Rad Lab embarking on its research mission with a "feverish" pace. By
January 1941 it was testing new radar sets from the roof of MIT buildings, using it to track planes
in the Boston area. In February, the Rad Lab was asked by the Army to make experimental radar
sets for installation in planes, setting a precedent for limited "crash production" in addition to its
crash innovation, though most production was both then and later done by industrial contractors
like General Electric, RCA, AT&T, Westinghouse, or Raytheon.

13
   Prior to the war, radar was an emergent technology, and much of the early experimentation in radio detection was
   done by the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory, the U.S. Army Signal Corps, and the the private laboratory of Alfred
   Lee Loomis, introduced below, in Tuxedo Park, New York.
14
   The significance of the cavity magnetron was its ability to generate enough power to make radar feasible at wave-
   lengths of <50 cm, an achievement that had proved elusive. It sparked further innovation that brought wavelengths
   down to under 10 cm, and was the critical component in every radar set thereafter.


                                                        17
Throughout the war, radar development was centered at MIT, with parts procurement and various
projects subcontracted out to other organizations, such as Bell Labs. The first two years of work
at the Rad Lab focused on basic advances in microwave communication, growing from a kernel of
perhaps 20 scientists to an organization of thousands, most on-site in a single, three-story building,
all working long hours in service to the war effort--including numerous future Nobel laureates in
physics. By 1943, substantial progress had been made on the core technology, and its work began
shifting to to engineering and production. It was in 1943, according to Baxter (1946), that the Rad
Lab's operations expanded to "development, assistance to manufacturers, and field service." To
this end, the Rad Lab put staff members on detail at manufacturers, and manufacturers likewise
sent personnel to Cambridge for collaboration on prototypes.

Coordination was a prominent feature of the research effort. As the Rad Lab grew, the OSRD began
to contract select projects to other institutions when the work was sufficiently distinct, important,
or sensitive, and it placed staff with these other contractors to be liaisons. It also placed staff in
the field, and it was "at the [battle]front or at Army and Navy bases [that] the possible tactical
uses of radar were explored, operating procedures were established, problems of installation and
maintenance were met, and the training of operators and maintenance personnel went forward"
(Baxter 1946). Collaboration with the British also persisted throughout the war, with the Rad Lab
hosting a British liaison officer and running a branch in Britain. With multiple contractors as well
as the military branches working on radar, the OSRD also organized a government radar patent
program to exchange inventions and coordinate patent filing.

As the war progressed, radar countermeasures (i.e., obfuscation and jamming of enemy radar), and
even counter-countermeasures, were proved to be nearly as valuable as radar itself. Shortly after the
attack on Pearl Harbor, the NDRC was asked to begin work on countermeasures in collaboration
with the Naval Research Laboratory and Signal Corps, and it added a countermeasures division to
the Rad Lab, to be led by Frederick Terman of Stanford.

The countermeasures project had distinct objectives, staff, culture, and security requirements, and
it was soon decided to move it to another institution--with Harvard being the natural choice due
to its facilities and proximity. On March 20, 1942, the OSRD initiated a new division (Division 15,
"Radio Coordination") and a new contract with Harvard to fund the Radio Research Laboratory
(RRL) for development of radar countermeasures. In July, Terman moved with his staff of then
>100 people to Harvard. The lab quickly grew, with recruits piling in from around the country,
including from firms like AT&T and CBS, and even re-training biologists and chemists into radar
technicians, reaching a size of 800 staff members at its peak.

Between 1940 and 1945, radar developed into a profoundly important instrument of war, giving

                                                 18
soldiers the ability to see from land, sea, or air what their eyes could not. Despite hardly featuring
in U.S. military strategy at the start of the war, by 1945, the military had procured over $3 billion
of radar and $300 million of radar jamming equipment (>$45 billion today). The OSRD supported
R&D in over 100 distinct radar systems for different applications (e.g., ground-, ship-, or air-based;
stand-alone or integrated into firing devices; etc.). Baxter (1946) later described radar as "the most
versatile instrument in modern warfare," going on to attribute the Rad Lab's success to a "highly
flexible and effective administration, extensive research in fundamentals, steady improvement of
components, and close liaison with the Army and Navy, and the British." Though it was decom-
missioned at the end of the war, the Rad Lab lived on through its post-war descendants, MIT's
Research Laboratory for Electronics and Lincoln Laboratories. Fred Terman returned to Stanford
as Dean of Engineering (later Provost), where he laid the foundation for the post-war ascendancy
of the Silicon Valley area in electrical engineering, electronics, and microwave communications,
earning a reputation as "the Father of Silicon Valley".


4.2   Atomic Fission

The most widely-remembered scientific achievement of World War II is the harnessing of atomic
energy to create a weapon of mass destruction. Yet the atomic bomb was the culmination of years
of OSRD work on atomic fission which preceded the Manhattan Project and was transferred over
only when the basic science was established, and the fission project converted into an all-out effort
to produce enough fissile material for a bomb as quickly as possible.

The OSRD's atomic fission research was rooted in the scientific breakthroughs of Otto Hahn and
Friedrich Strassmann, who in 1938 had produced barium after bombarding uranium with neutrons,
and Lise Meitner and Otto Frisch, who discovered in a follow-up experiment in early 1939 that
the result was achieved through atomic fission. What made the result remarkable was that the
resulting fragments had less mass than the original uranium nucleus--and by implication, the
missing matter had been transformed into energy, which Albert Einstein's famous formula E = mc2
implied would be very large relative to its mass. This finding alone was revolutionary, earning Hahn
and Strassmann a Nobel prize in 1944, but the fact that the fission of uranium released additional
neutrons suggested it may be possible to engineer chain reactions. The finding electrified the physics
community, presenting new possibilities in the production of energy.

It was well known amongst the tightly-knit physics community in 1939 that U-235 was the isotope
in which fission was achieved (Baxter 1946), and uranium was thus the focus of most early research
on fission. At this time, only a handful of deposits had been discovered around the world, with


                                                 19
isotopes U-234, U-235, and U-238 comprising <0.01%, 0.7%, and 99.3% of material in naturally-
occurring uranium. If only U-235 was reactive, scientists faced two possibilities: "One approach
was to place unseparated uranium in a `pile' with carbon or heavy water as a moderator or `slower
down' of neutrons to increase the chances of a chain reaction," whereas the other was "to separate
the isotopes and accumulate a stock of U-235" (Baxter 1946).

In the summer of 1939, at the urging of Leo Szilard and Albert Einstein, President Roosevelt
appointed a special Advisory Committee on Uranium to initiate study of the fission of uranium,
led by Lyman A. Briggs, the director of the National Bureau of Standards. When the NDRC was
established in June 1940, this committee was folded in as one of its divisions (Table 1). Briggs' first
request to Bush was for an allotment to research the fundamental constants of nuclear fission, and
contracts were let in the fall of 1940 with several universities and funds transferred to two federal
agencies to support this work. Notably, the NDRC's leadership itself was divided over the military
relevance, and thus prudence, of this investment. As Baxter (1946) recounts:

      To at least two members of NDRC these appropriations seemed questionable. The
      order creating the agency defined its objective as research and development of instru-
      mentalities of war, and did not seem broad enough to include ... nuclear physics or the
      development of atomic energy for peacetime use. Eventually atomic power might be
      harnessed to propel battleships or submarines, but not for many years to come. In view
      of all the high-priority problems pressing for solution was it desirable to commit many
      of the limited group of first-rate physicists to the uranium job?

This internal dissension led Jewett (member of the NDRC) to appoint an independent committee
of physicists not deeply involved in atomic fission research to review the issue and provide a rec-
ommendation on whether atomic fission research held military promise, and whether it "called for
a radical expansion of our efforts" or a continuation of a modest, exploratory research program.
This committee, which included Nobel laureates Arthur Compton and Ernest O. Lawrence, met
twice in the spring of 1941 and recommended a "strongly intensified effort," but acknowledged
that it would likely take years for this research to yield enough progress to be of use in military
applications. Based on this committee's report, Briggs requested to increase NDRC expenditures
on atomic fission three-fold, writing over a dozen new contracts for the study of "the possibility of a
chain reaction and of full-scale equipment for the production of power," as well as "continuation of
work on the separation of uranium isotopes", which was thought to be the only material conducive
to a chain reaction in a mass small enough to be a bomb (Baxter 1946).

Even then, the scale of the program was relatively small, at a few hundred thousand dollars. But as

                                                  20
both this work and parallel efforts in Great Britain made progress, American physicists who were
involved in the NDRC-funded research or close to the problem became increasingly convinced of
the possibility of separating uranium isotopes and generating an explosive chain reaction, and Bush
decided that a course of action needed to be set by the President. In a meeting with Roosevelt and
Vice President Henry Wallace in October 1941, Bush explained the state of atomic fission research,
being conservative in his prediction of the feasibility of an atomic weapon by acknowledging it
was based only on experimental laboratory data, and it was unknown if a full-fledged attempt at
uranium separation would be successful. Roosevelt told Bush to proceed.

The uranium program was accordingly reorganized to accelerate its progress: gaseous diffusion and
centrifugal separation of U-235 was headquartered at Columbia under the direction of Harold C.
Urey, electromagnetic separation (through the use of a cyclotron) at Berkeley under the direction
of Ernest Lawrence, and chain reactions in unseparated uranium and its (recently discovered)
fissionable byproduct plutonium at Chicago under Arthur Compton.15 The United States' formal
entry into the war following the attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7 triggered an "all-out attack
on the uranium problem" (Baxter 1946). At a December 16 meeting, the President urged Bush
to "press as fast as possible on the fundamental physics and on the engineering planning, and
particularly on the construction of pilot plants," with the understanding that when the program
was ready for full-scale production, it would be transferred to the Army.

Because it was unclear which method of separation would be viable for large-scale production, the
OSRD decided to continue investing in all approaches until any was successful or found infeasible.
As of May 1942, there were "five horses running neck and neck" (Baxter 1946): the centrifugal,
diffusion, and electromagnetic methods of separating U-235, and the graphite and heavy-water pile
methods of making plutonium from uranium. The military urged on this work on the grounds that
Germany was likely also pursuing the bomb, and even brief delays could have catastrophic effects.
Given the urgency of the project, Briggs, Compton, Lawrence, Urey, and Eger Murphree (a chemist
from Standard Oil who was recruited to help manage the diffusion and centrifuge separation work)
proposed to begin building pilot plants for all five methods of producing fissionable material at
scale before the viability of any one had been proven. This proposal was then forwarded by Bush
and Conant to the President, Vice President, and Secretary of War with a supplementary proposal
that the Army undertake the construction of these pilot plants.16

15
   All Nobel laureates working with exceptional students and colleagues, including other past and future prize winners
   like Enrico Fermi, Glenn Seaborg, and Luis Alvarez (also of the MIT Rad Lab).
16
   Although R&D would normally precede pilot production, "Fear that the Germans would be the first in the field with
   atomic bombs led to a telescoping of stages, in which pilot plant work often overlapped research in the laboratory,
   and the design and construction of some of the huge production plants were carried out before lessons could be
   learned and obstacles surmounted in the pilot plant" (Baxter 1946). The Manhattan Project, under the guidance


                                                         21
While the Army began building these plants, the OSRD continued its work. A major breakthrough
occurred on December 2, 1942--when Chicago's Pile Number 1 produced the first controlled nuclear
chain reaction, in effect becoming the world's first nuclear reactor--but the experimental pile would
have had to run for 70,000 years to produce enough plutonium for a bomb. Research on five
methods of producing fissionable material thus continued, though by the spring of 1943, centrifugal
separation was abandoned, and heavy-water soon thereafter.

This left the military with three viable paths to producing enough uranium or plutonium for a bomb.
With the science of atomic fission understood and pilot plants running, the OSRD transferred
its work to the Army on May 1, 1943. Its contracts were subsumed into the recently-organized
Manhattan Project, whose mission was to produce a functional atomic weapon. In all, the OSRD
wrote over 100 contracts to nearly 50 contractors for research on atomic fission, with total value of
$19 million, comparable to the $28 million expended on radar through April 1943. Several OSRD
staff members were then transferred to the Manhattan Project, and Bush, Conant, and Tolman
served in an advisory capacity until July 16, 1945, when all three were present at Alamogordo to
witness the successful detonation of the first atomic weapon.


4.3   Penicillin

Infectious disease was the most important medical problem facing soldiers during the war. As with
other wartime problems, there had been considerable but incomplete progress against infectious
diseases in the decades before the war. Sulfa drugs, developed in Germany, were effective against a
range of bacterial diseases, especially streptococcal infections. But they had major toxicity issues
and were not useful for many other battlefield ailments. The best hope was in penicillin, which in
1929 the Scottish physician-scientist Alexander Fleming had found inhibited the growth of bacteria
in the mold Penicillium notatum, where it was naturally grown. A decade later, in 1939, an Oxford
University laboratory headed by Howard Florey and Ernest Chain (who later shared a Nobel Prize
with Fleming) were first able to purify the molecule, making it possible to conduct clinical tests.
However, the Oxford group was unable to produce enough of it for human testing, nor, in war-torn
Britain, to engage British pharmaceutical companies to help do so.

In 1941, Florey came to the U.S. for help (Baxter 1946). He was referred to the U.S. Department of
Agriculture's Northern Regional Research Laboratory (NRRL) in Peoria, IL, which had experience
growing mold at high yield, and also met with A.N. Richards at the CMR. Though CMR's primary
 of the military, engaged numerous industrial contractors to collaborate with the academic labs to build these plants
 at now-familiar sites: electromagnetic separation and gaseous diffusion plants were built at Oak Ridge, TN, and
 a plutonium plant at Hanford, WA. Work on the design of a bomb itself was moved to the newly established Los
 Alamos laboratory near Santa Fe, NM, for reasons of secrecy and safety.


                                                        22
focus was supporting research rather than production (Stewart 1948), Richards assured Florey "that
he would see that everything possible was done to expedite the production of penicillin" (Federal
Trade Commission 1958). This commitment was made despite the fact that the production program
for natural penicillin was regarded as "chimerical" in certain quarters and there was considerable
uncertainty about its feasibility (Federal Trade Commission 1958). But it was buffered by CMR's
decision to engage in a parallel effort to develop a synthetic penicillin, which had even greater
appeal, as both Richards and Bush believed large scale production of a synthetic would be cheaper
and more technically feasible than production of natural penicillin.

The CMR took sharply different approaches to the two R&D programs, which presented distinct
problems. Its research efforts focused on synthetic penicillin, where the key questions were figuring
out penicillin's molecular structure and finding a way to chemically synthesize it. As with other
OSRD research programs, the CMR had to decide whether to concentrate resources in the top firms,
or spread its bets. Ultimately it decided to choose companies that had experience in or capabilities
for synthesis, or interest in penicillin more generally. It included nine firms, two universities, and the
U.S. Department of Agriculture in the synthetic penicillin program (Swann 1983). Under the terms
of its contracts, Bush had the right to inspect contractors' work and records, and contractors were
required to provide progress updates through monthly reports. CMR could then share information
from all contractors amongst the group, as useful (Swann 1983). Since several leading firms were
already conducting research on synthesis, CMR issued "token" contracts with no funding, mainly
to facilitate information flow. The principal terms of these contracts addressed patent rights of the
participants: firms were allowed to take out patents, with Bush's approval, but required to grant
non-exclusive licenses to other contractors and the government, with reasonable royalties. This
licensing policy was viewed as a substitute to presumptive government ownership.

In the natural penicillin case, the problem was not research; rather, it was production. Here, CMR
initially had a more limited coordinating and recruiting role: beyond some funding to the NRRL,
it did not fund much of the actual research. In late 1941, CMR organized meetings with Bush, the
NRRL, and representatives from the pharmaceutical companies Merck, Squibb, Pfizer, and Lederle
Labs, where it worked hard to persuade these (mostly reluctant) firms to be involved. The NRRL
was to work on techniques for increasing penicillin yields from mold, and the firms on production
techniques, and similar to the synthetic program, "their progress would be reported to CMR for
such distribution as would advance the program" (Andrus 1948).

This undertaking presented several challenges. One was getting firms to invest in developing (un-
funded) production capabilities. Merck and Pfizer were concerned about cross-over contamination
of penicillin on other activities, and (early on) wanted more proof of concept from Peoria before

                                                   23
charging ahead--so CMR provided progress reports and other reassurances to assuage concerns
(Federal Trade Commission 1958, Neushul 1993). It also served as a broker of information among
these firms, and helped them get waivers to avoid antitrust scrutiny that cooperative research some-
times attracted. Finally, CMR helped the firms by working with the War Production Board (WPB)
to get needed equipment to the firms, and connecting them with academics who would evaluate
the samples they produced. In all cases, the firms provided their own funding, participating for
patriotic, reputation, or other reasons. Since natural penicillin was a known molecule, there was
no strong intellectual property to be had, save for process patents.

While the synthetic penicillin program struggled to make headway, by 1942, firms were producing
40 million units of natural penicillin per month, up from 10 million in 1941 (Baxter 1946)--enough
for testing.17 Because quantity was initially scarce, the firms had agreed that all testing should
be organized by CMR. Testing was done via contract in collaboration with the NRC Committee
on Chemotherapeutic and Other Agents (COC), which would eventually be headed by CMR's own
Chester Keefer. CMR acquired supply from the producers (initially for free, but later at cost).
The COC then distributed penicillin to hospitals free of charge, in return for detailed case reports
(Federal Trade Commission 1958). Initially the testing contracts went to recognized experts, but
as supply of penicillin grew, more physicians could be involved. The COC received reports on over
10,000 patients, sending back its analyses to CMR periodically (Federal Trade Commission 1958).
CMR also supported testing "in the field" on wounded soldiers, in collaboration with the military
(Andrus 1948, Federal Trade Commission 1958). The positive results from these tests led to a
desire for broad adoption by the military, and to civilian demand.

This meant there was a need to build large scale production facilities for penicillin, beyond pilot
plants. The needs of massive scale-up were a distinct technical challenge. On the encouragement of
CMR, the Office of Production Research and Development (OPRD) of the WPB provided needed
material, and shared technical expertise and some funding, while the Defense Plant Corporation
helped support construction (Baxter 1946).18 Even as WPB tried to convince firms to invest quickly
in plants for scale-up, a lingering risk which allegedly slowed investment was the possibility that
the CMR might end up succeeding in a synthetic approach to penicillin production. Bush's view,
however, was that "Synthesis may make all this obsolete, but it may not, and the overall problem
is so important that no leads should be neglected" (Neushul 1993).

WPB contacted 175 potential producers, and eventually included 20 in the program (Neushul 1993),
17
     Baxter (1946) notes that it takes about one million "units" of penicillin to treat one patient.
18
     Note that although the government supported plant construction, nearly 75 percent of the $30 million spent on this
     came from private firms. The government provided authorization for rapid tax amortization of these investments
     to help defray these expenses (Swann 1983).


                                                           24
chosen based on experience with penicillin, fermentation, and biologic production in general, and
the quality of staff. WPB spent a lot of time and energy trying to facilitate information sharing
among the firms involved, which Richards later noted greatly increased productivity (Andrus 1948),
while OPRD funded academic research to help solve technical bottlenecks in the scale-up process
(Neushul 1993). In this effort, CMR was largely on the sidelines: its expertise was in research and
testing, whereas military production was the domain of the WPB.

The natural penicillin program was successful. Monthly output grew from 425 million units in
June 1943, to 117.5 billion in June 1944, to nearly 650 billion in June 1945. The cost of producing
100,000 units fell from $20 to less than one dollar. By 1943, there was enough penicillin to treat
U.S. and Allied troops and meet civilian demand. CMR was initially involved in rationing, but
once civilian demand became large this was turned over to WPB. The government was the major
buyer during the war, paying cost-plus prices of about $20/dose (Achilladelis 1993).

The synthesis problem, in contrast, proved surprisingly complex, despite initial enthusiasm and
scientists who promised results in months. Once natural penicillin production was successful, the
synthesis program was shut down. The causes of this "failure" have been examined elsewhere
(Swann 1983), and include unexpected scientific difficulties, lack of information sharing among
British and U.S. efforts, and difficulty in getting enough penicillin for testing. But Swann (1983)
also notes that lack of success during the war does not necessarily mean the program was a flop,
since much of the knowledge developed during the war "paved the way" for a number of clinically
important semi-synthetic penicillins introduced in the 1950s.

In Science, The Endless Frontier, Bush (1945) observed that "Penicillin reached our troops in time
to save countless lives because the Government coordinated and supported the program of research
and development on the drug." As is well known, the drug would also have a major impact
on civilian health as well providing treatment for a range of infectious diseases. Firms which
participated in the natural and synthetic penicillin programs were also poised to be important
players in the antibiotic revolution in the decades after the war. Achilladelis (1993) argues that
"OSRD policies for the development of penicillin created a unique opportunity for the American
Pharmaceutical Industry to gain experience in R&D and the manufacture of antibiotics which were
the major market for pharmaceuticals in the following 25 years."


4.4   Malaria

Malaria--caused by mosquito-borne, protozoan parasites of the Plasmodium group--has been one
the deadliest diseases in the world for centuries. In the U.S., malaria was on the road to elimination


                                                 25
by the early 1930s, reflecting urbanization and public health interventions such as mosquito control.
But much of World War II was fought in areas with high malaria risk, especially in North Africa
and the Pacific theater, and morbidity from malaria was a serious impediment to the Allied effort.
Malaria could be treated with quinine--an extract from the bark of the Cinchona tree--and though
its side effects (blurry vision, tinnitus, and nausea) were not ideal, it was effective. However, quinine
supply routes were vulnerable, and after the Japanese seized Java in 1942, nearly all U.S. supply
was cut off. As General Douglas MacArthur put it, "this will be a long war if for every division I
have facing the enemy I must count on a second division in the hospital with malaria and a third
division convalescing from this debilitating disease" (Slater 2009).

Some malaria research was conducted in the 1930s, much of it focused on developing a quinine
substitute. In the U.S. this was supported by the NRC and Rockefeller Foundation, but this pro-
gram was disorganized and not well funded. The Germans were also working on quinine substitutes
during the interwar era, partly because their own stock had been cut off during the Allied blockade
in World War I. Most of this work was conducted by the conglomerate I.G. Farben, which had so-
phisticated chemical synthesis capabilities. The German effort yielded several candidates, including
a drug called atabrine (which had been marketed globally, including in the U.S. before World War
II) and sontochin (which would be the German drug of choice during the war but was not widely
known), among many others. However, side effects of the U.S. produced version of atabrine (e.g.,
discoloration, gastrointestinal issues, and a loss of virility) made soldiers reluctant to take it, and
generals similarly reluctant to compel them to do so (Baxter 1946).

In 1941 the NRC organized a Conference on Chemotherapy of Malaria (later called the Board for the
Coordination of Malarial Studies) which CMR funded as one of its first activities. The Board would
develop a coordinated approach to developing malaria preventatives and treatments. It included
CMR representatives, NRC scientists, and representatives of the Army and Navy. According to
Baxter (1946), "The presence of the service members enabled [the services] to follow developments
in civilian laboratories and, through their knowledge of problems in the field, direct the attention
of civilian research to particular problems that demanded solution."

Much of the work supported by CMR was aimed at identifying a good substitute for quinine. The
initial work focused on atabrine: since the drug was being made in the U.S. using slightly different
materials and approaches, it was unclear if its adverse side effects were inherent or due to process.
This work examined whether the U.S. variant was sufficiently pure and the actual incidence and
severity of side effects, as well as testing and developing dosing guidelines. But CMR also supported
synthesis and screening of other drugs in parallel (Slater 2009).

The hunt for other treatments began with basic research on parasitology in animal models (Baxter

                                                   26
1946, Slater 2009). Once testing capacity was widespread and there were good animal models, the
bottleneck was rapid identification of new compounds. This was a different problem than penicillin,
where only one or two compounds were studied: CMR funded synthesis and testing of thousands
of antimalarial compounds, trying to find one better than atabrine. But in addition to funding,
it also coordinated a decentralized, inter-disciplinary and cross-sector research network. Together
with NRC, it helped share information across related efforts, and distributed research problems to
different teams to avoid unnecessary duplication. The NRC Board for Malaria Studies (led by James
Shannon, who would later become perhaps the most prominent head of the NIH) conducted trials
of atabrine and other candidates--including in prisons and on other institutionalized populations,
and, working with military liaison officers, on soldiers in the field.

The Survey on Malarial Drugs was the "workhorse" of the program (Slater 2009). This project cat-
aloged information on new compounds and prepared and distributed reports and bulletins (Baxter
1946). A key issue was how to get firms to contribute compounds, and CMR established categories
of information allowing firms to do so in confidence in cases where they had proprietary interests.
This was a balancing act, and a source of considerable controversy. In this program, more so than
natural penicillin, the leader (William Mansfield Clark) was heavily focused on protecting firms'
proprietary interests, while Bush and Richards wanted broader sharing and disclosure. Importantly,
many of the firms involved in the malaria program did not sign formal contracts, perhaps deterred
by the "short form" patent provisions (Slater 2009). Despite all of these issues, by 1942 "research
on the disease moved faster in one year than the previous ten" according to one account (Condon-
Rall 2000). The final product, A Survey of Antimalarial Drugs, 1941-1945, included information
on compounds from over 100 firms and institutions (Slater 2009).

In all, CMR supported research or testing of over 14,000 compounds in animals, and 80 in humans
(Baxter 1946). Out of this effort came chloroquine, which--although it arrived too late to be
useful during the war itself--became a revolutionary malaria treatment in the post-war period.
Surprisingly, the drug that would eventually be used on the field was none other than atabrine.
Once it was determined to be safe and effective in 1943, General MacArthur essentially decreed
it be used (Condon-Rall 2000). By 1944, there was a sharp decrease in malaria incidence (Baxter
1946), making the other developments moot during the war itself.



5    Impacts on Postwar U.S. Science and Science Policy

The impacts of the OSRD were significant, directly affecting not only the prosecution of the war,
but also U.S. technological progress, scientific manpower, federal science policy, and the postwar

                                                  27
U.S. economy. Its immediate impact was to help protect Allied forces in battle and bring the war
to swifter, victorious ending. Although we lack a counterfactual against which to measures its
impact on the war, the view of contemporaries and historians is that the OSRD had a significant,
multifaceted effect on its outcome (Bush 1945, Baxter 1946).19 It was also anticipated that the
results of its work would permeate civilian life, outliving the war itself: as Stewart (1948) wrote, "its
part in the winning of the war was its greatest contribution," but its full impact would be realized
later "as the civilian counterparts of its military developments begin to exert their influence upon
life in the United States and in the world at large."

We previously described the range of technological advances that the OSRD achieved in World War
II. Yet many of these results would not have reached the public without a dissemination strategy,
which the OSRD developed in the last year of the war.20 The OSRD allowed individual researchers
to write books and scientific articles, but until 1946 their publication required both OSRD and
military approval. Technical reports were deposited with the military services, and other reports
sent to the Department of Commerce, National Archives, and in select cases, to the Library of
Congress for distribution to local libraries throughout the country.

When it was all over, OSRD-funded research had generated nearly 8,000 inventions, 3,000 patents,
2,500 scientific articles, and over 10,000 technical reports. According to Google Scholar, the MIT
Radiation Laboratory Series, a 28-volume encyclopedic series sharing the engineering and technical
details of all of the work of the Rad Lab, has over 12,000 citations at the time of writing. CMR
publications have collectively been cited at least 70,000 times--an average of 40 per publication,
for the 1,718 CMR publications we can link to Clarivate's Web of Science. Moreover, the OSRD
did more than simply advance the frontier of knowledge and state of the art in existing fields--it
opened up entire new fields of research. Stewart (1948) wrote of the CMR: "The shift in emphasis
and even in direction was enormous. Many subjects of minor importance in peacetime become of
controlling importance in war," and some were even "born of war."

The intense focus of the wartime experience also appears to have trained a generation of researchers
and research managers, deepening U.S. scientific and administrative talent. The MIT Rad Lab, for
19
   For example, radar was used to detect incoming enemy aircraft on land and at sea, and incoming rockets targeting
   the civilian population in London. It was also paired with electronic fire control systems for automatic, guided
   anti-aircraft fire, and was the critical component of the proximity fuze, which detonated explosive shells prior to
   impact to increase the probability of hitting a moving target and the damage inflicted.
20
   Five years of "scientific silence" had left a gaping hole in the literature, and there were both obstacles and pit-
   falls to releasing all of this information at once--including concerns around security as well as the protection of
   government interest in patentable research--which necessitated a strategic approach. Even if the research were in
   publishable form and free of security classification, the sheer volume would flood journals, book publishers, and
   the scientific community beyond their capacity. The OSRD addressed these issues largely through pre-publication
   review. Interestingly, it also provided journals with list of candidate referees who, as of the end of the war, had the
   greatest experience or expertise in new fields in which it had sponsored research.


                                                           28
example, employed hundreds of recent college graduates, PhD students, and recent PhDs in physics,
electrical engineering, and related fields--including future Nobel laureates--and anecdotally shaped
many of their careers. Managing a sprawling research organization was itself a distinctive talent
that grew more valuable after the war as many U.S. universities transformed into federally-funded
research powerhouses, and many of the OSRD's senior scientists and major lab directors went on
to become university presidents, provosts, and deans after the war.

In a recent paper, we have also shown that the OSRD had a large, long-run impact on the direction
of U.S. invention, the locations where it took place, and employment in related industries (Gross
and Sampat 2020). World War II and the OSRD catapulted the U.S. electronics and microwave
communications industries to the technology frontier, laying the groundwork for much of the in-
novation which took place in the subsequent decades, and setting in motion agglomeration forces
which led to research activity increasingly concentrating in technology hubs around the country.
The CMR may have had similar effects on medical research and the life sciences, though this
remains an open question which has not yet been tested.

Several institutional innovations developed or refined during the war, including significant gov-
ernment funding of university research, remained features of the postwar era. Specific aspects of
contract design--indirect cost recovery and patent rights on publicly funded research--evolved from
the models developed during the war, and the debates on these issues in the postwar era echoed
those in the 1940s (Sampat 2020). In medicine, the active CMR contracts were transferred to NIH
after the war and formed the basis for its extramural program. The NIH "dual" peer review model
itself was based on the CMR/DMS approach described above (Mandel 1996).

Its most important impact was more general, in laying the foundation for government support of
research broadly. It was clear even before the war was over that the government would be an
active funder of research in peacetime. In November 1944, President Roosevelt asked Bush to
reflect on the lessons from OSRD for using research to promote peacetime goals of health, national
security, and job creation (Roosevelt 1944).21 Bush's response, Science, The Endless Frontier is
sometimes considered the "blueprint" for postwar R&D policy.22 The "Bush Report" made the case
for government funding of "basic" research at universities, with priority setting by scientists rather
than politicians, and emphasized the need for scientific autonomy. This was a markedly different
approach from how OSRD operated, and may reflect the difference between optimal innovation
policy in crisis and non-crisis situations, a topic we turn to next.


21
     It is now well accepted that Bush composed the letter himself (Kevles 1977, Bush 1970).
22
     For alternative perspectives, however, see Mowery (1997, 2009).


                                                          29
6        Lessons and Limits

Policymakers often use war as a metaphor to motivate major R&D efforts.23 Beyond large gov-
ernment expenditures in a short period of time, what does it take to mobilize science in an emer-
gency? What lessons can we draw from World War II for future crises? Lacking a counterfactual,
it is impossible to say with certainty exactly which features of the wartime effort were essential.
Compounding this difficulty, we also must rely largely on accounts of individuals involved in the
effort, who may lack perspective or objectivity in their assessments.

Even so, reflecting on the OSRD may inform innovation policy more generally. For one thing,
the OSRD experience highlights that the innovation policy problems during a crisis are different
from those in peacetime (or "non-crisis" times). The main difference is that in crises, speed is a
primary objective. Because in crises the objective of R&D policy is not just to get research done,
but also to get it deployed quickly, in various cases we discussed (e.g., atomic fission, penicillin,
malaria) the OSRD, together with other government agencies, also supported parallel R&D efforts
and production capacity "at risk." Moreover, while non-crisis R&D policy worries about racing
and overfishing (e.g., Dasgupta and Maskin 1987), in crisis contexts multiple shots on goal can be
valuable, especially for problems where there is solution uncertainty (Nelson 1961, Scherer 2011).
The value of a solution is so great that large amounts of funding to increase probability and speed
of success, even if much is ultimately wasted, can be cost-effective.

The need for speed in crisis R&D also may require a heavier hand, a tighter focus, and more explicit
coordination than ordinary R&D problems. In contrast to the status quo ante, and also modern
U.S. research policy, the OSRD chose to focus on applied research, involved users in priority setting,
and had a heavy hand in coordination and implementation. Hoyt (2006) has called the wartime
vaccine push "an integrated research model"--a term which would also apply to the rest of OSRD.
The reason for the applied research focus and heavy government hand throughout--despite the
fact that OSRD leaders generally supported scientific autonomy and limited government--was the
urgency of the moment. For example, by and large there was no time for exploratory research:
Conant (1947) recalled "Time set a limit to what could be done ... the basic knowledge at hand
had to be turned to good account." This, then, is another lesson from the OSRD model for crisis
innovation: the need for clear objectives, tight focus, and active management of the R&D process,
beyond simply correcting standard market failures in basic science.

The OSRD history also points to the choices policymakers have to make. A first choice is whether
23
     According to Google searches, we need a Manhattan Project for cancer, AIDS, alternative energy, global warming,
     cybersecurity, nutritional supplements, and even for protecting Manhattan itself from rising sea levels (Wellerstein
     2013), raising the question: what don't we need a Manhattan Project for?


                                                            30
to contract for research services or specific outputs. When choosing what to fund, research efforts
can be serial or parallel. Contractors can be concentrated or diffuse. The funder can choose to
retain patent rights or relinquish them to inventors. It can also actively coordinate across research
efforts and with end users, or take a hand-off approach. Finally, it can invest in production at risk,
or wait until a scientific solution (or feasibility) is known before scaling.

Though there was a general model, as the case studies suggest different problems called for different
types of solutions. In Table 6, we try to characterize what seems to have been OSRD's implicit
framework for decision-making around these problems. These decision rules are a function of
features of the problem (e.g., scientific uncertainty, divisibility of the R&D, and how hard it is to
quickly scale up production), features of the contractors (e.g., their existing scientific capabilities,
and their opportunity cost of being part of the crisis response), and features of the environment (e.g.,
who are the end users). We also characterize where our example OSRD research programs--radar,
fission, penicillin, and malaria--came down on each.

OSRD leaders and historical scholarship have also pointed to other salient features of the organi-
zation that they viewed as important to its success. First, the OSRD benefited from the strong
working relationship among its leadership, rooted in their prior personal history and mutual trust,
and especially benefited from Bush's keen judgment. The organization itself was staffed by excep-
tional scientists, with a clear chain of command that made it possible for questions, answers, and
directions to transmit efficiently up and down the chain. Its ability to make significant changes
mid-stream, such as with the reorganizations of the NDRC and CMR, was notable. It was willing to
take risks, making big bets on uncertain but high-value research proposals. Having an (effectively)
unrestricted budget was, in this sense, a boon. Another was the lack of "red tape": having little
precedent for its work, the OSRD invented most of the tools, and guardrails, that it needed as it
went. One of these was the contract mechanism itself, which was simple and quick to execute.24
More generally, the OSRD sought to minimize the transaction costs of research. It is important
to recall that this was an era before formal grant and contract procedures were institutionalized
at universities and in the federal government--and before IRBs, technology transfer offices and
other gatekeepers in the research process were common. Though this is good for speeding results,
research may have been too unrestricted: Rothman (1991), for example, has emphasized that in
the medical context, the need for speed sometimes resulted in ethically questionable practices (e.g.,
experimentation on prisoners), even by the standards of the day.

24
     Bush himself noted the fast pace of contracting in his memoir (Bush 1970): "Within a week [the] NDRC could
     review the project. The next day the director could authorize, the business office could send out a letter of intent,
     [and] the actual work could start." Bush goes on to emphasize how "this swiftness in getting things started, [and]
     the flexible scheme of operations, was an important ingredient."


                                                             31
The OSRD effort also benefited from some favorable conditions which are not guaranteed to recur
in all crises. The U.S. economy was basically functioning and able to operate at high gear, unlike in
Britain or Germany. The U.S. also had a head start: it knew the war was coming for several years
and the OSRD pre-dated the formal U.S. entry into the war. As Bush would emphasize in Science,
The Endless Frontier, for many of the problems facing the military there was a pre-existing stock of
relevant fundamental understanding, developed through basic research before the war, allowing the
OSRD to focus largely on development and application. Despite considerable controversy about
whether the nation's "full" talent was being employed (Kilgore 1943), the R&D establishment was
small and it was relatively easy for Bush and his network to identify the most capable individuals and
institutions for each research program. Without these favorable conditions, it is possible the OSRD
may not have succeeded. An additional lesson is thus the importance of strategically investing in
science and technology in regular times, to draw on in crises. This may include investing in basic
research and developing the scientific workforce, cataloguing top individuals and organizations to
enlist for unplanned urgent research problems, and insuring supply chains.

The OSRD approach may also be more suitable to some problems over others. Its approach may be
best suited to contexts where the government is the final purchaser and controls implementation,
and the range of needed technologies and approaches can be clearly articulated. Defense applica-
tions are one example, but by no means the only one: others might include government-administered
health care or education. However, in contexts where the users are diffuse and heterogeneous (e.g.,
climate change; see Mowery et al. 2010) or where significant behavioral change in the population
is needed, the OSRD approach may not be sufficient.

Taking stock, the history of OSRD illustrates how crisis innovation policy is different, and suggests a
framework for thinking about appropriate policy responses in different contexts. Yet the particulars
of the OSRD model may only work for specific types of innovation problems, such that caution is
warranted in appealing to the World War II model as a solution to all crises. These, in our view,
are the main lessons from OSRD for organizing crisis innovation.




                                                  32
References
Achilladelis, Basil. 1993. "The dynamics of technological innovation: The sector of antibacterial medicines,"
  Research Policy, Vol. 22, No. 4, pp. 279­308.

Andrus, Edwin Cowles. 1948. Advances in military medicine, made by American investigators. Vol. 1: Little,
  Brown and Company.

Azoulay, Pierre and Benjamin Jones. 2020. "Beat COVID-19 through innovation," Science, Vol. 368, No.
  6491, p. 553.

Baxter, James Phinney. 1946. Scientists against time. Boston: Little, Brown and Company.

Bush, Vannevar. 1945. Science, the Endless Frontier: A report to the President. Washington: Government
  Printing Office.

        . 1970. Pieces of the action. New York: William Morrow and Company.

Conant, James B. 1947. "The mobilization of science for the war effort," American Scientist, Vol. 35, No. 2,
  pp. 195­210.

Condon-Rall, Mary Ellen. 2000. "Malaria in the Southwest Pacific in World War II," Boston Studies in the
  Philosophy of Science, Vol. 207, pp. 51­70.

Dasgupta, Partha and Eric Maskin. 1987. "The simple economics of research portfolios," The Economic
  Journal, Vol. 97, No. 387, pp. 581­595.

Dupree, A. Hunter. 1970. "The great instauration of 1940: The organization of scientific research for war,"
  in Holton, Gerald ed. The twentieth-century sciences: Studies in the biography of ideas, New York: W.
  W. Norton and Company.

Federal Trade Commission. 1958. Economic Report on Antibiotics Manufacture, June 1958. No. 414: US
  Government Printing Office.

Fox, Daniel M. 1987. "The politics of the NIH extramural program, 1937-1950," Journal of the History of
  Medicine and Allied Sciences, Vol. 42, No. 4, pp. 447­466.

Geiger, Roger L. 1993. Research and relevant knowledge: American research universities since World War
  II. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Gross, Daniel P. 2019. The consequences of invention secrecy: Evidence from the USPTO Patent Secrecy
  Program in World War II. NBER Working Paper No. 25545.

Gross, Daniel P. and Bhaven N. Sampat. 2020. Inventing the endless frontier: The effects of the World War
  II research effort on post-war innovation. NBER Working Paper No. 27375.

Hoyt, Kendall. 2006. "Vaccine innovation: Lessons from World War II," Journal of Public Health Policy,
  Vol. 27, No. 1, pp. 38­57.

Keefer, Chester S. 1969. "Dr. Richards as Chairman of the Committee on Medical Research," Annals of
  Internal Medicine, Vol. 71, No. 8, pp. 61­70.

Kevles, Daniel J. 1977. "The National Science Foundation and the debate over postwar research policy,
  1942-1945: A political interpretation of Science­The Endless Frontier," Isis, Vol. 68, No. 1, pp. 5­26.

Kilgore, Harley M. 1943. "The Science Mobilization Bill," Science, Vol. 98, No. 2537, pp. 151­152.

Lindee, M. Susan. 2020. To beat Covid-19, the government must bring back the process that gave
  us penicillin. Washington Post, available at https://www.washingtonpost.com/outlook/2020/04/01/
  roadmap-defeating-covid-19/.

                                                     33
Mandel, Richard. 1996. A half century of peer review, 1946-1996. Bethesda: National Institutes of Health.

Markey, Edward J. and Peter L. Slavin. 2020. We need a Manhattan Project to fight the coro-
 navirus pandemic. Boston Globe, available at https://www.bostonglobe.com/2020/03/17/opinion/
 we-need-manhattan-project-fight-coronavirus-pandemic/.

Mowery, David C. 1997. "The Bush report after 50 years: Blueprint or relic?" in Barfield, Claude E. ed.
 Science for the 21st century: The Bush Report revisited, Washington: American Enterprise Institute.

       . 2009. "What does economic theory tell us about mission-oriented R&D?" in Foray, Dominique ed.
  The new economics of technology policy : Edward Elgar.

Mowery, David C., Richard R. Nelson, and Ben R. Martin. 2010. "Technology policy and global warming:
 Why new policy models are needed (or why putting new wine in old bottles won't work)," Research Policy,
 Vol. 39, No. 8, pp. 1011­1023.

Navarro, Peter. 2020. Memorandum to the Coronavirus Task Force. Available at https://www.sciencemag.
  org/sites/default/files/manhattanprojectbrightexhibit21.pdf.

Nelson, Richard R. 1961. "Uncertainty, learning, and the economics of parallel research and development
  efforts," The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 43, No. 4, pp. 351­364.

Neushul, Peter. 1993. "Science, government and the mass production of penicillin," Journal of the history of
  medicine and allied sciences, Vol. 48, No. 4, pp. 371­395.

Richards, A. N. 1946. "The impact of the war on medicine," Science, Vol. 103, No. 2680, pp. 575­578.

Roosevelt, Franklin D. 1944. Letter to Vannevar Bush. Dated November 17.

Rothman, David J. 1991. Strangers at the bedside: A history of how law and bioethics transformed medical
  decision making. New York: Basic Books.

Sampat, Bhaven N. 2020. "Whose drugs are these?" Issues in Science and Technology, Vol. 36, No. 4, pp.
  42­48.

Scherer, F. M. 2011. Parallel R&D paths revisited. HKS Faculty Research Working Paper RWP11-022.

Slater, Leo Barney. 2009. War and disease: Biomedical research on malaria in the twentieth century. New
   Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.

Stewart, Irvin. 1948. Organizing scientific research for war: The administrative history of the Office of
  Scientific Research and Development. Boston: Little, Brown, and Company.

Swann, John Patrick. 1983. "The search for synthetic penicillin during World War II," The British Journal
  for the History of Science, pp. 154­190.

Wellerstein, Alex. 2013. We don't need another Manhattan Project. URL: https://fas.org/pir-pubs/
 dont-need-another-manhattan-project/.




                                                    34
Figure 1: Common words in OSRD patent and publication titles

                 Panel (A): Words in patent titles




              Panel (B): Words in publication titles




Notes: Figure illustrates the most common words appearing in the title of
OSRD-supported patents and academic publications. Font size is propor-
tional to number of occurrences, with larger words being more common.
Patents primarily resulted from NDRC-supported technological R&D, and
academic publications from CMR-supported medical research.




                                   35
                    Table 1: NDRC Divisions (1940-1941)
            NDRC Division                                   Director
            A ­ Armor and Ordnance                          Tolman
            B ­ Bombs, Fuels, Gases, Chemical Problems      Conant
            C ­ Communications and Transportation           Jewett
            D ­ Detection, Controls, Instruments            Compton
            E ­ Patents and Inventions                      Coe
            Committee on Uranium                            Briggs*
        *
            Lyman Briggs, Director of the National Bureau of Standards.



Table 2: OSRD Divisions, Panels, and Special Sections (1941-1947)

National Defense   Research Committee (NDRC)          Contract Authorizations
Division/Section    Name/Description                   ($, '000s) (1943-1947)
        1           Ballistics                                         5,327.2
        2           Effects of Impact and Explosion                    2,701.4
        3           Rocket Ordnance                                   85,196.5
        4           Ordnance Accessories                              20,014.3
        5           New Missiles                                      12,881.2
        6           Subsurface Warfare                                33,883.5
        7           Fire Control                                       7,711.7
        8           Explosives                                         11079.9
        9           Chemistry                                          4,698.2
       10           Absorbents and Aerosols                            3,524.2
       11           Chemical Engineering                               9,216.2
       12           Transportation Development                         2,199.4
       13           Electrical Communication                           2,073.9
       14           Radar                                            104,533.4
       15           Radio Coordination                                26,343.0
       16           Optics                                             5,923.9
       17           Physics                                            7,655.3
       18           War Metallurgy                                     3,794.4
       19           Miscellaneous Weapons                              2,416.1   *
      AMP           Advanced Mathematics Panel                         2,522.9
      APP           Applied Psychology Panel                           1,542.5   *
      COP           Committee on Propagation                             453.0   *
       TD           Tropical Deterioration                               232.4   *
       SD           Sensory Devices                                      272.5   *
       S-1          Atomic Fission                                    18,138.2   *
        T           Proximity Fuzes                                   26,400.0   *
      Total                                                          400,735.1

Committee on Medical Research (CMR)                   Contract Authorizations
   Division     Name/Description                       ($, '000s) (1941-1947)
      1         Medicine                                               3,873.3
      2         Surgery                                                2,847.6
      3         Aviation Medicine                                      2,466.5
      4         Physiology                                             3,981.5
      5         Chemistry                                              2,383.9
      6         Malaria                                                5,501.9
      ­         Miscellaneous                                          3,635.3
    Total                                                             24,689.9

Notes: NDRC authorizations from January 1, 1943 onwards, except where noted
below. CMR authorizations reported for the entire history of CMR.
*
  Authorizations for Division 19 from April 1, 1943; APP, from September 18,
1943; COP, from January 22, 1944; TD, from May 18, 1944; SD, from November
1, 1945. Authorizations for Sections S-1 and T are from June 27, 1940 onwards,
with Section S-1 terminating in September 1943.




                                         36
                      Table 3: Top OSRD contractors, by contract obligations
                      Top 10 firms                                                 Top 10 universities
Contractor                         Total oblg.   Percent        Contractor                        Total oblg.   Percent
Western Electric Co.               $15.2 mil.     3.3%          Massachusetts Inst. of Tech.      $106.8 mil.    23.1%
General Electric Co.                  $7.6         1.6%         California Inst. of Tech.            $76.6       16.6%
Radio Corp. of America                $6.0         1.3%         Harvard University                   $29.1        6.3%
E. I. Dupont De Nemours & Co.         $5.4         1.2%         Columbia University                  $27.1        5.9%
Monsanto Chemical Co.                 $4.5         1.0%         University of California             $14.6        3.2%
Eastman Kodak Co.                     $4.3         0.9%         Johns Hopkins University             $10.8        2.3%
Zenith Radio Corp.                    $4.2         0.9%         George Washington University           $6.9       1.5%
Westinghouse Elect. & Mfg. Co.        $3.9         0.8%         University of Chicago                  $5.7       1.2%
Remington Rand, Inc.                  $3.7         0.8%         Princeton University                   $3.6       0.8%
Sylvania Electric Products, Inc.      $3.1         0.7%         University of Pennsylvania             $2.9       0.6%
Total                                $57.8        12.5%         Total                                $284.0      61.5%
Notes: Table lists the top 10 firms and universities with OSRD contracts by total obligations. Percentages
measure each contractor's percent of total OSRD research spending.



                   Table 4: Top NDRC and CMR states, by contract obligations
                 Top 10 states for NDRC contracts                      Top 10 states for CMR contracts
           Contractor              Total oblg. Percent          Contractor               Total oblg. Percent
           Massachusetts           $143.4 mil.  32.6%           New York                  $4.6 mil.   21.7%
           California                 $95.5     21.7%           Massachusetts                $4.3     20.1%
           New York                   $86.3     19.6%           Illinois                     $2.5     11.5%
           Illinois                   $20.2      4.6%           California                   $1.6      7.5%
           District of Columbia       $15.7      3.6%           Pennsylvania                 $1.3      6.1%
           Pennsylvania               $13.3      3.0%           Maryland                     $1.3      6.0%
           New Jersey                 $12.0      2.7%           District of Columbia         $1.3      6.0%
           Maryland                   $11.8      2.7%           Connecticut                  $0.8      3.6%
           Ohio                        $8.0      1.8%           Ohio                         $0.7      3.1%
           Michigan                    $6.2      1.4%           Michigan                     $0.6      3.0%
           Total                     $412.4     93.8%           Total                       $19.0     88.7%
           Notes: Table lists the top 10 states with NDRC and CMR contracts by total obligations.
           Percentages measure each state's percent of the given division's total research spending.




                                                           37
                                                               Table 5: Summary of select OSRD research programs
     Question                                     Radar                                       Atomic fission                                   Penicillin                                 Malaria

                                                                                                                                1a. Natural : Produce sufficient            Find an effective preventative or
                               1. Develop a functional radar system at          1. Deepen science around nuclear fission;       quantities of natural penicillin for        treatment for malaria, by:
                               microwave frequencies; 2. Create (and refine)    2. Engineer a controlled nuclear chain          research and clinical testing; 1b.          1. Improving understanding of
                               variants of radar for a wide variety of          reaction; 3. Identify a fissile material that   Synthetic : Identify penicillin's           mechanisms; 2. Developing
     What needed to be done?
                               applications from land, sea, or air; 3. Assist   could be produced in enough quantity to         molecular structure and how to              high-throughput testing and
                               manufacturers in production at scale; 4.         make an atomic bomb, before passing the         synthesize it, 2. Conduct clinical tests;   screening protocols; and 3. Drug
                               Support military on installation and use.        reins to the Manhattan Project.                 3. Scale up penicillin production for       synthesis, production, and
                                                                                                                                military and civilian use.                  evaluation.

                                                                                                                                Natural : Initial work in fermentation,
                               MIT Radiation Laboratory: a newly-created
                                                                                                                                production, testing done by NRRL and
                               "central laboratory" hosted at MIT, led by       Basic research on fission contracted to
                                                                                                                                pharmaceutical firms. CMR funded
                               Lee A. DuBridge and employing thousands of       several universities. Subsequent work on                                                    Decentralized effort across many
                                                                                                                                larger-scale clinical testing through
                               scientists and engineers from around the U.S.,   uranium separation and uranium piles was                                                    institutions, both industrial and
     Who did the work?                                                                                                          contract to Mass Memorial Hospital.
                               was the locus of radar research. Specific        performed at UC Berkeley (led by Ernest                                                     academics. Firms typically not
                                                                                                                                WPB and OPRD worked with firms to
                               projects sometimes subcontracted. Radar          Lawrence), U of Chicago (Arthur                                                             under formal contract.
                                                                                                                                scale up production for military use.
                               Countermeasures division spun out into the       Compton); Columbia U (Harold Urey).
                                                                                                                                Synthetic : Contracts to pharmaceutical
                               Harvard Radio Research Lab.
                                                                                                                                and chemical firms, universities.

                                                                                                                                Natural : Most projects had short-form      Most academic contracts were
                               Most work performed under the short-form         Early contracts used long-form patent           clause. Very little patenting, beyond a     short-form. Firms retained patents
                               patent clause, giving the government title.      clause, giving contractors title. As the        few USDA process patents. Synthetic :       and submitted information "in
                               The Rad Lab and RRL had patent offices           work began to produce results and its           Short-form for university contracts.        confidence" to NRC (though this
                               which prepared applications. OSRD led a          consequences better understood, Roosevelt       Contracts with firms typically didn't       was a source of tension between




38
                               Government Radar Patent Program which            instructed Bush to arrange for the U.S.         have any financial support, were to         NRC and Bush-Richards throughout
     Contracts and patents
                               held monthly meetings where representatives      government to retain title. All contractors     promote information exchange. Bush          the war (Slater 2009)). After CMR
                               from the radar research laboratories and the     agreed to convert to the short-form clause,     had control over any patent application     added a malaria division late in the
                               Armed Services shared new inventions on          effective retroactively. Most nuclear patent    decisions. OSRD had right to compel         war, it brought new industrial
                               which they intended to file patents, resolved    applications were also issued secrecy           cross-licensing (subject to reasonable      contracts under short-form clauses
                               conflicts, and decided the scope of claims.      orders by the USPTO (Gross 2019).               royalties) among the contractors, and       (to protect the public interest) but
                                                                                                                                retained a government license.              this affected few contracts.

                                                                                Project initiated in 1940 at the request of     Natural : CMR staff organized meetings
                               Project began with the British Tizard                                                                                                        CMR funded and participated in
                                                                                President Roosevelt, with he and Bush           among firms and agencies involved,
                               mission to the U.S. (1940), which brought the                                                                                                NRC-based efforts to share
                                                                                communicating regularly on the viability        including British research efforts,
                               cavity magnetron. Frequent international                                                                                                     information across research projects,
                                                                                of an atomic bomb. OSRD managed a               collected and shared progress reports,
                               exchange thereafter. Both Rad Lab and RRL                                                                                                    collect and report data. Unlike
                                                                                multi-site research portfolio until a viable    and brokered connections. Synthetic :
                               kept field offices near British radar research                                                                                               penicillin, an important goal was to
     Coordination efforts                                                       technology for producing fissionable            Secured protection from antitrust
                               and hosted British researchers in U.S. Also                                                                                                  distribute projects to different teams
                                                                                material was found. Military built pilot        regulation for firms collaborating on
                               hosted military liaison officers and worked                                                                                                  to avoid duplication. Developed and
                                                                                plants while research was ongoing and           synthesis. Both : Worked with WPB to
                               with military to explore possible uses of                                                                                                    diffused standardized testing
                                                                                later took over the project (under the          ensure contractors had the equipment
                               radar, train operators, support installation                                                                                                 protocols. Coordinated civilian and
                                                                                Army Corps of Engineers' Manhattan              and supplies needed. Promoted
                               and maintenance in the field.                                                                                                                military trials of chloroquine.
                                                                                Project) for weapons development.               information flow across efforts.

                               Limited "crash production" of experimental
                                                                                Little OSRD downstream activity, which
                               radar sets at Rad Lab upon military request;                                                     CMR primarily supported clinical            Funded researchers to overcome
                                                                                was made the Army's responsibility.
                               production at scale provided by leading                                                          testing of natural penicillin. After        chloroqiune production bottlenecks,
                                                                                OSRD supported pilot plant construction.
     Downstream activities     industrial firms (GE, RCA, Westinghouse,                                                         clinical testing, most downstream work      to generate enough drug for trials.
                                                                                After fission research transferred to the
                               Western Electric). Rad Lab sent staff into the                                                   was guided and funded by WPB and            Supported civilian and military
                                                                                Army, OSRD leadership served as advisors
                               field to aid Allied installations of radar and                                                   OPRD ­ not OSRD/CMR.                        trials of chloroquine.
                                                                                to the Manhattan Project.
                               learn about enemy radar.
                                                           Table 5: Summary of select OSRD research programs (cont'd)
     Question                                      Radar                              Atomic fission                     Penicillin                           Malaria

     Number of OSRD contracts                        183                                    100                  Natural: 36 / Synthetic: 18                     78

     Total value                                 $156.9 mil.                             $14.4 mil.                 $2.4 mil. / $0.4 mil.                     $4.8 mil.

     Short form patent clause:
                                                   86.21%                                 100.00%                         100.00%                              98.13%
     pct. of obligations

                                 Massachusetts Inst. of Tech. (64.9%)    University of California (30.4%)   Mass. Mem. Hospital (66.6%)          University of Chicago (15.8%)
                                 Harvard University (10.0%)              University of Chicago (19.6%)      Cornell University (6.8%)            Columbia University (11.0%)
     Top five contractors        Research Construction Co. (8.2%)        Columbia University (13.4%)        Johns Hopkins University (4.7%)      New York University (9.7%)
                                 General Electric Co. (3.2%)             Standard Oil Dev. Co. (6.7%)       University of Michigan (4.1%)        Johns Hopkins University (8.7%)
                                 Columbia University (2.3%)              Princeton University (3.7%)        University of Pennsylvania (3.67%)   Allied Chemical & Dye Corp. (5.2%)

     Notes: Table summarizes the features of the OSRD's radar, atomic fission, penicillin, and malaria research programs. Recall that the short form patent clause gave
     the government title to any patents on inventions produced under contract, unless the government chose not to file, in which case the contractor retained patent
     rights. Note that some atomic fission research contracts began under the long form clause but were later amended to the short form clause.




39
                                             Table 6: Organizing crisis innovation: A framework for key questions

                                                                                                                                       OSRD approach


         Issue          Options        Depends on...           Explanation                                          Radar     Fission     Penicillin   Malaria


                         Research
     What needs to                     Stock of existing       If solution unknown - fund research;                                        Primarily   Primarily
                            vs.                                                                                     Both        Both
      be done?                         know-how                if specifiable - contract for output                                       production   research
                        production


       How many           Serial
      approaches           vs.         Solution uncertainty    High solution uncertainty - Multiple bets            Serial    Parallel     Parallel    Parallel
        to fund?         parallel

         How to
                       Concentrated
        organize                                               Complex R&D problems less divisible - greater       Concen-    Concen-
                            vs.        R&D complexity                                                                                       Mixed       Diffuse
        research                                               concentration (e.g., systems engineering)            trated     trated
                          diffuse
        efforts?




40
                                                               Contractors with pre-existing relevant assets,
                       R&D funder      Contractor incentives   high opportunity cost, or large share of
      Who owns             vs.         Security risks          investment - allow contractor title to patents;      Funder     Funder       Mixed       Mixed
       the IP?          performer      R&D spillovers          Security concerns, benefits of knowledge sharing,
                                       Public interest         or public interest - retain government title


                        Hands-on
      Coordination                     Spillovers across
                            vs.                                High spillovers - coordinate research projects      Hands-on   Hands-on     Hands-on    Hands-on
     across efforts?                   research efforts
                       laissez-faire


                        Hands-on
     Coordination           vs.        Size and number         Large buyers - coordinate with end user             Hands-on   Hands-on     Hands-on    Hands-on
     with users?       laissez-faire   of end users


                          During       Immediate demand,
     When to begin                                             If need is immediate and rapid production scaling
                            vs.        cost of scaling up                                                          Ex-post     At risk      At risk    Ex-post
      production?                                              difficult - Build production at risk
                        after R&D      production quickly
Web Appendix
A   Historical Supplement

         Figure A.1: Executive Order 8807 creating the OSRD (June 27, 1941)
       APPENDIX               I


                                    EXECUTIVE ORDER NO.                 8807



                                  Establishing the Office of
                          Scientific Researchand Development
                     IN    THE Executive Office of the President

         By virtue of the authority vested in me by the Constitution and the statutes
       of the United States, and in order to define further the functions and duties of
       the Office for Emergency Management with respect to the unhmited national

       emergency    as declared     by the President on   May   27, 1941, for the       purpose of   as-

       suring adequate provision for research on scientific and medical problems re-
       lating to the national defense, it is hereby ordered:
         1. There shall be within the Office for Emergency Management of the Executive

       Office of the President the Office of Scientific Research and Development, at the
       head of which shall be a Director appointed by the President, The Director shall
       discharge and perform his responsibilities and duties under the direction and
       supervision of the President. The Director shall receive compensation at such rate
       as the President shall determine and, in addition, shall be entitled to actual and

       necessary transportation, subsistence,     and other expenses incidental              to the per-

       formance of    his duties.
         2. Subject to such policies, regulations, and directions as the President may

       from time to time prescribe, and with such advice and assistance as may be neces-
       sary from the other departments and agencies of the Federal Government, the
       Office of Scientific Research and Development shall:

           a.   Advise the President with regard to the status of              scientific   and medical
                research relating to national defense and the measures necessary to assure
                continued and increasing progress in      this field.

           b.   Serve as the center for mobilization of the scientific personnel and re-
                sources of the Nation in order to assure maximum utilization of such
                personnel and resources in developing and applying the results of scientific
                research to defense purposes.

           c.   Co-ordinate, aid, and, where desirable, supplement the experimental and
                other scientific and medical research activities relating to national defense
                carriedon by the Departments of War and Navy and other departments
                and agencies of the Federal Government.
           d.   Develop broad and co-ordinated plans for the conduct of scientific research
                in the defenseprogram, in collaboration with representatives of the War
                and Navy Departments; review existing scientific research programs for-
                mulated by the departments of War and Navy and other Agencies of
                the Government, and advise them with respect to the relationship of their
                proposed   activities to the total research   program.




                                                          1
Figure A.1: Executive Order 8807 creating the OSRD (June 27, 1941)
 336                                                                                       APPENDIX         I


         e.   Initiate and support scientific research on the mechanisms and devices of
              warfare with the objective of creating, developing, and improving instru-
              mentalities, methods, and materials required for national defense.
         f.   Initiate        and support      scientific research   on medical problems      affecting the
              national defense.

         g. Initiate  and support such scientific and medical research as may be re-
              quested by the government of any country whose defense the President
              deems vital to the defense of the United States under the terms of the Act
              of   March 11, 1941, entitled "An Act to Promote the Defense of the United
              States";  and serve as the central liaison office for the conduct of such
              scientific and medical research for such countries.

         h.   Perform such other duties relating to scientific and medical research and
              development as the President may from time to time assign or delegate
              to   it.



   3. The Director may provide for the
                                          internal organization and management of
 the Office of Scientific Research and Development and may appoint such advisory
 committees              as he finds necessary to the performance of his duties and responsi-
 bilities.    The         Director shall obtain the President's approval for the establishment
 of the principal subdivisions of the agency                         and the appointment of the heads
 thereof.

   4.    In carrying out its functions, the Office of Scientific Research and Develop-
 ment     shall utilize the laboratories, equipment, and services of governmental agen-
 cies    and       institutions         to   the   extent that such facilities    are   available   for   such
 purposes. Within the limits of funds appropriated or allocated for purposes en-
 compassed by this Order, the Director may contract with and transfer funds to
 existing governmental agencies and institutions, and may enter into contracts and
 agreements with individuals, educational and scientific institutions (including the
 National Academy of Sciences and the National Research Council), industrial or-
 ganizations, and other agencies, for studies, experimental investigations, and
 reports.
    5.   The           authorized to take over and carry out the provisions of any
                   Director      is

 contracts             within the scope of this Order heretofore entered into by
                   which       fall

 (i)  the National Defense  Research Committee, established by order of the Coun-
 cil of National Defense on June 27, 1940, (2) the Health and Medical Committee,

 established by order of the Council of National Defense on September 19, 1940,
 and (3) the Federal Security Administrator in his capacity of Co-ordinator of
 Health, Medical Welfare, Nutrition, Recreation, and other related activities as
 authorized by order of the Council of National Defense on November 28, 1940.
 The Director is further authorized to assume any obligations or responsibilities
 which have heretofore been undertaken by the above agencies for and on behalf
 of the       Government              of the United States     and which   fall   within the scope of this
 Order.
   6. There is created within the Office of Scientific Research and Development

 an Advisory Council consisting of the Director as Chairman, the Chairman of
 the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, the Chairman of the National
 Defense Research Committee (hereinafter described), the Chairman of the Com-




                                                           2
      Figure A.1: Executive Order 8807 creating the OSRD (June 27, 1941)
APPENDIX          I
                                                                                      337
mittee on Medical Research (hereinafter described), one representative of the
Army to be designated by the Secretary of War, and one representative of the
Navy to be designated by the Secretary of the Navy. The Council shall advise and
assist    the Director with respect to the co-ordination of research activities carried
on by private and governmental research groups and shall facilitate the inter-
change of information and data between such groups and agencies.
   7. There shall be within the Office of Scientific Research and Development a
National Defense Research Committee consisting of a Chairman and three other
members appointed by the President, and in addition the President of the National
Academy of Sciences, the Commissioner of Patents, one ofiBcer of the Army to be
designated by the Secretary of War, one officer of the Navy to be designated
by the Secretary of the Navy, and such other members as the President may
subsequently appoint. The National Defense Research Committee shall ad-
vise and assist the Director in the performance of his scientific research duties
with special reference to the mobilization of the scientific personnel and re-
sources of the Nation. To this end it shall be the responsibility of the Committee
to recommend to the Director the need for and character of contracts to be en-
tered into with universities, research institutes, and industrial laboratories for
research and development on instrumentalities of warfare to supplement such
research and development activities of the Departments of War and the Navy.
Furthermore, the Committee shall from time to time make findings, and submit
recommendations to the Director with respect to the adequacy, progress, and re-
sults of research on scientific problems related to national defense.
   8. There shall be within the Office of Scientific Research and Development a

Committee on Medical Research consisting of a Chairman and three members to
be appointed by the President, and three other members to be designated respec-
tively by the Secretary of War, the Secretary of the Navy, and the Administrator
of the Federal Security Agency. The members so designated by the Secretaries of
War and the Navy and Federal Security Administrator shall be selected from the
respective staffs of the Surgeons General and the Surgeon General of the Public
Health Service with particular reference to their qualifications in the field of medi-
cal research. The Committee on Medical Research shall advise and assist the
Director in the performance of his medical research duties with special refer-
ence to the mobilization of medical and scientific personnel of the nation. To this
end it shall be the responsibility of the Committee to recommend to the Director
the need for and character of contracts to be entered into with universities, hos-
pitals,   and other agencies conducting medical research    activities for research   and
development                                     Furthermore, the Committee shall
                 in the field of the medical sciences.
from time to time, on request by the Director, make findings and submit recom-
mendations with respect to the adequacy, progress, and results of research on medi-
cal   problems related   to national defense.

  9.     The members  of the Advisory Council, the National Defense Research Com.-
mittee,     the Committee on Medical Research, and such other committees and
subcommittees      as the Director may appoint with the approval of the President
shall serve as    such without compensation, but shall be entitled to necessary and
actual transportation, subsistence,     and other expenses incidental   to the   perform-
ance of their duties.




                                                  3
           Figure A.1: Executive Order 8807 creating the OSRD (June 27, 1941)
             338                                                                          APPENDIX         I

              10.   Within the Hmits of such funds             may be appropriated to the Office of
                                                               as
            Scientific Research and Development or             may be allocated to it by the President,
                                                               as
            the Director   may employ        necessary   personnel and make provision for necessary
            supplies, facilities,   and   services.   However, the Director   shall use   such   statistical,

            informational, fiscal, personnel, and other general business services and facilities
            as may be made available to him through the Office for Emergency Management.


                                                                               FRANKLIN     D.   ROOSEVELT


             The White House
            June 28, ig4i




                     Table A.1: NDRC Divisions and Sections (1940-1941)
Division   Name/Description                  Example Sections

                                             Structural Defense; Propulsion; Ballistics; Proximity
   A       Armor and Ordnance
                                             Fuzes for Shells; Guided Projectiles

           Bombs, Fuels, Gases,              Explosives; Detection of Persistent Agents; Aerosols;
   B
           Chemical Problems                 Absorbents; Protective Coatings; Exhaust Disposal

           Communications and                Communications; Transportation; Mechanical and
   C
           Transportation                    Electrical Equipment; Submarine Studies; Sound Sources

           Detection, Controls,
   D                                         Detection; Controls; Instruments; Heat Radiation
           Instruments




                                                           4
