                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             GLOBAL FINANCIAL CYCLE AND LIQUIDITY MANAGEMENT

                                          Olivier Jeanne
                                         Damiano Sandri

                                       Working Paper 27901
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27901


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2020




This paper benefitted from comments from seminar participants in the 2017 IMF Annual
Research Conference, the London Business School, the 2020 AEA Annual Meetings, and the
World Bank. We thank our discussants Gianluca Benigno and Kinda Hachem for their comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
IMF, its Executive Board, IMF management, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Olivier Jeanne and Damiano Sandri. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Global Financial Cycle and Liquidity Management
Olivier Jeanne and Damiano Sandri
NBER Working Paper No. 27901
October 2020
JEL No. F31,F32,F36,F38

                                         ABSTRACT

We use a tractable model to show that emerging markets can protect themselves from the global
financial cycle by expanding (rather than restricting) capital flows. This involves accumulating
reserves when global liquidity is high to buy back domestic assets at a discount when global
financial conditions tighten. Since the private sector does not internalize how this buffering
mechanism reduces international borrowing costs, a social planner increases the size of capital
flows beyond the laissez-faire equilibrium. The model also provides a role for foreign exchange
intervention in less financially developed countries. The main predictions of the model are
consistent with the data.


Olivier Jeanne
Department of Economics
Johns Hopkins University
582 Wyman Bldg.
3400 N. Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21218
and NBER
ojeanne@jhu.edu

Damiano Sandri
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street N.W.
Washington D.C. 20431
dsandri@imf.org
1     Introduction
Emerging market (EM) economies are subject to large fluctuations in their
access to foreign funds as a result of the global financial cycle. Figure 1
shows that gross capital inflows to EMs increased more than three folds in
the years prior 2007 and then collapsed during the global financial crisis. The
volatility of gross inflows has been largely absorbed through offsetting capital
outflows which capture the purchase of foreign assets by residents in EMs.
In other words, when foreign investors increase their holdings of EMs' assets,
EM residents accumulate foreign assets and viceversa. To further smooth the
domestic impact of fluctuations in capital inflows, EMs also employ several
capital flow management policies, such as capital controls or foreign exchange
interventions.1 Figure 1 shows, for example, that the public sector actively
leans against fluctuations in capital inflows by accumulating official reserves
when gross inflows increase and selling reserves when inflows recede.
    The chart also shows the evolution of the stock market total-return index
in EMs.2 We see that in the years prior to the global financial crisis, stock
prices in EMs rose rapidly above trend exactly when foreign investors in-
creased their holdings of EM assets while EM residents brought their money
abroad. The opposite dynamic took place post 2007, when EM stock prices
plunged while gross capital flows declined sharply. This suggests that EM
residents seize a trading advantage by buffering the volatility of gross capital
inflows with gross outflows: they sell EM assets when prices are high and
save the proceeds abroad; and then use foreign funds to buy back EM assets
when prices decline.
    This paper proposes a model that accounts for these facts, provides ad-
ditional predictions consistent with empirical evidence, and lead to novel
normative implications for capital flow management.
    We present a simple three-period model of an EM economy with a large
number of private agents who borrow from foreign investors in the first period
to finance an illiquid domestic investment and to accumulate liquid foreign
assets. There is a risk of an external financial tightening in the second period.
External tightening means that foreign investors wish to withdraw their funds
because they highly value liquidity, leading to a fire sale of EM debt. In our
model, external financial tightening takes the form of deleveraging by foreign
  1
    Rey (2015), the IMF (2012), Ostry et al. (2011) and Jeanne, Subramanian and
Williamson (2012) have advocated the use of such policies.
  2
    This is computed in deviation from a log-linear trend, as reported on the right axis.


                                           2
 Figure 1: Gross capital flows and stock market index, average across EMs
                              14                                                                          100
                                                                        Gross inflows
                              12                                        Gross outflows                    80




                                                                                                                Deviation from trend (percent)
                                                                        Official reserves
       Percent of trend GDP




                              10                                                                          60
                                                                        Stock market index (right axis)
                              8                                                                           40

                              6                                                                           20

                              4                                                                           0

                              2                                                                           -20

                              0                                                                           -40
                                   2000   2002   2004   2006   2008   2010   2012      2014     2016



banks, in line with the evidence about the role of banking in the transmission
of the global financial cycle (Miranda-Agrippino and Rey, 2020). When ex-
ternal financial conditions tighten, EM agents as well as foreign arbitrageurs
use their liquidity to buy home debt. External financial tightening thus leads
to a "retrenchment" (as defined by Forbes and Warnock (2012)) in which EM
agents repatriate foreign funds at the same time as foreigners sell EM assets.
In a decentralized equilibrium, EM agents hold a level of liquidity such that
the expected benefit from buying back domestic debt at the fire-sale price is
exactly offset by the opportunity cost of carrying the liquidity.3
    The model highlights the importance of domestic financial development,
defined as a country's ability to produce financial assets and sell them to
foreign investors. More financially developed countries channel a larger share
of gross capital inflows into external liquidity rather than towards domestic
physical investment. This might look like a diversion of capital flows away
from their most productive use but the country's large external balance sheet
in fact helps it to finance more investment at home. External liquidity reduces
the country's cost of external borrowing and stimulates domestic productive
investment.
    Yet, even in financially developed countries, the private sector under-
invests in liquidity. This is because of a pecuniary externality since private
   3
    The opportunity cost of reserves is measured as the spread between the interest rate
on external debt and the return on liquid reserves, as in Rodrik (2006). See Adler and
Mano (2016) for a recent review of how to measure the opportunity cost of reserves.


                                                                  3
agents do not internalize the impact of their decisions on the price of domes-
tic debt. Increasing foreign liquidity raises the price of EM debt, both ex
ante and in a fire sale. This reduces the carry cost of liquidity but also the
associated benefits. We show that on balance, the level of liquidity is too low
under laissez-faire. A constrained social planner finds it optimal to increase
foreign borrowing so as to accumulate more foreign liquidity. Paradoxically,
although welfare of an EM economy is reduced by the uncertainty in ex-
ternal financial conditions, welfare is maximized by maximizing the size of
the country's external balance sheet, and thus the volatility of gross capital
inflows. This is contrary to conventional wisdom which calls for restrict-
ing capital flows to buttress resilience to global financial shocks. The social
planner also reduces physical investment below the laissez-faire level so as to
exploit the country's monopsonist power in issuing its own debt. We show
that the social planner allocation can be implemented by using a subsidy on
the accumulation of foreign liquidity by the private sector.
    The model also provides a rationale for foreign exchange intervention. In
countries at a relatively low level of financial development, the government
can complement the buffering role of private capital flows by accumulating
official reserves when global financial conditions are loose and selling them
to re-purchase domestic assets when conditions tighten. As financial devel-
opment increases, foreign exchange intervention becomes less valuable since
the private sector can better insure itself.
    We then take a closer look at the data in light of the model. We define
a country's international borrowing spread as the difference between the re-
turn that it pays on its external liabilities and the return that it earns on its
external assets (the opposite of the "exorbitant privilege" studied by Gour-
inchas and Rey (2007)). The model makes three empirical predictions: 1)
gross capital inflows are positively correlated with gross capital outflows and
with the borrowing spread over time; 2) the borrowing spread is negatively
correlated with the size of external liabilities across countries; and 3) the
use of foreign exchange interventions is negatively correlated with the size
of foreign liabilities across countries. We find these three predictions to be
consistent with the data from EM economies.
   Relationship to the literature. As noted in the introduction, most of
the theoretical literature on capital flow management has focused on controls
on capital inflows--see for example Ostry et al. (2012) and Korinek (2011).
The rationale for policy intervention generally arises from pecuniary exter-


                                       4
nalities associated with collateral constraints, as analyzed for example in
Jeanne and Korinek (2010), Bianchi (2011), Benigno et al. (2016), Schmitt-
Groh´ e and Uribe (2017), and Korinek (2018). In these models there is no
meaningful separate role for the management of inflows and outflows (in par-
ticular foreign exchange reserves). What matters in a crisis is the net worth
of indebted agents and it is irrelevant if net worth is increased by lowering
external debt or increasing external assets. These papers have shown that
controls on capital inflows should be used to reduce net capital inflows. By
contrast we show here that capital flow management should increase gross
capital inflows. The pecuniary externalities at work in our model are dis-
tributive in the sense of Davila and Korinek (2018).
    In a more closely related contribution, Caballero and Simsek (2020) present
a model of gross capital flows in which capital flow surges and retrenchments
are generated by fickle global investors. Our analysis shares several features
with theirs, in particular the association of capital flow retrenchments with
fire sales. There are also several differences that turn out to be significant for
the results: in our model capital flows involve short-term and long-term debt
rather than real assets, and the EM economy is populated by a representative
agent (whereas they assume two agents, banks and distressed sellers). This
leads us to emphasize the redistributive implications of capital flow manage-
ment between emerging market borrowers and advanced economy investors.
Another difference is that we analyze the role for reserves interventions by the
government. The optimal management of gross capital flows is also analyzed
in Aizenman (2011). In their model reserves are used to prevent contagion in
the liquidation of domestic projects. The optimal policy involves both a tax
on external borrowing and a subsidy on the accumulation of private reserves.
    The paper is also related to a theoretical literature on the optimal level
of reserves for an economy with fluctuating access to foreign financial flows.
Jeanne and Ranci`  ere (2011) present a model of the optimal level of reserves
to deal with the risk of rollover risk in external debt. Reserves are modeled
as an insurance contract that pays off conditional on the realization of a
sudden stop, like in Caballero and Panageas (2008). Bianchi, Hatchondo
and Martinez (2018) analyze a similar problem when reserves take the form
of a noncontingent asset and can be financed by sovereign defaultable debt.
Gourinchas, Rey and Govillot (2017) present a model in which EMs holds
low-yielding US assets because these assets yield a higher return in bad times.
In these models there is no meaningful difference between reserves held by the
government or by the private sector. Similar to our paper, C´    espedes, Chang

                                       5
and Velasco (2017) and C´     espedes and Chang (2019) analyze models in which
official reserves are needed because the private sector does not internalize the
beneficial effects of liquidity in periods of financial distress.
    On the empirical side, our paper is related to the literature that studies
the behavior of gross capital flows in the global financial cycle. Forbes and
Warnock (2012) and Broner et al. (2013) have documented how gross capital
inflows and outflows tend to move together. Broner et al. (2013) document
that gross capital flows are very large and volatile, especially relative to
net capital flows. During crises, total gross flows collapse and there is a
retrenchment in both inflows by foreigners and outflows by domestic agents.
Davis and van Wincoop (2017) document that the correlation between capital
inflows and outflows has increased substantially over time in advanced and
developing countries. IMF (2013) shows that EM economies that buffer
foreign capital inflows with offsetting resident flows tend to be more resilient
against fluctuations in global capital markets. Miranda-Agrippino and Rey
(2020) find that tight phases of the global financial cycle are accompanied
by a deleveraging of global banks and a surge in risk premia in global asset
markets. Bruno and Shin (2015) present a model highlighting the bank
leverage cycle as the determinant of the transmission of financial conditions
across borders through banking sector capital flows. They find support for
the key predictions of their model in a panel study of 46 countries.
    A line of the empirical literature has pointed to the stabilizing benefits of
reserves. Bussi` ere et al. (2015) show that countries with high reserves relative
to short-term debt suffered less from the global financial crisis, particularly
when associated with a less open capital account. Ghosh, Ostry and Qureshi
(2016) find that countries with higher stocks of foreign exchange reserves
are significantly less likely to experience a crisis following surges in capi-
tal inflows. Aizenman, Cheung and Ito (2015) find that emerging market
economies with lower reserve holdings in 2012 tended to experience exchange
rate depreciation against the U.S. dollar when many emerging markets were
adjusting to the news of tapering quantitative easing in 2013. Blanchard,
Adler and de Carvalho Filho (2015) show that countercyclical reserve in-
terventions have stemmed exchange rate pressures from global capital flow
shocks in emerging market economies.
    The paper is structured as follows. The next section presents the model
assumptions and section 3 characterizes the laissez-faire equilibrium. Section
4 looks at the impact of domestic financial development on capital flows.
Section 5 analyzes optimal policies. Section B presents our empirical results

                                        6
and section 7 concludes.


2    Model
We consider an EM economy over three periods t = 0, 1, 2. The economy is
populated by a unitary mass of atomistic identical agents who borrow from
foreign investors in period 0. The proceeds of the borrowing are used to fi-
nance domestic investment projects as well as foreign liquid assets (reserves).
The domestic projects are illiquid in the sense that they pay off in period 2
and cannot be sold in period 1. The global financial cycle is modeled by as-
suming that foreign investors' willingness to hold EM debt varies over time,
in a sense to be made more precise below.
    Agents do not consume in periods 0 and 1. The welfare of all agents
(EM borrowers and foreign investors) is equal to their expected period-2
consumption, where we assume that the intertemporal discount factor is
zero to simplify the notation. Figure 2 reports the timeline and the main
assumptions, which we describe in more details below.

      EM BORROWERS
          t=0                             t=1                      t=2
      Investment and            Balance sheet adjustment to Production and
      balance sheet buildup     external financial conditions consumption, U=E0(c2)
                                   a-a'=p'(b-b')
           a                             a'
                 pb                              p'b'             cEM=f(k)-b'+a'
           k                             k

      FOREIGN INVESTORS

                                  With probability ,
      Bankers
                                  bankers sell EM debt to
      invest in EM debt           arbitrageurs and EM
      and cash                    agents at price q


                              Figure 2: Model timeline


                                             7
   EM borrowers. The budget constraints of the representative EM bor-
rower are,

                                 k + a = pb,                                         (1)
                               a + p b = a + p b,                                    (2)
                              b + cEM = f (k ) + a .                                 (3)

In period 0 the representative EM agent finances an illiquid domestic invest-
ment k as well as liquid foreign assets a by issuing long-term bonds b at
price p. The bonds are default-free and repaid in period 2. The payoff of the
investment is an increasing and concave function of k and occurs in period
2, when EM agents consume. The foreign assets are invested in cash, which
is modeled as a zero-return storage technology. One may think of a as the
reserves of the private sector (the case of public reserves will be considered
in section 5). The representative EM borrower adjusts his balance sheet to
external financial conditions by buying back a quantity of bonds b - b at
price p in period 1, after which he is left with a quantity of reserves a . EM
assets and liabilities are assumed to be non-negative.
    Foreign investors. There is a large number of foreign investors endowed
with resources in periods 0 and 1. The EM economy cannot obtain funds
directly from foreign investors and must borrow from specialists. There are
two classes of specialists, the bankers and the arbitrageurs.
    Bankers are atomistic and have unitary mass. They have no funds of
their own in period 0 and lend to EM borrowers by issuing deposits to non-
specialist investors. The period-0 budget constraint of bankers is,

                                        pb = d,

where d is the quantity of deposits that they issue.4 Bankers also have 
units of legacy assets that generate R units of output if they are held until
maturity at time 2, with R > 1. These assets can be liquidated for a value 
at time 1.
    We assume that the deposits are demandable in period 1 and that de-
positors demand early repayment with probability  .5 Thus, there are two
   4
     Nothing of substance is changed if we allow the bankers to invest in cash.
   5
     Demandable deposit contracts are a standard feature in the banking literature. De-
posits could be demandable to give appropriate incentives to bankers or to protect depos-
itors against the risk of a sudden loss in bankers' income pledgeability.


                                           8
states: the normal state (denoted by N ), in which depositors are repaid d in
period 2, and the "sudden stop" state (denoted by S ), in which the depositors
demand early repayment.
    In the normal state the period-2 consumption of bankers is equal to the
payoff on the unliquidated legacy asset plus the profit that bankers make
from the spread on the EM debt,

                         cB
                          N = R + b - d = R + (1 - p) b.                                 (4)

    In a sudden stop, bankers repay the deposits by using their cash holdings,
selling EM debt, and possibly liquidating their legacy assets. Let us denote
by q the price of EM debt at time 1 in the sudden stop state. If q > p the
bankers make a profit (q - p) b after they have sold their EM debt holdings,
which they invest in cash for consumption in period 2. If q  p the bankers
make a loss (p - q ) b. In this case, the representative banker liquidates a
quantity (p - q ) b of legacy asset to repay all the depositors in a sudden stop.
The bankers' consumption in the sudden stop state is thus given by,

                                  R + (q - p) b          if q > p,
                        cB
                         S =                                                             (5)
                                  R - R (p - q ) b       if q  p.

Observe that since R > 1, the disutility of bank losses is larger than the
utility of bank profits, making bankers effectively risk averse.
    EM debt can also be sold to arbitrageurs. These agents are endowed
with  in period 1 which they can invest in cash or EM debt. Their final
consumption is equal to the payoff from investing  in EM bonds (or in cash
if p = 1) in period 1,
                                         
                                   cA = .                                 (6)
                                         p
    This setup captures the key frictions at work in conventional accounts
of the global financial cycle. EM economies obtain funds from specialized
investors who are sometimes under pressure to sell EM assets. The selling
pressure, in our model, comes from the fact that the period-0 lenders have to
deleverage.6 This selling pressure would not depress the price of EM debt in
the presence of arbitrageurs with a large pool of resources. A key assumption
   6
     Alternatively, we could assume that the original lenders are self-funded but have access
to an alternative investment with gross return R between periods 1 and 2 with probability
 . In this case the selling pressure comes from the fact that foreign investors want to
disinvest from the EM economy to take advantage of the higher return.


                                             9
will be that the arbitrageurs' resources  are not large enough to prevent a
fire sale of EM debt.
    First best. We characterize the unconstrained first-best allocation as a
benchmark for the rest of the analysis. The first-best allocation is achieved
if EM borrowers can bypass the intermediation of specialists and borrow di-
rectly from non-specialist foreign investor at a zero interest rate. EM physical
investment then satisfies,
                                 f k F B = 1,                                (7)
and the level of reserves a is indeterminate. As we will see, the first best
allocation is achieved if the probability of sudden stop,  , is equal to zero, or
if the resources of arbitrageurs, , are large enough to prevent a fall in the
price of EM debt in a sudden stop.


3     Laissez-faire
We now solve for the laissez-faire equilibrium in which: (i) EM borrowers set
the levels of k , a, and b so as to maximize their utility E0 cEM subject to
the budget constraints (1)-(3) and taking the prices p and p as given; and
(ii) the prices p and p clear the market for EM debt in periods 0 and 1. The
equilibrium from period 1 onwards is contingent on the state (N or S ). We
derive the laissez-faire equilibrium by proceeding backwards, starting with
period 1.
    Period-1 equilibrium. In the normal state the period-1 price of EM
debt is p = 1. All agents (EM residents, bankers and arbitrageurs) view EM
debt as equivalent to cash and their portfolio allocation between EM debt
and cash is indeterminate.
    In the sudden stop state the bankers sell their holdings of EM debt to the
arbitrageurs and the EM residents. The debt price that equalizes demand
and supply is such that a +  = qb unless there is enough cash in the market
to buy the debt at price 1 (a +   b). The two cases are subsumed by the
following expression for the fire-sale price of debt,
                                            a+
                             q = min 1,           .                          (8)
                                             b

  Period-0 demand for EM debt. In period 0 the foreign bankers
                        B
maximize their utility U0 = E0 cB = (1 -  ) cB    B        B      B
                                             N + cS where cN and cS


                                       10
are respectively given by (4) and (5). It is easy to see that if q > p, the
bankers make a strictly positive expected profit on each unit of EM debt
purchased in period 0 since they can resell it at a higher price in period 1. If
that were the case their demand for EM debt would be infinite, which is not
an equilibrium. Hence, the price of EM debt in case of a sudden stop cannot
exceed the issuance price, q  p. Using (4) and (5), the banker's welfare is
given by,
                      B
                     U0  = R + (1 -  + Rq - Re p) b,                        (9)
where
                                Re  1 -  + R,
is the expected return on period-1 liquidity for bankers.
    Bankers maximize their utility (9) subject to the constraint that the
legacy asset is large enough to cover their loss, (p - q ) b  . We assume
that  is large enough that this constraint is not binding, so that bankers'
expected profit from holding EM debt must be equal to zero in equilibrium.7
This implies,
                                  1 -  + Rq
                             p=                .                        (10)
                                       Re
    Expression (10) can be re-written as
                                            R-1
                     p = E0 (p ) -  (1 -  )       (1 - q ) ,              (11)
                                              Re
where E0 (p ) = 1 -  + q is the expected price of EM debt. The last term
on the right-hand side of (11) is a pure risk premium discount, which is due
to the fact that EM debt falls in value when there is a sudden stop that raises
the value of liquidity for bankers.
    Solving for b in equations (1), (8) and (10) it is possible to express the
period-0 price of EM debt in terms of physical investment k and reserves a.
The following lemma describes how p varies with k and a.
Lemma 1 The fire-sale price of EM debt is a function of the EM agents'
investment in physical capital k and reserves a,
                                                         -1
                                      Re (k - )+
                      q (k, a) = 1 +                          ,                (12)
                                     1- a+
(using the conventional notation x+ = max (x, 0)).
  7
    A condition on  involving the exogenous parameters is derived at the end of this
section.


                                        11
Proof. Using equation (8) and (10) to substitute out q and p from the
budget constraint (1) gives

                 Re (k + a) = (1 -  ) b + R min (b, a + ) .

If b  a +  this equation reduces to k + a = b. If b  a +  simple
manipulations of this equation give
                                         Re
                         b=a++              (k - ) .                       (13)
                                        1-
Using this expression to substitute out b from (8) gives
                                                   -1
                                 Re (k - )
                         q = 1+                         .                  (14)
                                1- a+

The condition q  1 is then satisfied only if k -   0. Hence there are two
cases. Either k   and q = 1, or k   and q is given by (14). These two
cases are summarized by equation (12).
   Using (10), the period-0 price of EM debt can also be expressed as a
function of k and a
                                     1 -  + Rq (k, a)
                        p (k, a) =                    .                    (15)
                                           Re
Several important observations follow from equations (12) and (15). First,
p (k, a) = 1 if k  . If EM debt is lower than , there is enough cash in
the market to prevent a fall in the price of EM debt in a sudden stop. In
this case there is no risk in the price of debt, so it can be sold to bankers in
period 0 for p = 1.
    Second, if k > , q and p are both strictly smaller than 1 because the
resources of the arbitrageurs are too low to prevent a fall in the EM debt
price if there is a sudden stop. In this case the price of EM debt is decreasing
in physical investment and increasing in reserves,
                               p      p
                                 < 0,   > 0.
                               k      a
On one hand, higher investment k is financed by issuing more debt b, which
depresses the fire-sale price of debt. On the other hand, issuing debt in order


                                        12
to accumulate reserves raises the fire-sale price of debt. To understand this
result one can substitute out a from (8) using (1), which gives
                                             k-
                                   q =p-        .
                                              b
Selling debt at price p in period 0 and accumulating the proceeds as reserves
to buy back the debt at a lower price in period 1 raises the fire-sale price
of debt given p. By raising the fire-sale price, reserves accumulation also
increases the ex-ante price p.
    Period-0 reserves. Next, consider the problem of EM agents in period
0. The EM agents' welfare can be computed by assuming that they spend
all their reserves to buy back EM debt in period 1.8 Using a = 0 and the
budget constraints (1)-(3) to substitute out k and cEM , the representative
borrower's welfare can be written,

                      EM                              1
                     U0  = f (k ) - b + aE0                   ,                     (16)
                                                      p
                                           k              1           1
                             = f (k ) -      + a E0               -     .           (17)
                                           p              p           p
The representative EM agent maximizes his welfare taking the prices p and p
as given. The first-order condition for k equates the marginal cost of issuing
bonds to the marginal return on capital,
                                              1
                                      f (k ) = .                                    (18)
                                              p
    The second term on the right-hand side of (17) is the EM agent's benefit
from holding reserves. This is the expected profit from issuing bonds at
price p in period 0 and investing the proceeds in cash to buy back EM debt
at price p in period 1. In an equilibrium where EM borrowers hold reserves
(i.e., in which the constraint a  0 is not binding) the marginal net benefit
of accumulating reserves must be equal to zero
                                       1        1
                                 E0         -     = 0.                              (19)
                                       p        p
       It is then possible to show the following result.
   8
     If p = 1 their purchase of EM debt is indeterminate but their welfare is the same as
if they spent all their reserves on EM debt.


                                           13
Lemma 2 If k F B >  the representative EM agent holds a strictly positive
level of reserves if and only if q = 1/R.
Proof. Using that p is equal to 1 with probability 1 -  and to q with
probability  and equation (10), the l.h.s. of (19) can be written
                      1 -  + R             1 - q 1 - Rq
         1-+        -           =  (1 -  )               .                  (20)
                  q   1 -  + Rq              q 1 -  + Rq
Condition (19) is satisfied if and only if q = 1/R or q = 1. If q < 1/R
(q > 1/R), the marginal benefit of accumulating (decumulating) reserves
is strictly positive (negative), so that EM agents accumulate (decumulate)
reserves until q = 1/R. The solution q = 1 is ruled out by k F B > . If q = 1
then k = k F B by (18) but (12) implies q < 1, a contradiction.
    The intuition for this result is as follows. In the sudden-stop state foreign
bankers and EM agents receive period-1 payoffs of respectively R and 1/q
per unit of period-1 liquidity. Foreign bankers and EM agents have short or
long positions in cash and EM debt and substitute between the two assets
at the same price. Hence in equilibrium EM agents must receive the same
payoff as bankers in the sudden-stop state, which implies 1/q = R.
    Period-0 equilibrium. Putting things together, the equilibrium level
of capital and price of debt are determined as in Figure 3. The upward
sloping curve corresponds to the EM demand for funds, equation (18). The
downward sloping curve represents the foreign investors's supply of funds,
equation (15), taking into account the endogeneity of a to the fire-sale price.
When k exceeds , the fire-sale price q falls below 1 but as long as q is
larger than 1/R, EM residents do not invest in reserves (by Lemma 2) so
that p is equal to p (k, 0). When the fire-sale price reaches 1/R (point B ),
EM residents start to accumulate reserves so that the fire-sale price remains
equal to 1/R, and p is equal to 1/Re . EM agents start accumulating reserves
when q (k, 0)  1/R, which using (12) is equivalent to k  R/Re .
    Figure 3 shows an equilibrium (point A) where EM agents accumulate
a positive level of reserves. The following Proposition characterizes such
equilibria in general.
Proposition 3 (Laissez-faire equilibrium with private reserves) The EM agents
hold a strictly positive level of reserves in the laissez-faire equilibrium if and
only if
                                       R
                                 f  e > Re .                                  (21)
                                       R

                                       14
       p

                                                              Demand
        1                                         f'(k)=1/p
                                  p(k,0)
                                            B          A
            
     1/                                                        Supply




                                           R/Re                     k
                                                         

                 Figure 3: Laissez-faire equilibrium k and q

In this equilibrium the price of EM debt is equal to 1/Re in period 0 and falls
to 1/R in period 1 if there is a sudden stop. The period-0 level of physical
investment satisfies
                                f k LF = Re ,                             (22)
and the EM country's external balance sheet is given by
                                      k LF - 
                           bLF =               ,                          (23)
                                   1/Re - 1/R
                                   k LF - R/Re
                           aLF   =               .                        (24)
                                      R/Re - 1
Proof. Assume that the constraint a  0 is not binding so that (19) applies.
Then by Lemma 2 q is equal to 1/R and equation (10) implies p = 1/Re .
Condition (18) implies f k LF = Re . The expressions in (23) and (24)
result from the budget constraint k LF + a = pLF b and 1/R = (a + ) /b
from equation (8). Condition (21), which is equivalent to k LF > R/Re , is
necessary and sufficient to ensure that the expression for a given in (24) is
strictly positive.

                                      15
    Proposition 3 calls for several observations. First, equation (22) implies
that k LF < k F B if  > 0, i.e., the level of physical capital falls short of
the first best under laissez faire. This is because the cost of borrowing from
foreign bankers is increased by the cost of liquiditating the legacy asset in a
sudden stop.
    Second, condition (21) is stronger than the condition for the price of EM
debt to be affected by a sudden stop in period 1,  < k F B . If  < k F B but
(21) is not satisfied, the price of debt falls in period 1, but not by enough to
induce the EM agents to accumulate reserves.
    Third, the level of physical investment and the debt prices p and p do
not depend on the foreign arbitrageurs' resources . Changes in  lead to
changes in the EM balance sheet such that the price of EM debt remains the
same. For example, a lower  induces EM residents to issue more debt and
accumulate more reserves so as to keep the price of debt the same.
    Finally, this equilibrium was derived under the assumption that bankers
have enough legacy asset to pay for their losses in a sudden stop,  
(p - q ) b. Using the values given in Proposition 3 this condition becomes
  k LF - . We assume this condition to be satisfied in the rest of this
paper.


4         Financial development and capital flows
We assumed in the previous section that EM agents were unconstrained in
the amount of debt that they can issue. We now relax this assumption and
assume that domestic agents can issue a limited amount of debt because of
a domestic financial friction that limits the ability of EM agents to issue
debt to foreign investors. The question is how domestic financial develop-
ment affects capital flows, and in particular the allocation of capital inflows
between physical investment and reserves. The model predictions derived in
this section will be compared with the empirical evidence in section B.
    We assume that a financial friction limits the borrowing capacity of EM
agents. As a result EM borrowers are subject to the credit constraint,
                                           pb  ,                                       (25)
where  is an exogenous parameter. Several microfoundations for such a
constraint can be found in the literature.9 Parameter  may reflect the
    9
        For example, assume the collateral constraint pb   +  (a + k ) , where  is a coeffi-


                                              16
strength of creditor rights, the strength of their enforcement, or the credi-
tors' ability to monitor the borrowers' actions. We will interpret this variable
as the country's level of financial development. Increased financial develop-
ment allows EM agents to produce more financial assets that can be sold
to foreign investors. Constraint (25) is binding if and only if  is smaller
than the economy's unconstrained level of foreign borrowing, k LF + aLF =
 k LF -  / (1 - Re /R).
     We study how the country's external balance sheet, a and b, investment
k , and debt prices, p and q , depend on the level of domestic financial devel-
opment  . The constraint a  0 is binding if and only if the marginal return
on capital is larger than the marginal return on reserves when there is zero
reserves, i.e.
                                                
                            f (k )  1 -  +            .                     (26)
                                             q (k, 0)
The left-hand side and right-hand side of this inequality are respectively
decreasing and increasing in k . Thus (26) is satisfied if and only if k is lower
than the level k for which it is an equality. The threshold k is between  and
k LF because k =  satisfies (26) but k LF does not.10
    Having defined k , we can distinguish between three stages of financial
development.

   1. Low financial development. For   k , EM agents borrow  and invests
      the proceeds in illiquid domestic capital: k =  and a = 0. Constraint
      (25) is binding because  is lower than k LF + aLF and EM agents do
      not invest in reserves because (26) is satisfied.

   2. Intermediate financial development. For   k, k LF + aLF , constraint
      (25) is still binding, but EM borrowers now invest a share of capital
      inflows in reserves. The comparative statics of capital flows with re-
      spect to changes in financial development are stated in the following
      proposition.
cient lower than one. The r.h.s. is the amount of good that foreign creditors can recover in
a default. If this constraint were violated, the borrower could make a take-or-leave offer to
reduce her debt to that amount in period 0, which the creditors would accept. Using (1)
to substitute out a + k , this credit constraint can be rewritten as (25) with  = / (1 -  ).
   10
      For k =  this is an implication of q (, 0) = 1 and  < k F B . For k = k LF note that
since aLF > 0, f k LF = 1 -  + /q k LF , aLF < 1 -  + /q k LF , 0 .



                                             17
       Proposition 4 (Impact of financial development on capital flows) EM
       borrowers hold a positive level of reserves and their external borrowing
       is constrained if and only if the level of domestic financial development
       is intermediate,   k, k LF + aLF . In this case domestic financial de-
       velopment (an increase in  ) raises physical investment k and reserves
       a as well as the price of EM debt,
                             k      a         p
                               > 0,   > 0 and   > 0.
                                              

       Proof. In equilibrium k and a satisfy

                               k + a = ,
                                                        
                               f (k ) = 1 -  +                .
                                                     q (k, a)

       The first equation is the budget constraint (1) using the fact that (25) is
       binding. The second equation equates the marginal product of capital
       and the marginal benefit of reserves. These two equations can be rep-
       resented by respectively a downward-sloping locus and upward-sloping
       locus in the space (k, a). An increase in  shifts the downward-sloping
       locus up and so increases both k and a. Using the second equation, an
       increase in k implies an increase in q and so in p.
       Financial development leads to gross capital inflows that finance incre-
       ments in both physical capital and foreign reserves. Both capital and
       reserves increase at the margin because domestic agents equate the re-
       turns on both types of assets. The return on reserves falls because the
       fire-sale price of EM debt increases with the level of reserves.

   3. High financial development. For  > k LF + aLF , constraint (25) is no
      longer binding so that further financial development does not affect
      capital flows.

   Figure 4 illustrates the impact of financial development on the main en-
dogenous variables.11 The left-hand side and right-hand panels respectively
  11
                                                                         
    We use the following model specification and calibration: f (k ) = 2 k ,  = 0.5,
 = 0.1 and R = 1.2. The numerical illustrations presented in the rest of the paper will
be based on the same parameter values.


                                          18
show the impact of financial development on gross capital flows and the price
of EM debt. For  < k , the capital inflows allowed by financial development
finance only physical capital and no reserves are accumulated. If  < , larger
debt inflows do not reduce the price of debt because foreign arbitrageurs have
enough resources to buy back all the debt in a sudden stop. When  > 
the price of debt initially falls sharply with the level of borrowing as capital
inflows do not finance the accumulation of reserves. The response of the debt
price to gross inflows is reversed when  > k . The capital inflows allowed
by financial development then finance mostly the accumulation of foreign
reserves, which raises the price of EM debt.
Physical investment and foreign reserves




                                           2.5
                                                                                                           1
                                            2
                                                                                         EM debt prices


                                           1.5                                                            0.8

                                            1
                                                                                                          0.6
                                           0.5

                                            0                                                             0.4
                                                 0             2     k LF+aLF   4                               0            2       k LF+aLF   4
                                                     Financial development                                          Financial development



                                                      Figure 4: Financial development and capital flows



5                                           Policies
We now turn to optimal public interventions. Section 5.1 characterizes the
externalities that justify the intervention of a social planner and solves for
the social planner allocation. Section 5.2 looks at the role of open market
operations by the government that can be interpreted as sterilized foreign
exchange interventions.

5.1                                              Externalities
We now consider a constrained-efficient social planner, who sets a and b
in period 0 so as to maximize the welfare of EM borrowers subject to the

                                                                                    19
same constraints as private agents. The wedge between the private and
social impacts of changing the EM balance sheet comes from a pecuniary
externality. The social planner takes into account the impact of changing
the EM representative agent's balance sheet on the debt prices p and p
whereas private borrowers do not. In the spirit of macroprudential policy
we assume that the social planner intervenes only ex ante (in period 0) and
leave for later a discussion of ex post (period 1) interventions.
    The social planner can manipulate the EM debt price exploiting the fact
that the EM country is a monopolist in the market for its own debt. Which
way the social planner wants to move prices is not clear a priori because EM
agents are both sellers and buyers in the market for EM debt. In period 0
EM agents sell debt and benefit from a higher price p. In a sudden stop the
same agents buy back debt and benefit from a lower price q . Since p and q
are related by (10) the social planner must trade off the two benefits.
  Social vs. private value of liquidity. We use (10) and (17) to write
EM welfare as
            EM                    k+a                   
           U0  = f (k ) -                    + a 1 -  +          .      (27)
                            (1 -  + Rq ) /Re            q
Decentralized agents take q as given but the EM social planner takes into
account that q is endogenous to k and a. The difference between the social
value and the private value of liquidity is
                                     EM
                                    U0  q
                                          ,                             (28)
                                    q a
                                 EM
where the partial derivative of U0  is taken for constant k and a in (27).

Proposition 5 (Social value of liquidity) The social value of liquidity is
higher than the private value of liquidity under laissez-faire.
                                            EM
Proof. Since q/a > 0 we need to prove that U0  /q > 0. We have
                   EM
                  U0                      Re (k + a)    
                            =        -               +a
                  q             q        1 -  + Rq      q
                                                         2
                                 R                   p
                            =          (k + a) - a           ,
                                p2 R e               q
                            = R2 > 0,

                                      20
where we have used the fact that in the laissez-faire equilibrium, p = 1/Re ,
q = 1/R, k = k LF and a = aLF given by (24).
    The laissez-faire equilibrium involves an under-accumulation of liquid-
ity. EM welfare is increased by larger capital inflows that finance additional
reserves. This result runs counter to the idea that gross capital flows are
excessively large and volatile under laissez-faire. The problem is actually the
opposite: gross flows are not large enough in the decentralized equilibrium.
Gross capital flows play a stabilizing role in our model because they stabilize
the price of domestic debt ex post (in period 1) and thus reduce the risk
premium that the country has to pay ex ante (in period 0).
    The intuition behind this result can be better understood by looking at
global welfare. Global welfare is the sum of the welfare of EM residents,
foreign bankers and foreign arbitrageurs,12
                              W    EM    B    A
                             U0 = U0  + U0 + U0 ,

where the welfare of the three types of agents is given by,

                      EM                                    
                     U0  = f (k ) - b + a 1 -  +                    ,             (29)
                                                            q
                        B
                       U0 = R,                                                    (30)
                        A                                  
                       U0 = E0 cA =  1 -  +                     .                 (31)
                                                           q

These expressions come from equations (9), (10), (6), (16) and using the
fact that p is equal to 1 with probability 1 -  and to q with probability
 . Observe that the welfare of bankers is independent of the EM country's
balance sheet and is equal to the payoff on their unliquidated legacy asset.
Summing up (29), (30) and (31) and using q = (a + )/b we have,
                     W
                    U0 = R + f (k ) - (1 -  ) (b - a - ) .

Then using (10) and q = (a + )/b to substitute out p from (1) gives
(1 -  ) (b - a - ) = Re (k - ) so that the expression above can be re-
written,
                      W
                    U0   = R + Re  + f (k ) - Re k.               (32)
  12
    We do not include the welfare of the foreign investors who are not bankers or arbi-
trageurs, which is simply equal to their endowments.


                                          21
   Global welfare is equal to the payoff on the bankers' unliquidated legacy
asset, plus the value of the foreign arbitrageurs' endowment invested at Re ,
plus the EM investment surplus assuming a cost of funds of Re . Importantly,
global welfare is constant given k . For a given level of physical investment,
changes in the EM balance sheet only redistribute welfare between EM agents
and foreign arbitrageurs.
   Using (32) one can rewrite EM welfare as,

            EM    W    A    B                                      1
           U0  = U0 - U0 - U0 = f (k ) - Re k +  R -                   .       (33)
                                                                   q
Given k , EM welfare is increasing in q . The EM social planner thus always
finds it optimal to increase q , which can be done by raising the level of
capital inflows and reserves. The social planner allocation is characterized in
the following proposition.

Proposition 6 (Social planner allocation) Assume that the social planner
maximizes EM welfare subject to bp   . The social planner maximizes
the volume of capital inflows, i.e., bp   is binding. In the social planner
allocation the level of reserves is higher, and the level of physical capital lower,
than under laissez-faire: aSP > aLF and k SP < k LF .

Proof. The Lagrangian for the social planner's problem is,

           EM                                    1
          U0  = f (k ) - Re k +  R -                     +  (  - k - a) .
                                              q (k, a)
The first-order condition for a is
                                       q
                                 =          > 0,
                                      q 2 a
which implies that constraint bp   is binding.
   The first-order condition for k is
                                              q
                            f (k ) = Re -          + .
                                             q 2 k
Since q/k < 0, one has f (k ) > Re which implies k SP < k LF .
    This proposition is a stronger version of Proposition 5. Not only does
the social planner want to marginally increase the level of gross capital in-
flows under laissez-faire, she wants to maximize the level of capital inflows.

                                        22
By doing so the EM social planner transfers some of the rent that foreign
arbitrageurs extract from the fire sale of EM debt to her own residents.
     The social planner lowers the ex-ante cost of borrowing for private agents
closer to the first-best level. At the same time, she does not raise k --instead
she decreases it below the laissez-faire level. This is because the social plan-
ner's intervention does not decrease the social cost of borrowing taking into
account the lower profit on reserves. Like private agents, the social planner
is constrained by the fact that external finance comes from leveraged bankers
who demand a compensation for the risk of having to liquidate legacy assets.
Hence the social planner, rather than increasing k , lowers it to accumulate a
little more liquidity at the margin.
    Remark 1. Implementation with Pigouvian taxes. A priori the
social planner allocation can be implemented with two policy instruments
since the social planner has two target (k and a). We consider the case
where the social planner can use taxes on reserves and capital accumulation,
respectively denoted by a and k . The period-0 budget constraint of EM
agents becomes
                       (1 + k ) k + (1 + a ) a = pb + z,                (34)
where z is the lump-sum rebate of the taxes.
    The optimal taxes are characterized in Appendix A1 and we summarize
the main results here. The levels of the optimal taxes are not uniquely
determined because the constraint k + a   is binding. The social planner
allocation can thus be implemented with only one instrument, a subsidy
on reserves. If the constraint k + a   is binding under laissez-faire, the
subsidy induces EM agents to invest less in k and more in a. If the constraint
k + a   is not binding under laissez-faire, the subsidy induces EM agents
to borrow more.
    Remark 2. Ex post interventions. We have assumed that the social
planner does not intervene in period 1, and in particular lets private agents
spend all their reserves in a sudden stop. We show in Appendix A2 that this
is not time consistent: ex post, the social planner may want to curtail the
sales of private reserves in order to maximize the country's rent from the fire
sale. The social planner allocation described in Proposition 6, thus, requires
a credible commitment to let private agents use all their reserves in period
1.
   Remark 3. Welfare criterion. No Pareto improvement benefiting

                                      23
both EM agents and foreign investors is possible starting from laissez-faire.
Any Pareto improvement would have to increase global welfare, but global
welfare is already at its maximum level under laissez-faire since (32) is maxi-
mized for f (k ) = Re . A global social planner applying the Pareto criterion,
thus, would not alter the laissez-faire allocation.
    It is unclear, however, that the Pareto criterion is an appropriate one in
the context of this model. The Pareto criterion implies the preservation of the
rent of foreign arbitrageurs, even though this rent is paid by the EM economy
which is a victim of the financial friction affecting foreign banks. The EM
social planner allocation brings the global economy closer to the first-best
welfare allocation, under which foreign arbitrageurs do not appropriate any
rent.
    Policy international could also be motivated by concerns about inequal-
ity. Because of linearity in agents' utility, the model does not take into
account the possible income inequality between EM borrowers and foreign ar-
bitrageurs. Redistributing income from richer foreign arbitrageurs to poorer
EM borrowers would increase total welfare if utility were concave. One may
capture this idea by assuming that the social planner puts a lower weight 1-
on the welfare of foreign arbitrageurs than on the welfare of EM residents.
The objective function of the global social planner would then be
          GSP    EM            A
         U0   = U0  + (1 -  ) U0 ,
                                                               
                 = f (k ) - Re k - +Re  -  1 -  +                      .
                                                            q (k, a)

If  is close to 0 (i.e. the social planner values the welfare of foreign arbi-
trageurs almost as much as that of EM borrowers), the global social planner
implements a level of physical investment that is about the same as under
laissez-faire but also maximizes the level of EM external borrowing in the
same way as the EM social planner.Therefore, the conclusion that gross cap-
ital flows should be increased above the laissez-faire carries over to the global
social planner under the fairly weak assumption that it puts more weight on
the welfare of EM borrowers, even by a vanishingly small amount.

5.2    Government reserves
We now introduce an EM government that can borrow and accumulate re-
serves. The government has no real expenditure. The budget constraints of

                                       24
the government are

                                  ag = pbg ,                               (35)
                          ag + p b g = a g + p b g ,                       (36)
                             b g + z = a g,                                (37)

where z is a lump-sum transfer to the private sector. The budget constraints
(1)-(3) still apply to the EM agents, with the transfer z added to the period-2
budget constraint.
     We assume that the government sells all its reserves to buy back EM debt
if there is a sudden stop in period 1. That is, a g = 0 and z = (1/q - 1/p) ag >
0 in the event of a sudden stop. Note that when it intervenes the government
purchases more debt that it has issued in period 0 (b g < 0). The government
does not intervene if external financial conditions are normal: a g = ag and
z = - (1/p - 1) ag < 0 (the government imposes a tax -z to pay for the
carry cost of reserves).
     We interpret these government balance sheet operations as sterilized for-
eign exchange interventions by the central bank. When the central bank
buys foreign reserves and sells the same quantity of domestic government
debt, it increases the total supply of debt by the consolidated government
sector (treasury plus central bank) to the private sector and accumulates an
equivalent quantity of reserves. This corresponds to an increase in bg and ag
in our model.
     We assume that the government has its own borrowing constraint in pe-
riod 0,
                                     pbg   g .
The borrowing constraints of the government and the private sector are sep-
arate because they are determined by different factors. The borrowing con-
straint of private borrowers is determined by private creditor rights and their
enforcement. The borrowing constraint of the government is determined by
its ability to raise taxes and the cost of defaulting on government debt.
    Note that we have imposed constraints on what the government can do
with its balance sheet. Most importantly, the government cannot make trans-
fers to the private sector in period 0. Otherwise, the government could use its
borrowing capacity to finance more investment in physical capital in period
0. It is easy to see (by consolidating the budget constraint of the govern-
ment with that of the private sector) that in this case, the government could


                                      25
achieve the same allocations as in the laissez-faire equilibrium in which the
private sector borrowing capacity is increased from  to  +  g . That is,
the effect of government balance sheet interventions would be equivalent to
that of financial development. This is not the case here because we do not
allow the government to make such transfers in period 0, our focus being on
reserves interventions.
    We then have the following result.

Proposition 7 (Government reserves interventions) Government reserves
interventions are welfare-increasing if and only if the level of domestic fi-
nancial development  is in the interval,   , k LF + aLF . If the private
sector holds reserves, a government accumulation of reserves partially crowds
out private reserves, crowds in physical investment and raises the price of
government debt,
                            a       k       p
                     -1 <      < 0,    > 0,    > 0.
                             g       g       g

Proof. If   , p and q are equal to 1 so that the government does not
change welfare with reserves interventions. If   k LF + aLF , the economy
is in a Ricardian regime in which government reserves interventions have no
impact because they are offset by the private sector (as long as they are small
enough to leave private reserves strictly above zero, which is true if  g < aLF ).
Thus, government reserves interventions can be welfare-increasing only if
  , k LF + aLF .
    Government reserves interventions are indeed welfare-increasing if  is
in this interval. If the private sector does not accumulate reserves under
laissez-faire (k =  ), a marginal accumulation of government reserves does
not change k but raises q , which increases welfare by (33). If the private
sector accumulates reserves under laissez-faire (k <  and a > 0), a marginal
accumulation of government reserves is equivalent to a marginal increase in
financial development under laissez-faire, which raises welfare. This increase
total reserves, physical capital, and the price of EM debt as shown in Propo-
sition 4.
    The impact of government reserves interventions depends on the level of
financial development. If financial development is low the country does not
issue enough debt to be affected by a sudden stop and there is no strict
benefit from reserves interventions. If financial development is high, the

                                       26
economy is in a Ricardian regime where government reserves interventions
have no impact. Thus, government reserves interventions raises welfare only
for intermediate levels of financial development.
     The left-hand side panel of Figure 5 shows the optimal level of public
reserves.13 There is a discontinuity at  = , where the optimal level of
reserves jumps up from zero to  g . As soon as the EM economy is affected
by a sudden stop the government should accumulate as much reserves as
possible. For  > k LF + aLF the government cannot affect total reserves
because of Ricardian equivalence and thus stops accumulating reserves. For
 smaller than but close to k LF + aLF , the government accumulates just
enough reserves to fill the gap between  and k LF + aLF .
     The right-hand side panel of Figure 5 compares the welfare gains from
the optimal reserves interventions discussed in this section with the optimal
reserves subsidy discussed in the previous section. For intermediate levels of
financial development the welfare gains are substantially larger for reserves
interventions than for the reserves subsidy because reserves interventions re-
lax constraint (25) whereas reserves subsidies keep this constraint unchanged.
In other terms, the welfare gains from reserves interventions are significantly
larger than the gains from capital controls for countries at intermediate levels
of financial development.
                                                                                       Welfare gain (% of laissez-faire welfare)
 Optimal level of government reserves




                                                                                                                                   2.5
                                        0.6                         g
                                          g                     a                                                                   2         Reserves

                                        0.4                                                                                        1.5

                                        0.3                                                                                         1
                                        0.2
                                                                                                                                   0.5                                Taxes
                                        0.1
                                         0                                                                                          0
                                              0   1         2
                                                                    k +a
                                                                        LF   LF   4                                                      0   1           2
                                                                                                                                                              kLF+a LF        4

                                                  Financial development,                                                                     Financial development,




                                                           Figure 5: Optimal reserves interventions

                  13
    We use the same parameter values to construct Figure 4 and set  g = 0.5. We set the
optimal level of reserves to zero when reserves interventions do not affect welfare.


                                                                                      27
6      Evidence
The model makes predictions about how EMs are affected by, and respond
to, the global financial cycle depending on the level of financial development.
EMs smooth the impact of the global financial cycle with their external
balance sheets that pulsate to the rhythm of the global financial cycle: when
global financial conditions are loose, EMs absorb large inflows with which
they finance large outflows, and unwind these positions when global financial
conditions tighten. EMs that are more financially developed and can build up
larger external balance sheets, experience larger, more volatile, but also more
correlated inflows and outflows. The offsetting behavior of gross capital flows
stabilizes the price of domestic assets allowing more financially developed
EMs to finance themselves externally on better terms on average. Foreign
exchange intervention can enhance this adjustment mechanism but its role
is increasingly fulfilled by private sector reserves as the country's level of
financial development and integration increases.
    These facts are broadly consistent with the behavior of capital flows in
EMs--especially during the 2008-09 global financial retrenchment as shown
by Figure 1--and with the literature on the global financial cycle. In this
section, we investigate the extent to which the cross-country evidence is con-
sistent with the model predictions. The purpose of this section is to provide
suggestive evidence consistent with the model rather than to formally test
the model against possible alternatives.
    Data. We first describe the country sample and the data. Our baseline
empirical analysis uses annual data and focuses on a core sample of EMs
that belong to the MSCI Emerging Market Index and have at least 10 years
of data. We use data from the IMF International Investment Position (IIP)
and Balance of Payments (BOP) statistics from 1990 to 2017. IIP statistics
include data on the stock of foreign assets and liabilities, while BOP data
provide information on gross capital flows and the investment income from
gross liabilities and assets. The list of countries is reported in appendix B.
    We assess the robustness of our empirical findings along several dimen-
sions. First, we consider a larger sample of EMs which includes all countries
at an intermediate level of development.14 Second, we replicate the analysis
  14
    This larger sample includes all countries with population above 2 million, except those
considered as "Advanced Economies" by the IMF World Economic Outlook or as "Low
Income" by the World Bank.


                                            28
by considering only countries with complete data from 2005 onward. This
ensures that our findings are not driven by the unbalanced nature of the
dataset since the time-series coverage varies significantly across countries es-
pecially before 2005. Third, we check whether the results are robust to using
quarterly data, considering countries with at least 5 years of data. Quarterly
data are generally available for a shorter time span but for several countries
they provide more data points given the higher frequency of observation.
    The model makes predictions about the returns on foreign assets and
liabilities. Using BOP and IIP data, we compute for each country and period
                                        A                  L
t the rate of return on foreign assets rt and liabilities rt as follows:
                       A
                      rt =      At - Ot + YtA /At-1 - 1
                       L
                      rt =      Lt - It + YtL /Lt-1 - 1

where At and Lt denote assets and liabilities, Ot and It are gross outflows and
inflows, and YtA and YtL are the income payments on assets and liabilities. We
define a country's international borrowing spread as the difference between
                                                                  L     A
the return paid on liabilities and the return earned on assets, rt  - rt  , as for
example in Gourinchas and Rey (2007) and Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007).
   We compare three predictions of the model with the data.
    Prediction 1: gross capital inflows are positively correlated with
gross capital outflows and with the borrowing spread over time. In
the model, capital inflows are correlated with capital outflows for countries
that accumulate (private or public) reserves. Period 0 can be viewed as a cap-
ital flow boom (with large and positive inflows and outflows) whereas period
1 features a retrenchment (with negative inflows and outflows) if external
financial conditions tighten. Furthermore, the price of the domestic asset
falls if there is a retrenchment, leading to a low return for foreign investors.
Domestic investors receive a zero return on their reserves. This implies that a
retrenchment is correlated with a low realized borrowing spread in period 1 of
the model. More generally, gross inflows and outflows tend to expand when
EM asset prices are increasing and viceversa, implying a positive correlation
between gross flows and the borrowing spread.
    Table 1 reports these correlations in our sample of analysis. For each
country, we compute the time-series correlation between inflows and outflows
and report the cross-country average in the first row of the table. The average
correlation is positive and statistically significant across all EM samples and

                                       29
data frequencies. This is consistent with a number of findings reported in
the literature, e.g. Forbes and Warnock (2012), Broner et al. (2013), IMF
(2013), and Davis and van Wincoop (2017).

 Table 1: Correlation of capital flows and international borrowing spreads
                        (1)        (2)          (3)              (4)      (5)         (6)
                              Annual data                           Quarterly data
                      Core EM    Large EM sample            Core EM     Large EM sample
                       sample  all years  post 2005          sample   all years    post 2005
 Correlation:
  Inflows/outflows    0.69***    0.44***     0.53***         0.77***    0.61***    0.69***
   Inflows/spreads     0.12**     0.09**      0.10*          0.16***     0.04        0.12*
   Outflows/spreads   0.26***    0.22***     0.25***         0.23***    0.17***     0.18**
                                *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


    The more novel prediction of the model is the positive correlation between
gross flows and the borrowing spread. The second and third rows of Table
1 confirm that gross flows are positively correlated with borrowing spreads,
i.e. with the excess return on EM assets relative to foreign assets. In other
words, when EM asset prices are booming, thus generating a higher realized
borrowing spread, foreigners tend to buy EM assets while residents invest
abroad. The opposite dynamic takes place when EM asset prices decline.
This suggests that EM residents seize a trading advantage by selling domestic
assets to foreigners when prices are high and buying them back at a discount
when prices are low.15
    Prediction 2: the borrowing spread is negatively correlated with
the size of external liabilities across countries.This is perhaps the most
counterintuitive implication of the model. Conventional wisdom suggests
that countries with larger foreign liabilities are more exposed to changes in
the global financial cycle. This could imply greater instability and higher
international borrowing spreads, as foreign investors demand higher risk pre-
mia. As shown in section 4, however, the model predicts that domestic
financial development leads to both a larger stock of foreign liabilities and a
lower cost of borrowing abroad. Formally, the borrowing spread in the model
  15
    In line with our findings, Caballero and Simsek (2020) show that in 30 OECD countries
gross capital flows tend to decline when expected stock returns increase.


                                              30
is measured by 1/p - 1, i.e., the spread between the long-term interest rate
at which the country borrows abroad and the (zero) return on foreign assets.
An increase in external liabilities leads to an increase in p (see Proposition
4) and so to a decrease in the borrowing spread.
    The model prediction is in line with the evidence presented in Table 2.
The table shows that countries with larger gross liabilities in percent of GDP
tend to enjoy lower international borrowing spreads. This is true across all
country samples and data frequency. This effect is economically significant.
Looking at the results based on annual data, an increase in gross liabilities of
10 percent of GDP is correlated with a 50 basis points reduction in borrowing
spreads.

   Table 2: International borrowing spreads over size of foreign liabilities
                 (1)         (2)           (3)              (4)           (5)          (6)
                         Annual data                                 Quarterly data
               Core EM       Large EM sample              Core EM         Large EM sample
                sample    all years   post 2005            sample      all years    post 2005

 Liabilities   -0.04**    -0.06***      -0.05***           -0.11**      -0.04*      -0.23***
                (0.02)     (0.02)        (0.02)             (0.04)      (0.02)       (0.04)
 Constant      7.62***    9.88***       9.18***           13.99***     7.61***      24.78***
                (1.77)     (1.71)        (1.55)             (4.01)      (2.46)       (4.47)

 Countries       22          61            47                16           40            14
 R-squared      0.18        0.16          0.21              0.38         0.09         0.767
                         *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


    A possible concern with the interpretation of our results is that spreads
may decline in countries that have larger foreign liabilities because they are
intrinsically safer and less susceptible to fleeing foreign investors. Columns
(1) to (3) in Table 3 shows that this is not the case, since capital inflows are
more volatile in countries with larger liabilities. As shown in columns (4) to
(6), the decline in borrowing spreads is correlated with the higher covariance
between gross inflows and outflows in countries with larger liabilities, which
is consistent with the model.
   Prediction 3: the use of foreign exchange interventions is nega-
tively correlated with the size of foreign liabilities across countries.
As we showed in section 4, financial development allows the private sector to
accumulate its own reserves, reducing the need for the government to stabilize

                                             31
    Table 3: Variance and covariance of capital flows over foreign liabilities
                  (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)          (5)           (6)
                    Variance of capital inflows               Covariance inflows/outflows
               Core EM         Larger EM sample           Core EM        Larger EM sample
                sample       all years      post 2005      sample      all years     post 2005

 Liabilities   0.09***       0.07***        0.08***        1.73***      0.89***       1.53***
                (0.01)        (0.01)         (0.01)         (0.26)       (0.15)        (0.24)
 Constant      -2.44**         -0.47          -1.38      -103.81***    -53.79***    -104.03***
                (0.93)        (0.72)         (0.91)        (23.50)      (14.43)       (24.78)

 Countries        22            61           47               22          61            47
 R-squared       0.80          0.56         0.62             0.69        0.37          0.47
                                  *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



domestic asset prices with foreign exchange interventions. Foreign exchange
interventions also become less effective because of Ricardian equivalence.
    Indeed, columns (1) to (3) in Table 4 show that countries with larger
liabilities tend to have a lower share of reserves in foreign assets. Further-
more, besides holding relatively fewer reserves, these countries use them less
actively in offsetting inflows. Columns (4) to (6) show indeed that countries
with larger liabilities have a lower covariance between reserves and gross in-
flows relative to the covariance between outflows and inflows. This implies
that the private sector plays a more preponderant role in offsetting move-
ments in capital inflows as financial development deepens.


7      Conclusions
The global financial cycle exposes emerging markets to large fluctuations in
capital inflows. A common policy prescription is to increase resilience by
restricting capital flows, for example through the use of capital controls. In
this paper, we offered a different perspective by pointing out that countries
can buffer the volatility of capital inflows with offsetting capital outflows. We
formalized this argument using a tractable model which shows that emerging
markets can use their balance sheets to manage the ebb and flow of the global
financial cycle. This requires accumulating reserves when capital inflows are
high, and using them to buy back domestic assets at lower prices when foreign
investors disinvest. To fully benefit from this buffering mechanism, countries

                                                    32
         Table 4: Size and use of official reserves over foreign liabilities
                  (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)
                 Share of reserves in foreign assets      cov(reserves,infl.) / cov(outflows,infl.)
               Core EM          Larger EM sample          Core EM           Larger EM sample
                sample        all years     post 2005      sample        all years       post 2005

 Liabilities   -0.22***       -0.12**      -0.16***        -0.35**        -0.36**       -0.30***
                (0.08)         (0.05)       (0.05)          (0.16)         (0.15)         (0.10)
 Constant      59.11***      54.57***      58.29***       77.14***       91.84***       82.57***
                (6.82)         (5.00)       (5.47)         (14.98)        (14.61)        (10.89)

 Countries        22            61           47               21             44             38
 R-squared       0.29          0.09         0.17             0.20           0.12           0.20
                                  *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



need to be sufficiently financially developed to buildup large external balance
sheets.
    The model also revealed that the private sector tends to under-invest in
liquidity since it does not internalize how the country's balance sheet affects
asset prices. A social planner would thus increase the size of gross capital
flows beyond the laissez-faire equilibrium rather than restrict capital flows
in line with conventional policy prescription. This exposes the country to
higher volatility in gross flows but leads to more stable domestic asset prices,
reducing the risk premium on international borrowing. The social planner's
solution can be implemented with a subsidy on the accumulation of foreign
reserves by the private sector.
    In countries at a relatively low level of financial development--where fi-
nancial constraints limit the issuance of international debt by private agents--
the government can use its own balance sheet to manage the global financial
cycle. By accumulating official reserves when global conditions are loose and
selling them when conditions are tight, the government can complement the
buffering role provided by the private sector. As financial development pro-
gresses, foreign exchange intervention becomes less helpful since the private
sector can insure itself to a large extent. The model implications are in line
with empirical stylized facts showing that more financially developed coun-
tries tend to have greater covariance between inflows and outflows, benefit
from lower borrowing spreads, and rely less on official reserves.
    In the paper, we used a stylized three-period model to clarify the key


                                                    33
mechanisms behind financial buffering. The analysis can be extended in
several directions. First, by introducing non-tradable goods, the model can
be used to examine whether and how financial buffering can also help to
stabilize the real exchange rate. Second, the model can be nested into a
conventional DSGE framework to analyze its quantitative implications.




                                    34
A     Model Appendix

A.1     Pigouvian taxes
Social planner allocation. As shown in the proof of Proposition 6, the
first-order condition for the social planner maximizing EM welfare subject
to (25) is
                                       q        q
                        f (k ) = Re + 2       -      .
                                       q   a k
Using (12) and the binding constraint k + a =  this condition can be rewrit-
ten as
                                              
                     f (k ) = R e 1 +                 .
                                      1 -  (a + )2
This condition, together with k + a =  , determine the social planner allo-
cation k SP , aSP . Both k SP and aSP are increasing in  .
   Taxes on capital and reserves. With the Pigouvian taxes in equation
(34) the welfare of the EM representative resident is

          EM                          1
         U0  = f (k ) - b + aE            ,
                                      p
                            (1 + k ) k + (1 + a ) a - z           1
                 = f (k ) -                             + aE          .
                                         p                        p

The first-order conditions are
                                       1 + k
                              f (k ) =       + ,                           (38)
                                         p
                                 1     1 + a
                          E          =       + ,                           (39)
                                 p       p

where  is the shadow cost of constraint k + a   . The optimal Pigouvian
taxes are such that these equations are satisfied for the social planner alloca-
tion with q SP = q k SP , aSP and pSP = p k SP , aSP given by (12) and (15).
Equations (38) and (39) imply

                                                        
                k - a = pSP f k SP - 1 -  +                   .            (40)
                                                       q SP

                                      35
Equation (40) implies that k -a is uniquely determined and strictly positive.
The r.h.s. of (40) is equal to zero if k SP and q SP are replaced by k LF and
q LF . The fact that k SP < k LF and aSP > aLF implies that q SP > q LF so
that the r.h.s. of equation (40) is strictly positive.
    One solution has k = 0 and a < 0, i.e., the social planner allocation
can be implemented with a subsidy on reserves only. To see this note that if
k = 0, a is given by

                                                                     
                                 a = -pSP f k SP - 1 -  +                  .
                                                                    q SP

For this level of taxation the constraint k + a   is strictly binding, i.e.,
 > 0. This results from (38) and f k SP pSP > 1, an implication of
f k LF pLF  1, k SP < k LF and pSP > pLF .
    Figure 6 shows the variation of a with  under the same calibration
as for Figure 4. The subsidy is equal to zero for low levels of financial
development where the social planner does not want to accumulate reserves.
It jumps to a level in excess of 12 percent and then decreases with the level
of financial development towards a limit level of about 2.5 percent. The
decrease is because the marginal return on capital, which the subsidy must
offset in order to induce reserves accumulation, falls with the level of financial
development.


                        5
 Tax on reserves (%)




                        0


                        -5                    a

                       -10


                       -15
                             0        1                  2                     3
                                           Financial development,


Figure 6: Variation of optimal subsidy on reserves (in percent) with financial
development

    Capital controls. One can replace the tax on capital by a tax on capital
inflows. To see this, let us add a tax on capital inflows b to the set of

                                                  36
instruments so that the period-0 budget constraint of EM residents becomes,
                                                  pb
                    (1 + k ) k + (1 + a ) a =         + z.              (41)
                                                1 + b
The first-order conditions are now
                                   (1 + k ) (1 + b )
                          f (k ) =                   ,                  (42)
                                          p
                           1       (1 + a ) (1 + b )
                      E          =                   .                  (43)
                           p              p
Any allocation achieved with k , a and b = 0 can also be achieved with
k = 0, b = k and a satisfying (1 + a ) (1 + k ) = (1 + a ). The tax
on physical capital is instead applied to capital inflows and the subsidy on
reserves is increased by the same amount as the tax on capital inflows to
keep the level of reserves unchanged.


A.2     Ex-post interventions
We have assumed in the text that the social planner does not intervene in
period 1. The social planner could however decide to spend less reserves
in period 1 than under laissez-faire so as to lower the price at which EM
residents buy back debt. Let us assume that the social planner sets the level
of interventions a  a. The fire-sale price of debt is
                                      a +
                                 q=       .                             (44)
                                        b
   In the sudden stop state EM welfare is given by,

                       EM                  a
                      U1  = f (k ) - b +     +a-a,
                                           q
where k and b are pre-determined. Using (44) to substitute out q and leaving
out constant terms, the period-1 social planner's problem can be written,
                                       a
                               max       b-a.
                               a a   a +
The solution is
                          a = min a,       b -  .

                                      37
The social planner uses all the reserves if and only if

                                a      b - .

If this condition is not satisfied the social planner spends only a fraction of
the reserves in period 1 in order to increase the monopoly profit from buying
back EM debt at a low price. Using (13) to substitute out b the condition
can be rewritten
                                        Re
                          a (a + )            (k - ) .
                                       1-
When  goes to infinity so does a in the social planner allocation (Proposition
6). Hence this condition is violated by the social planner allocation for large
levels of  .


B     Data Appendix
The "core EM sample" of countries used in Tables 1 to 4 includes: Ar-
gentina, Brazil, Chile, China, Colombia, Egypt, Hungary, India, Indone-
sia, Malaysia, Mexico, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Russia, South
Africa, Thailand, Turkey. The "Large EM sample" also includes: Alba-
nia, Angola, Armenia, Bangladesh, Belarus, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegov-
ina, Botswana, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Costa Rica, Croatia, C^ote d'Ivoire, Do-
minican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, FYR Macedonia, Georgia, Ghana,
Guatemala, Honduras, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyz Re-
public, Lesotho, Moldova, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nicaragua, Nige-
ria, Panama, Paraguay, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Tunisia, Ukraine,
Uruguay, Venezuela.




                                      38
References
Adler, Gustavo, and Rui Mano. 2016. "The Cost of Foreign Exchange
 Intervention: Concepts and Measurement." IMF Working Paper 16/89.

Aizenman, Joshua. 2011. "Hoarding International Reserves versus a Pigo-
 vian Tax-cum-Subsidy Scheme: Reflections on the Deleveraging Crisis of
 2008­2009, and a Cost Benefit Analysis." Journal of Economic Dynamics
 and Control, 35(9): 1502­1513.

Aizenman, Joshua, Yin-Wong Cheung, and Hiro Ito. 2015. "Inter-
 national reserves before and after the global crisis: Is there no end to
 hoarding?" Journal of International Money and Finance, 52: 102­126.

Benigno, Gianluca, Huigang Chen, Christopher Otrok, Alessandro
 Rebucci, and Eric R Young. 2016. "Optimal capital controls and real
 exchange rate policies: A pecuniary externality perspective." Journal of
 Monetary Economics, 84: 147­165.

Bianchi, Javier. 2011. "Overborrowing and Systemic Externalities in the
  Business Cycle." American Economic Review, 101(7): 3400­3426.

Bianchi, Javier, Juan Carlos Hatchondo, and Leonardo Martinez.
  2018. "International Reserves and Rollover Risk." American Economic Re-
  view, 108(9): 2629­2670.

Blanchard, Olivier, Gustavo Adler, and Irineu de Carvalho Filho.
  2015. "Can Foreign Exchange Intervention Stem Exchange Rate Pressures
  from Global Capital Flow Shocks?" Manuscript, IMF.

Broner, Fernando, Tatiana Didier, Aitor Erce, and Sergio L
 Schmukler. 2013. "Gross capital flows: Dynamics and crises." Journal
 of Monetary Economics, 60(1): 113­133.

Bruno, Valentina, and Huyn Song Shin. 2015. "Cross-Border Banking
 and Global Liquidity." Review of Economic Studies, 82(2): 535­564.



                                   39
Bussi`
     ere, Matthieu, Gong Cheng, Menzie D. Chinn, and No´          emie
 lisack. 2015. "For a few dollars more: Reserves and growth in times of
 crises." Journal of International Money and Finance, 52: 127­45.

Caballero, Ricardo J, and Alp Simsek. 2020. "A Model of Fickle
 Capital Flows and Retrenchment." The Journal of Political Economy,
 128(6): 2288­2328.

Caballero, Ricardo J., and Stavros Panageas. 2008. "Hedging Sud-
 den Stops and Precautionary Contractions." Journal of Development Eco-
 nomics, 85: 28­57.

C´
 espedes, Luis Felipe, and Roberto Chang. 2019. "Optimal Foreign
 Reserves and Central Bank Policy Under Financial Stress." working paper.

C´
 espedes, Luis Felipe, Roberto Chang, and Andr´       es Velasco. 2017.
 "Financial Intermediation, Real Exchange Rates, and Unconventional Poli-
 cies in an Open Economy." Journal of International Economics, 108: 76­
 86.

Davila, Eduardo, and Anton Korinek. 2018. "Pecuniary Externali-
 ties in Economies with Financial Frictions." Review of Economic Studies,
 85(4): 352­395.

Davis, J. Scott, and Eric van Wincoop. 2017. "Globalization and the
 Increasing Correlation Between Capital Inflows and Outflows." National
 Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 23671.

Forbes, Kristin J, and Francis E Warnock. 2012. "Capital Flow Waves:
  Surges, Stops, Flight, and Retrenchment." Journal of International Eco-
  nomics, 88(2): 235­251.

Ghosh, Atish R., Jonathan D. Ostry, and Mahvash S. Qureshi. 2016.
 "When Do Capital Inflow Surges End in Tears?" The American Economic
 Review, 106(5): 581­585.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Helene Rey. 2007. "From world banker
 to world venture capitalist: US external adjustment and the exorbitant

                                   40
  privilege." In G7 current account imbalances: sustainability and adjust-
  ment. 11­66. University of Chicago Press.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, H´  el`
                                  ene Rey, and Nicolas Govillot. 2017.
 "Exorbitant Privilege and Exorbitant Duty." Manuscript, Department of
 Economics, University of California, Berkeley.

IMF.        2012.       "The       Liberalization      and        Manage-
  ment     of     Capital    Flows:         an    Institutional    View."
  http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2012/111412.pdf.

IMF. 2013. "The Yin and Yang of Capital Flow Management: Balancing
  Capital Inflows with Capital Outflows." World Economic Outlook (Chapter
  3, October).

Jeanne, Olivier, and Anton Korinek. 2010. "Excessive Volatility in Cap-
  ital Flows: A Pigouvian Taxation Approach." American Economic Review
  Papers and Proceedings, 100(2): 403­7.

Jeanne, Olivier, and Romain Ranci`     ere. 2011. "The Optimal Level of
  Reserves for Emerging Market Countries: Formulas and Applications."
  Economic Journal, 121(555): 905­930.

Jeanne, Olivier, Arvind Subramanian, and John Williamson. 2012.
  Who Needs to Open the Capital Account? Peterson Institute for Interna-
  tional Economics.

Korinek, Anton. 2011. "The New Economics of Prudential Capital Con-
 trols: A Research Agenda." IMF Economic Review, 59: 523­561.

Korinek, Anton. 2018. "Regulating Capital Flows to Emerging Markets:
 An Externality View." Journal of International Economics, 111: 61­80.

Lane, Philip R, and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. 2007. "A global per-
  spective on external positions." In G7 current account imbalances: sus-
  tainability and adjustment. 67­102. University of Chicago Press.

Miranda-Agrippino, Silvia, and H´    el`
                                       ene Rey. 2020. "US Monetary Pol-
 icy and the Global Financial Cycle." Review of Economic Studies.

                                   41
Ostry, Jonathan D, Atish R Ghosh, Marcos Chamon, and Mah-
 vash S Qureshi. 2011. "Capital Controls: When and Why?" IMF Eco-
 nomic Review, 59(3): 562­580.

Ostry, Jonathan D, Atish R Ghosh, Marcos Chamon, and Mah-
 vash S Qureshi. 2012. "Managing Capital Inflows: The Role of Capital
 Controls and Prudential Policies." Journal of International Economics,
 88: 407­421.

Rey, H´el`
         ene. 2015. "Dilemma Not Trilemma: the Global Financial Cycle
 and Monetary Policy Independence." National Bureau of Economic Re-
 search Working Paper 21162.

Rodrik, D. 2006. "The Social Cost of Foreign Exchange Reserves." Inter-
 national Economic Journal, 20(3): 253­266.

Schmitt-Groh´   e, Stephanie, and Mart´   in Uribe. 2017. "Is Optimal Cap-
  ital Control Policy Countercyclical in Open Economy Models with Collat-
  eral Constraints?" IMF Economic Review, 65(3): 498­527.




                                   42
