                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    PUBLIC POLICY AND PARTICIPATION IN POLITICAL INTEREST GROUPS:
AN ANALYSIS OF MINIMUM WAGES, LABOR UNIONS, AND EFFECTIVE ADVOCACY

                                       Jeffrey Clemens
                                       Michael R. Strain

                                      Working Paper 27902
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27902


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2020




We thank Jim Andreoni, Ryan Berg, Samuel Brazys, Eli Berman, Julie Cullen, Jesse Driscoll,
Seth Hill, Andrew Kelly, and Stan Veuger for comments, and Duncan Hobbs for outstanding
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Jeffrey Clemens and Michael R. Strain. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Public Policy and Participation in Political Interest Groups: An Analysis of Minimum Wages,
Labor Unions, and Effective Advocacy
Jeffrey Clemens and Michael R. Strain
NBER Working Paper No. 27902
October 2020
JEL No. D71,J08,J51

                                          ABSTRACT

Why do individuals join interest groups? Through what channels do interest groups and public
policy affect one another? We study these questions by analyzing the interplay among labor
unions, minimum wages, news coverage, and public opinion. Over the past decade, labor unions
have played a significant role in advocating for state and federal minimum wage increases. Over
this period, we find that each dollar in minimum wage increase predicts a 5 percent increase (0.3
pp) in the union membership rate among individuals age 16­40. We document four additional
facts that shed light on the mechanisms that may underlie this finding. First, while we find
increases overall in union membership, we find declines among the minimum wage's most direct
beneficiaries. This is consistent with a classic "free-riding" hypothesis. Second, we find increases
in union membership among much broader groups that are not directly affected by the minimum
wage. Third, we find that minimum wage increases predict increases in unions' favorability
ratings among the public. Fourth, we find that events in the legislative histories of minimum wage
increases predict increases in counts of newspaper articles that simultaneously discuss the
minimum wage and key players in the labor movement. Overall coverage of organized labor
shifts towards articles that discuss the minimum wage. These facts are consistent with models in
which a desire to affiliate with "effective advocacy" is an important driver of the decision to
participate in unions and other politically oriented groups.


Jeffrey Clemens
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive #0508
La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER
jeffclemens@ucsd.edu

Michael R. Strain
American Enterprise Institute
1789 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20036
and IZA
michael.strain@aei.org
Section I: Introduction
         Over the past decade, labor unions have emerged as advocates for historically high

minimum wages. Since its inception in 2012, the "Fight for $15" movement has received

substantial union support, ranging in intensity from simple expressions of solidarity to financial

and organizational aid.2 Over this same period, the public's view of labor unions has become

more favorable. Against this backdrop, we analyze the interplay among labor unions, minimum

wages, news coverage, and public opinion. We assess what factors might drive participation in

groups like labor unions, and how public policy and interest groups affect each other.

         We document that recent minimum wage increases have preceded increases in union

membership. Over the past decade, a one-dollar increase in a state's minimum wage predicts a 5

percent increase in union membership among those ages 16­40. As detailed below, we assess the

case for interpreting this link as causal and find that case to be relatively strong.

         Increases in minimum wages predict a greater likelihood of union membership among

groups of workers that do not benefit directly from minimum wage hikes. Why might this be?

We find that minimums wage increases lead to news coverage that links minimum wages to key

players in the labor movement. Higher minimum wages also predict higher public esteem for

unions. Union membership may thus rise in the wake of minimum wage hikes because

individuals value affiliating with groups that deliver "effective advocacy," even if they do not



2
  The AFL-CIO's website, for example, includes "restoring the minimum wage to a living wage" in its statement of
policy priorities for improving pay and benefits. (Accessed at the following link on May 5, 2020:
https://aflcio.org/issues/better-pay-and-benefits). The Service Employees International Union (SEIU) has been
relatively public regarding its operational and financial support for the Fight for $15. In a representative statement
linking the fortunes of unions and the Fight for $15, SEIU President Mary Kay Henry wrote in 2019, "This
movement will not stop until workers across the country win the $15 an hour and union rights they've demanded
since Day One." (Accessed at the following link on April 10, 2020: http://www.seiu.org/2019/01/seius-henry-fight-
for-15-and-a-union-is-winning-for-americas-working-people-changing-whats-possible.)
                                                           2
benefit personally from the outcome of that advocacy. We also find that minimum wage

increases reduce union membership among the workers who are most likely to benefit directly.

This finding is consistent with a classic free-riding hypothesis, since unions and the minimum

wage may be substitutable sources of bargaining power in the low-wage labor market.

       Our effort to isolate the causal effect of minimum wages on union membership faces

three standard but nontrivial challenges. First, it could be that union strength was already rising

in states that enacted minimum wage increases. That is, the correlation we observe may reflect

reverse causality. Second, the correlation could arise from factors, like strengthening labor

markets, that might simultaneously stimulate employment, union membership, and preferences

for raising minimum wages. Third, states that are favorably disposed toward high minimum

wages may, perhaps by chance or perhaps due to other policies, have been affected by other

factors that increased rates of union membership.

       We investigate the relevance of these threats to our estimation framework through a

standard set of best-practice robustness checks. To investigate the relevance of preexisting trends

in union membership, we use event-study estimators to check for such trends directly. We find

no evidence that trends in union membership had diverged before the enactment of minimum

wage increases. We also investigate whether we obtain similar results if we implement synthetic

control methods. These methods are designed to ensure that "treatment" and "control" states

followed similar trajectories before the implementation of minimum wage increases. We find

that synthetic control methods yield results similar to our more basic, baseline approach.

       We further investigate the relevance of economic shocks that might shape both union

membership trends and preferences over minimum wage increases. When we control for proxies

                                                  3
for macroeconomic conditions, we find that the relationship between minimum wages and union

membership rates strengthens. Further, we find that variation in minimum wages is uncorrelated

with changes in other labor market regulations. Our results are also robust to controlling for the

partisan composition of state governments. Finally, we implement a simple matching approach to

check for the relevance of differences in states' baseline union membership rates. Our findings

are robust to using these alternative methods.

       Taken together, our initial analysis finds robust evidence that recent minimum wage

increases have led to increases in union membership rates. We next take our analysis further in

an attempt to differentiate among alternative theories of the causes of union membership. To do

so, we begin by investigating which groups of workers become more likely to be members of

unions following minimum wage changes.

       To analyze the mechanisms through which minimum wage increases shape union

membership, we consider three distinct groups of workers. The first group consists of individuals

who are directly affected by minimum wage increases. The second group consists of individuals

who may be indirectly affected due to their employment as high-skilled workers in minimum-

wage-intensive industries. The third group consists of individuals in industries that are unlikely

to be affected by the minimum wage. Our proxies for these groups involve differences across

industries, between the public and private sector, and between high- and low-education workers.

As we show through analyses of wage data, high-education workers and public-sector workers

have wages that are not affected by the minimum wage. Wage data reveal that the minimum

wage's direct impacts are concentrated among young and low-education individuals in low-wage

food service and retail industries.


                                                 4
         Our analysis reveals that minimum wage increases affect union membership rates among

the groups we analyze in distinctive ways. First, we find strong evidence for gains in union

membership among workers with high levels of education, in particular when they are employed

in the public sector. Second, we find declines in union membership among low-skilled

individuals in low-wage industries.3 This second group contains the minimum wage's direct

beneficiaries. Importantly, this second group thus consists of workers for whom a minimum

wage increase may substitute for the bargaining power associated with union membership.

         Finally, we assess several mechanisms through which alternative theories of union

membership might work. First, we investigate whether minimum wage increases predict

increases in union wage premiums. We find that they do not. Second, we find that news coverage

tracks key moments in the legislative histories of minimum wage increases.4 Minimum wage

changes predict spikes in the number of articles that jointly discuss the benefits of minimum

wages and key players in the labor movement. Further, we show that events in the legislative

histories of minimum wage changes do not increase total coverage of organized labor, but shift

the character of that coverage towards articles about minimum wages. Finally, using polling data,

we find that minimum wage increases predict increases in the favorability of public perceptions

of labor unions.




3
  Notably, this is true of a sample of individuals who remain employed in those industries, implying that they
experienced direct positive effects of minimum wage changes. Indeed, we provide direct evidence that this group's
wages are quite strongly and positively impacted by the minimum wage changes we analyze.
4
  Using counts of local news articles assembled using LexisNexis, we find that minimum wage increases are
associated with increases in articles about the minimum wage, including those that quote labor advocates or
otherwise discuss key players in the labor movement. We also observe increases in counts of articles about the
minimum wage at crucial stages in the legislative process, including the months in which state legislators introduced
minimum wage legislation and the months in which such legislation was passed.
                                                          5
       Our findings relate to several literatures of potential interest. First, we add to a long

history of work on the determinants of union membership. A relevant slice of this literature

considers Right to Work laws. These laws enable workers to benefit from a union's presence

without paying dues, which raises free-rider considerations (Lumsden and Petersen, 1975;

Ellwood and Fine, 1987; Moore, 1998). Our emphasis on the role of unions as participants in

social or political movements connects to Freeman (1998), who analyzes the "spurt" of union

membership growth connected to society-wide economic change during the Great Depression. In

our analysis, we find evidence that union membership rates can be shaped by the enactment of

popular labor market policies with which unions have actively associated themselves. That said,

we also find that the free-rider considerations raised by studies of Right to Work laws are a

relevant concern, as the minimum wage's direct beneficiaries become less likely to join unions

following minimum wage increases.

       Second, we contribute to the literature on the question of what unions actually do. This

question is perhaps most famously associated with the aptly named "What Do Unions Do?" by

Freeman and Medoff (1984). Much of this literature focuses on estimating union wage premiums

(Freeman and Medoff, 1981; Hirsch and Schumacher, 2001) and assessing how changes in union

density affect wage inequality (Card, 1996; Card, Lemieux, and Riddell, 2004; Farber, Herbst,

Kuziemko, and Naidu, 2018). Some work in the economics literature has focused on the role of

unions as "a voice both at the work place and in the political arena" (Freeman and Medoff,

1979). Our analysis of news coverage provides evidence that the labor movement participates in

the political process, in part, by shaping news coverage of minimum wages. In this news

environment, minimum wage increases predict increases in union membership and improvement

in public sentiment toward unions.
                                                  6
         Third, we relate our evidence to potential channels through which an interest group might

accumulate members and influence. One channel, for example, is for a group to work towards

the material benefit of its members (Buchanan, 1965; Olsen, 1965). Interestingly, we find that

the minimum wage's most direct beneficiaries become less, rather than more, likely to join

unions. As noted above, this finding is consistent with models that emphasize a classic "free-

riding" concern. In addition, we find that increases in union membership are prevalent among

high education workers and public sector employees, neither of which benefit directly from the

minimum wage. This finding is consistent with models in which membership is responsive to an

interest group's reputation for effective, public-spirited advocacy (Clark and Wilson, 1961;

Wilson, 1973). Our analyses of news coverage and public opinion polls provide suggestive

evidence on the mechanisms through which these effects might operate.

         Finally, research in political science and political economy has long analyzed the

interplay between interest groups and policy. Within this broad area of inquiry, a relatively small

set of papers has focused on the impacts of policy on subsequent politics.5 Research in this vein

has focused primarily on cases in which policies created constituencies out of their direct

beneficiaries.6 Anzia and Moe (2016) analyze a case in which policy directly shaped the

potential influence of an already organized group -- namely, public-sector unions. They show



5
  Research on the activities of interest groups and other political factions has tended to focus on characterizing their
effects on the political process rather than on the drivers of their membership prospects. Relevant theoretical studies
in the political economy literature include work by Baron (1994), Grossman and Helpman (1996), Persson (1998),
Besley and Case (2003), and Dewan and Shepsle (2011). Empirical evidence consistent with important roles for
interest groups is somewhat sparse. Anzia (2019) argues that the literature's lack of evidence on the importance of
interest groups may reflect its lack of focus on subnational politics, which can yield more opportunities to execute
credible empirical strategies than can research focused exclusively on federal politics.
6
  Perhaps the most famous example involves the enduring constituency created by the Social Security system
(Campbell, 2003). Schattschneider (1935) similarly emphasizes the interest groups created by the Smoot-Hawley
Tariff of 1929. More recently, Clinton and Sances (2018) and Baicker and Finkelstein (2019) have analyzed the
effects of access to Medicaid on political participation. The latter analyses find nontrivial but transitory effects.
                                                           7
that changes in public-sector labor law nontrivially shaped future politics and that legislators'

votes on these laws suggest a sophisticated understanding of their long-run effects. In our

analysis, we find that minimum wage policy influences the subsequent fortunes of the labor

movement. We provide evidence that labor groups can attract members by contributing to policy

victories and shaping media narratives, which can elevate their status in public opinion. Our

analysis thus connects to a broad line of research on how the efforts of organized groups can

shape policy, public opinion, and their own future prospects.7

         Our paper proceeds as follows. Section II discusses theories that can help shed light on

individuals' decisions to participate in groups. Section III describes the data we use to study the

relationship between minimum wage changes and union membership rates. Section IV presents

our empirical methodology. Section V presents our initial analyses of the relationship between

minimum wage increases and union membership rates. Sections VI and VII present evidence on

the plausibility of key theories of interest group membership, as well as the mechanisms through

which they may work. Section VIII concludes.




Section II: What Factors Drive Participation in Interest Groups?

         How do interest groups accumulate members and influence? Many strategies exist, and

the effectiveness of these strategies will vary in nuanced ways across settings. Research in



7
  A long-running literature on the influence of organized groups is regularly associated with Schattschneider (1960),
including his early analysis of the interest groups created by the Smoot-Hawley Tariff of 1929 (Schattschneider,
1935). As recently described by Hacker and Pierson (2014), this line of research emphasizes the centrality of
organized groups that seek to advance policy agendas, frame debates, and shape public opinion. Recent proponents
of this tradition highlight its usefulness for making sense of the rise in polarization, as documented by Poole and
Rosenthal (1984, 2000, 2011); Gentzkow, Shapiro, and Taddy (2019); and others.
                                                          8
economics and political science has developed a number of insights into these issues. We do not

attempt to summarize those literatures exhaustively. Instead, we offer some lines of intuition that

guide our thinking and can help to interpret our empirical analysis.

       One approach for interest groups to accumulate influence and membership is to improve

their members' material well-being. This will typically come through the services the group

provides to its members (Buchanan, 1965; Olsen, 1965; Berman, 2000). In the case of unions,

these tend to include higher wages, better benefits, and greater voice in the workplace (Freeman

and Medoff, 1984). A recent paper by Murphy (Forthcoming) highlights the impact of unions on

well-being through the provision of legal insurance against allegations of misconduct.

       In our setting, a key question is whether a minimum wage increase raises the return to

workers from becoming union members. This channel of direct improvement in material well-

being may apply, for example, if minimum wages shift compensation structures for both

minimum wage workers and higher skilled workers. The potential relevance of this channel can

be investigated, in part, by asking whether minimum wage changes alter union wage premiums.

       Because minimum wage increases apply to both union and non-union workers, it is quite

possible for minimum wage increases to reduce union wage premiums. This raises a question of

free riding; a non-union worker need not pay dues to benefit from a minimum wage increase for

which the union advocated. The minimum wage's direct beneficiaries may thus become less,

rather than more, likely to join unions. Minimum wage increases may substitute for the wage

gain such workers might previously have obtained by joining the union. Membership rates

among the minimum wage's direct beneficiaries provide an opportunity to explore the relevance

of free riding linked to the direct material benefits of union membership.

                                                 9
       Why might unions advocate for minimum wage increases despite risks of free riding? A

variety of non-monetary motivations may be at work. Frymer and Grumbach (Forthcoming), for

example, discuss how both the actions of unions and the views of their members can be shaped

by broader, coalitional demands of the political process. As Sobel (2005) effectively illustrates,

alternative sets of non-monetary motivations may not readily be distinguished from one another

through evidence on people's decisions alone (e.g., the decision to join a union). Nonetheless,

evidence on supplemental features of the environment may shed some light on which

mechanisms are at work.

       One possibility is that improvements in the well-being of potential members may spark

loyalty and reciprocity (Falk 2007; Falk and Fischbacher, 2006). Reciprocity would tend to apply

to workers who benefit the most, directly or indirectly, from an increase in the minimum wage.

       An additional channel through which interest groups might accumulate influence is by

enhancing their public image as advocates. Through advocacy, for example, an interest group

might enhance its reputation for effectiveness and public spiritedness among its potential

members (Clark and Wilson, 1961; Wilson, 1973). We shed light on the potential relevance of

this channel through several pieces of analysis.

       We first assess the plausibility of the "public image" channel by analyzing the minimum

wage's effects on union membership among relatively high-wage groups of workers. That is, we

investigate union membership among workers who are not plausibly affected, either directly or

indirectly, by the minimum wage itself. This includes highly educated workers and individuals

who are employed in the public sector. We confirm in wage data that the wages of individuals in

these groups are unaffected by minimum wage increases.

                                                   10
       We further pursue the public image channel through analyses of news coverage and

public opinion. Our analysis of newspaper articles focuses on linkages between events in the

legislative histories of minimum wage increases, news coverage of the minimum wage, and news

coverage of organized labor. For the public image channel to be relevant, it is necessary that

unions' advocacy for minimum wages receive some form of public attention. Our analysis of

news coverage speaks to this question. Finally, we analyze the relationship between minimum

wage changes and public approval of organized labor, as expressed in public opinion polls.




Section III: Data

       In this section we discuss the data sources used in our analysis. The policy variation of

interest involves minimum wage changes. The primary outcome of interest is union membership.

Control variables in our analysis include demographic characteristics, proxies for variations in

macroeconomic conditions, and variables related to states' political landscapes and other labor

market policies. We also analyze data on public perceptions of unions and novel data on news

coverage of key events in the political and legislative histories of minimum wage increases.




Union Membership Rates

       The primary dependent variable in our analysis is an indicator for an individual's union

membership status. Union membership has long been tracked by the Current Population Survey

(CPS) conducted by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). Specifically, individuals are asked

about their union membership as part of the expanded battery of questions known as the

                                                11
Earnings Survey. These questions are asked of individuals during the fourth and eighth months

of their participation, which occur 12 months apart from one another. These interviews are

known collectively as the Outgoing Rotation Group (ORG) interviews of the CPS. To the best of

our knowledge, these are the largest, continually running, nationally representative surveys in

which individuals are asked about their membership in labor unions.




Additional Data from the CPS ORG Files

        Our analysis uses several additional pieces of information from the ORG samples of the

CPS. First, in many of our specifications we control for demographic characteristics including

age and education, which are correlated with individuals' skills as well as with their likelihood of

being a member of a union. These controls are of relevance to our analysis in large part because

our analysis samples, while meant to be nationally representative, may exhibit nontrivial

sampling variations given that we analyze variations across states and over time among

population subgroups.

        Second, we conduct several analyses of samples or dependent variables that are defined

based on an individual's industry, occupation, or sector. The CPS collects information on

"worker class," which refers broadly to the distinction between the public and private sectors.

This division of workers is of interest to our analysis of union membership because private-

sector union membership has exhibited a substantial long-run decline while public-sector

unionization has remained robust.8 We also utilize information on workers' industries and


8
  According to the BLS (2015, 2019), the share of private-sector workers who are union members has fallen from
around 17 percent in 1983 to 6.2 percent in 2019. The corresponding share of public-sector workers has remained
steady at roughly one-third during this period.
                                                       12
occupations so that we can focus a subset of our analyses on individuals in minimum-wage-

intensive segments of the labor market. Finally, we use CPS variables that contain information

about individuals' wage rates, including whether a respondent is paid by the hour and whether

their earnings or hourly wage rate is imputed by BLS (Clemens and Strain, 2019).




Effective Minimum Wage Rates and Legislative Events

       Our data on states' effective minimum wage rates and on key dates in the legislative

process draw on many sources. Our primary source for key dates in the legislative process is the

National Conference on State Legislatures. These dates have been cross-checked against myriad

news articles, reports from state labor departments, and legislative texts. For state-by-month

minimum wage rates, we use data compiled by Clemens, Hobbs, and Strain (2018). These

minimum wage rates have been checked against the complementary database of Vaghul and

Zipperer (2019). The map in Figure 1 illustrates which states enacted minimum wage increases

during our sample period, while Table 1 presents information on implementation dates.




Additional Control Variables

       Our analysis incorporates data on macroeconomic covariates that may be relevant as

control variables. As in our past work (Clemens and Strain 2018a, 2018b, 2019), we proxy for

variations in housing markets using a statewide median house price index from the Federal

Housing Finance Agency (FHFA). We proxy for aggregate economic performance using data on

state income per capita from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). We also analyze data on

                                                13
states' political landscapes, which are taken from NCSL (2020), and data on assorted state labor

market policies, which are updated and maintained by Sorens, Muedini, and Ruger (2008).




LexisNexis Data on Newspaper Mentions of Minimum Wages and the Labor Movement

       We also examine the impact of minimum wage increases and new minimum wage

legislation on newspaper coverage. Using LexisNexis, we construct a dataset measuring

mentions of "minimum wage" and labor advocacy organizations, including the Economic Policy

Institute (EPI), National Employment Law Project (NELP), and the Service Employees

International Union (SEIU), in state newspapers.

       For all queries, we restrict our searches to English language newspaper articles from the

50 US states and Washington, DC, published between January 1, 2010, and December 31, 2019.

We exclude articles LexisNexis flags as "highly similar" (same publication name, location, and

date; same author; and very similar content) to avoid counting duplicate copies. From each

article in a given query, we extract the publication name, date, and state from the article

metadata. We process the LexisNexis data to construct counts at the state-by-month-by-year

level. More details on the LexisNexis data are available in Appendix A.




Pew Survey Data on Public Perceptions of Labor Unions

       We use survey data collected by the Pew Research Center to examine broad trends in

recent sentiment toward labor unions. The Pew surveys we analyze were conducted in February

and August 2011; June 2013; January, February, and March 2014; March 2015; and April 2018.

                                                 14
We use responses to the question: "Is your overall opinion of labor unions very favorable, mostly

favorable, mostly unfavorable or very unfavorable?" We also include information on a

respondent's age, education level, and family income as controls for our analyses.9




Summary Statistics

        Table 2 presents summary statistics on our primary analysis samples. Among individuals

age 16­40, we observe that the share of individuals reporting union membership increased from

an average of 6.5 percent from 2011­14 to 6.9 percent from 2015­19 in states that increased

their minimum wages. In states that did not increase their minimum wages, the fraction

unionized decreased slightly, from an average of about 3.9 percent to 3.7 percent. Employment,

house prices, and income per capita all rose over this period. These variables increased more in

states that had minimum wage changes than in those that did not.




Section IV: Estimation Frameworks

        This section describes our empirical strategy for estimating the effect of minimum wage

increases on union membership rates. For our primary analyses, we estimate two closely related

specifications with moderately different strengths and weaknesses for the task at hand. The first




9
 The surveys contain a total of 10,746 respondents from all 50 states plus Washington, DC. After dropping
observations in which age, education, and income are missing, we have 9,474 respondents. Of these respondents,
901 selected "never heard of" or "can't choose" or refused to respond to the question, leaving 8,573 respondents.
We use all individuals age 18­64 as our main sample, containing 6,421 respondents.
                                                         15
regression we estimate is equation (1) below, in which we correlate union membership rates with

continuous panel variation in states' effective minimum wage rates:

             ,, = 1 , + 1  + 2  + ,,  + ,, .                                        (1)


All estimates of equation (1) include state and time fixed effects, so that 1 can be interpreted as

a difference-in-differences-style estimate of the relationship between changes in minimum wage

rates and changes in the likelihood that an individual is a union member. The vector X contains

sets of control variables that vary across the specifications we estimate. ,, is an indicator for

whether individual i residing in state s in time period t reports being a union member.

       The goal of our empirical analysis is to provide causal evidence on whether there is an

effect of minimum wage increases on union membership rates. Causal estimation of this effect

faces nontrivial challenges. Overall economic activity, for example, may be correlated with a

state's tendency to raise the minimum wage as well as with both the overall number of jobs and

perhaps with the fraction of jobs that are likely to be union jobs. Our analysis also faces a threat

of reverse causality. That is, a union movement that is growing in strength may be a movement

that is simultaneously gaining new members and succeeding in its advocacy for minimum wage

increases.

       Although it is impossible to rule out all possible threats to causal identification, we can

provide evidence on the relevance of threats that take several forms. First, within the framework

of equation (1) we explore the robustness of our estimates to controlling for proxies for broader

macroeconomic conditions that could influence union membership. We do so by controlling for

quarterly state income per capita and a quarterly index of quality-adjusted house prices. We

similarly control for changes in states' political landscapes.
                                                 16
       Second, we check for evidence on whether union membership rates began rising prior to

the enactment of minimum wage increases. We do this by estimating the event study

specification below:


 ,, =       (,)  ×  (,) + 1  + 2  + ,,  + ,, . (2)
         (,)0



Equation (2) differs from equation (1) with respect to the manner in which policy variation in

states' minimum wage regimes is included in the specification. In equation (2), we interact a set

of "event time" dummy variables with an indicator for whether a state implemented a minimum

wage increase during our sample period. The event time dummy variables are coded to

correspond with specific numbers of years relative to the enactment of a state's first minimum

wage increase during the sample. We omit the interaction for the time period describing the year

immediately prior to the first minimum wage in increase, which we define as year (, ) = 0.

The coefficients of interest can thus be interpreted as differential changes in union membership

rates from the year prior to the first minimum wage increase to the reference year. For reference

years less than 0, the point estimates thus provide evidence on whether divergent trends in union

membership had occurred prior to the minimum wage increase's enactment. This provides

evidence on the potential relevance of concerns related to endogenous policy. Estimates for years

following the minimum wage increase track the dynamics with which union membership rates

subsequently evolved.

       A final dimension of robustness on which we can provide evidence relates to a general

difference between states that have implemented minimum wage increases and those that have

not. States that have implemented minimum wage increases have disproportionately been states

with high baseline union membership rates. We thus implement both equation (1) and equation
                                                17
(2) on subsamples that remove states with unusually high or low baseline union membership

rates from the sample. Estimates on this sample involve states with similar baseline patterns of

unionization, and thus provide evidence on the potential relevance of this final source of concern.

       Further, we construct estimates using synthetic control methods. To do so, we construct

separate synthetic control groups to match the baseline level and trajectory of the union

membership rate for each of the states that enacted a minimum wage increase during our sample.

In all cases, we construct the synthetic control groups from the sample of states that enacted no

minimum wage increases. To probe the robustness of our synthetic control estimates and

mitigate concerns about "cherry picking" (Ferman, Pinto, and Possebom, 2020), we implement

two approaches to constructing synthetic controls. In the first, we construct synthetic control

groups using all values of the dependent variable (the union membership rate) for all time

periods up to the period during which a state's first minimum wage increase was implemented.

In the second, we exclude the union membership rate from the year preceding the minimum

wage increase and include our macroeconomic covariates as predictors instead.




Estimating the Relationship Between Minimum Wage Increases on the Union Wage Differential

       In addition to examining the effects of minimum wage changes on union membership

rates, we also explore the relationship between minimum wage increases and differentials

between union and nonunion wages. For this analysis, we estimate the following specification:

                    ,, = 1 , + 2 ,, + 3 , ×  + 1 


                              + 2  + ,,  + ,, .                  (3)


                                                18
Similar to equation (1), equation (3) uses continuous variation in state minimum wages and

includes state and time fixed effects. ,, is the hourly wage rate of employed individual i in

state s in time period t. ,, is an indicator for whether the individual is a union member. The

coefficient of interest, 3 , estimates the relationship between minimum wage increases and the

wage differential for union relative to nonunion workers. Similar to our previous analyses, we

include age and education controls as well as controls for state house prices and state income per

capita. Since differences in wages vary greatly by industry and occupation, we also include

industry and occupation fixed effects for all three-digit census occupation and industry codes. As

discussed when we present estimates of equation (3), properly interpreting 3 is difficult because,

as shown through our estimates of equation (1), minimum wage increases predict changes in

which workers belong to unions.




Analysis of Newspaper Coverage

       To investigate the relationship between minimum wage legislation and news coverage,

we estimate variants of the following specification using a Poisson regression model:

    E(, |, ) = exp (1 , + 2 , + 3 , + 3 ,

                   + 4 , + 1  + 2  + , ).                                            (4)


Here, , is a count of articles from newspapers in state s published in month t. The

outcomes we analyze include counts of articles that reference the minimum wage and counts of

articles that reference both the minimum wage and a key player from the labor movement. The

vector , includes the full set of covariates on the right-hand side of the expression.


                                                19
       The primary covariates of interest involve key dates associated with minimum wage

legislation. , is an indicator for whether a state changed its minimum wage between

month t and the previous month. , is an indicator for whether a state is scheduled to

change its minimum wage between month  and month,  + 1. The variable ,

is an indicator for the month in which a state's legislature first introduced an ultimately

successful bill to increase minimum wage. The variable , is an indicator for the

month a legislature passed a minimum wage increase.

       The vector , includes two sets of additional covariates. First, it includes time and place

varying indicators for worker strikes related to the Fight for $15 movement, the tenure of Ed

Murray as Mayor of Seattle, and the Occupy Wall Street protests. These events are associated

with increased news coverage of minimum wages, but they do not directly involve changes in

minimum wages due to new legislation. Second, we include the same macroeconomic covariates

as in earlier models. Like earlier models, equation (4) includes state and time fixed effects.




Estimating the Effect of Minimum Wage Increased on Public Perceptions of Labor Unions

       Finally, we examine how minimum wage increases shape public opinion toward labor

unions. To do so, we estimate the following specification using continuous variation in state

minimum wage rates:

             ,, = 1 , + 1  + 2  + ,,  + ,, .                                        (5)


Here, ,, is a measure of opinion toward labor unions for respondent i from state s in year t.

We code the dependent variable equal to 1 if an individual responded "very favorable," 0.75 if

                                                 20
"favorable," 0.25 if "unfavorable," and 0 if "very unfavorable," to the question: "What is your

overall opinion of labor unions?" We code the responses "Don't know," "Can't choose," and

"Refused" as missing. All specifications include state and time fixed effects. Some specifications

control for age, education level, recorded income bracket, and other assorted demographic

characteristics.




Section V: Estimates of the Relationship Between Minimum Wages and Union

Membership

        This section presents our analysis of the relationship between minimum wage changes

and unionization rates. We begin with presentations of unadjusted data on the evolution of union

membership rates and their correlation with changes in states' minimum wage rates. We then

present our baseline regression analysis and robustness checks.




Initial Evidence on the Evolution of Union Membership Rates

        Figures 2 and 3 provide a descriptive look at the evolution of union membership rates

from 2011 through 2019. The scatterplot in Figure 2 presents state-level changes in minimum

wages and union membership rates from the first years of our analysis sample (2011­14) to the

later years of our analysis sample (2016 through the end of 2019). The relationship is

distinctively upward sloping, revealing that minimum wage increases were positively correlated

with changes in union membership rates.



                                                21
       The four panels of Figure 3 present time series on union membership rates. The figure

reports separate time series for states that enacted minimum wage increases and those that did

not. The panels differ with respect to the samples of states. Panel A reports time series that

average across all states. From 2011 through 2019, the data reveal that union membership rates

increased by roughly 0.4 percentage point (roughly 6 percent on a baseline mean of just over 6.5

percentage points) in states that enacted minimum wage increases. In states that did not enact

minimum wage increases, union membership rates declined by roughly 0.3 percentage point (or

roughly 9 percent on a baseline mean of 3.3 percentage points).

       The sample used to construct Panel B is constrained to include states with baseline (i.e.,

2011-2014) union membership rates between 2.5 percent and 7.5 percent. We analyze this

second sample because states that enacted minimum wage increases were disproportionately

likely to be states with high rates of union membership at baseline. Panel B reveals that we find

trends similar to those observed in Panel A when we focus on states with more closely matched

union membership rates in our baseline period. The divergence is, if anything, more striking.

Membership rates rise by roughly 0.7 percentage points in states that enacted minimum wage

increases while declining marginally in those that did not. In subsequent analysis we more

formally match states that enacted minimum wage increases with other states using synthetic

control methods.

       In Panels C and D, we further explore the robustness of the relationship between

minimum wages and unionization rates using synthetic control analysis. This analysis provides a

further check for the potential relevance of differences in the baseline levels and trajectories of

unionization rates in states that increased minimum wages relative to those that did not. As


                                                 22
described in Section IV, we use two approaches to construct synthetic control groups in order to

guard against "cherry picking" concerns. In Panels C and D, which present averages across the

"treatment" and "synthetic control" groups using our two methods, we center all series on the

year during which a given "treatment" state's minimum wage first increased.

       Comparing our treatment and synthetic control groups, the differential movements in

union membership rates are quite similar to those observed in Panels A and B. The series move

in parallel from three years prior to each treatment state's first minimum wage increase through

the year of the minimum wage increase itself. The series subsequently diverge. By the fourth

year following the initial minimum wage increase, a differential of just over 1 percentage point

has emerged in Panel C, and of 0.8 percentage point in Panel D. The 0.8 percentage point

differential is roughly 16 percent relative to the baseline mean of 5 percentage points.




Regression Estimates of the Relationship Between Minimum Wages and Union Membership

       This section presents estimates of equations (1) and (2). The estimates serve two

purposes. First, they quantify and put error bounds around the magnitude of the relationships

presented in Figures 2 and 3. Second, they provide frameworks within which we can probe the

case for interpreting associations between minimum wages and union membership rates as a

causal impact of minimum wage increases.

       Table 3 presents estimates of equation (1), which analyzes the relationship between union

membership rates and continuous variation in the minimum wage. The estimate in column 1

reveals that, over our analysis sample, a one-dollar increase in a state's minimum wage predicts a

0.24 percentage point (roughly 5 percent relative to the mean across all states) increase in union
                                                23
membership rates among individuals age 16­40. The p-value on the test for whether this estimate

is statistically distinguishable from 0 is less than 0.01. Column 2 shows that the magnitude of the

relationship between union membership and a one-dollar minimum wage increase declines

modestly if we include exhaustive sets of age and education indicator variables as controls.

Column 3 shows that the magnitude rises if we control for two proxies for the overall

performance of states' economies--namely, the log of aggregate state income per capita and an

index of median house prices. Finally, Column 4 shows that controlling for both the proxies for

macroeconomic conditions and the demographic covariates yields a coefficient of 0.29

percentage points. This final specification, which is our baseline specification of equation (1),

implies that each dollar of minimum wage increase generated an increase in union membership

rates of roughly 6 percent. The results in Table 4 show that our point estimates are modestly

reduced when we restrict the sample to states that had baseline unionization rates greater than

0.025 and less than 0.075.

       In the regressions presented thus far, our analysis samples have consisted of individuals

age 16­40. Table 5 presents evidence on why. Specifically, it presents estimates from the most-

controlled specification in Table 3 (namely, the specification that includes our macroeconomic

covariates as well as our age and demographic covariates) on subsamples that partition the

population age 16­60 based on age. Each column presents estimates for a five-year age band.

Estimates are regularly positive and strongly distinguishable from 0 for individuals age 16­40;

they are economically small and indistinguishable from 0 for individuals age 41­60. The absence

of changes in union membership among individuals age 41­60 is unsurprising, as the likelihood

of transitioning into union membership status declines dramatically as individuals age out of


                                                 24
their 20s and 30s (Budd, 2010). We thus focus our analysis on individuals in the first half of their

careers.

        In Figure 4, we plot the coefficients and standard errors from our baseline event study

specification, described by equation (2). We observe two key facts. First, the coefficients in the

pre-increase periods ("­4 or less" through "0") are all statistically indistinguishable from zero.

We thus see no evidence of divergence in the trends experienced by our treatment and control

groups prior to the implementation of a state's first minimum wage change. This finding

supports a causal interpretation of our estimates. Second, following the implementation of

minimum wage increases, we observe a distinctive upward trajectory in union membership rates.

Within three years of a state's first minimum wage increase, union membership rates have risen

by 0.4 percentage points relative to states that enacted no increases during our sample period.

Within four years, the differential increase is 0.5 percentage points. Both the three-year and four-

year increases are statistically distinguishable from 0 at the 0.01 level.

        The panels of Figure 5 present evidence on the robustness of the baseline event-study

estimates presented in Figure 4. The robustness analysis explores the relevance of three

dimensions of our specifications. The first is whether they include macroeconomic covariates as

control variables. The second is whether the definition of minimum wage increases excludes

increases enacted due to long-standing inflation indexation previsions.10 The third is whether the

dependent variable is restricted to union membership or includes individuals who report that they

are covered by union contracts despite not reporting that they are members. The panels of Figure

5 reveal that our key findings are largely robust to the choices we make along all three of these


10
  Brummund and Strain (2020) find that employment responds differently to inflation-indexed minimum wage
increases relative to traditional, nominal minimum wage increases.
                                                     25
dimensions of our event-study estimator. The estimates for years "t = 1" through "t = 3" are

almost uniformly the same across panels. The estimate for year "t = 4 or more" changes to a

visually, though not statistically, detectable degree when we define minimum wage changes to

exclude inflation-indexed changes. This may be driven by composition because states with

inflation indexing rules enacted their first minimum wage increases quite early in the sample,

and thus contributed multiple years of observations to the time period defined as "t = 4 or more."

       Two points are of interest regarding the magnitudes of the point estimates we observe in

the panels of Figure 5. First, the "medium run" estimate we observe in years "3" and "4 or more"

are in line with what one would expect to find based on the estimates in Table 3. Among states

that enacted minimum wage increases over this period, the average increase enacted as of 2019

was on the order of $2. Our baseline estimate of equation (2), which appears in column 4 of

Table 3, implies that a $2 minimum wage increase predicts a 0.58 percentage point increase in

union membership. This is almost exactly in line with the medium-run effect we observe in

several panels in Figure 5.

       It is also of interest to consider the evolution of point estimates from years "1" and "2" to

years "3" and "4 or more." The estimates suggest a gradually unfolding increase in the

relationship between minimum wage increases and union membership. This is consistent with

standard "stock" and "flow" dynamics emphasized in prior research on the determinants of union

membership rates. The key point is that the overall union membership we observe in any given

cross-section of CPS data is a stock. As has been observed in analyses of the relationship

between union membership and Right to Work laws, the stock of union membership will tend to

respond gradually through a policy change's effects on membership flows (Ellwood and Fine,


                                                26
1987; Moore, 1998). This is consistent with what we observe. These dynamics also relate to why

we observe impacts of minimum wage changes on union membership among individuals in the

first half of their career, but not among those in the second half of their careers.

        Finally, Appendix Tables C1, C2, and C3 provide evidence that the relationship between

minimum wages and union membership rates is not driven by omitted factors related to the

political ideology of the party in power. First, Table C1 shows that our results are robust to

adding control variables for the party in control of state legislatures, of the governor's mansion,

and for cases in which either Democrats or Republicans have unified control of state

government.11 While the partisan control of state government has a strong cross-sectional

correlation with minimum wage policy, as shown in Table C2, we show in Table C1 that changes

in partisan control are not contaminating our estimates. Second, we show in Table C3 that our

identifying variation in minimum wages in largely uncorrelated with changes in other labor

market regulations enacted by states. Our measures of these regulations come from updated

databases maintained by Sorens, Muedini, and Ruger (2008). They span issues including Right to

Work laws, workers' compensation, paid leave, and the legality of noncompete agreements.




Section VI: Investigating Theories of Interest-Group Membership

        In this section, we present evidence that speaks to the plausibility of alternative theories

of interest-group membership. We do this by presenting analyses that divide the population into

subsamples that (1) are directly affected by the minimum wage, (2) may be indirectly affected by


11
 These variables come from the State and Legislative Partisan Composition Database from the National
Conference of State Legislatures (NCSL, 2020).
                                                      27
the minimum wage, or (3) are not plausibly affected by the minimum wage. We also present

evidence on the relationship between minimum wage increases and union wage differentials.




Analyses of Subgroups of Workers

       In this section, we provide evidence on which types of workers and demographic groups

are more likely to become members of unions in the wake of minimum wage increases. The

subgroups we analyze differentiate between individuals who might be directly impacted by the

minimum wage, who might benefit indirectly from the minimum wage, and whose employment

and wages have no plausible connection to the minimum wage. To be more specific, we

distinguish between public- and private-sector workers, between high- and low-education

workers, and between workers employed in high- and low-wage industries.

       We first explore the relationship between minimum wage increases and public- versus

private-sector union membership. This distinction is relevant for two reasons. First, public- and

private-sector unions have been on different paths for decades; private-sector unions have

declined, while public-sector unions have retained their strength. Second, minimum wage

increases tend to affect neither the wages nor the employment of public-sector workers.

       We estimate our full sample regression using dependent variables that differentiate

between public- and private-sector union membership. These specifications are designed so that

our overall estimate can be readily decomposed into public and private components. The

estimates, which appear in Table 6, imply that public-sector union membership accounts for

roughly half the overall increase we observe. For further context, note that public-sector union

membership accounts for roughly half of all union membership among individuals age 16­40 at
                                                28
baseline, but less than 15 percent of this group's employment. On average across these broad

groups of workers, the minimum wage has a weak correlation with wages (Panel B).

       We next add an education dimension to our analysis of both public- and private-sector

union membership. Specifically, we analyze the relationship between minimum wage increases

and public- versus private-sector union membership among individuals with at least some

college education. We analyze this sample to further probe the evidence that minimum wage

increases cause increases in union membership among groups that are not directly affected by the

minimum wage. The estimates in Panel B of Table 7 reveal, as should be expected, that

minimum wage increases have no impact on these groups' wage rates. The estimates in Panel A

reveal that minimum wage increases quite strongly predict increases in these groups' rates of

union membership. Together, these results provide evidence that a comprehensive theory of

union membership will need to include nonmaterial factors.

       Our next piece of analysis focuses on individuals employed in minimum-wage-intensive

industries. Specifically, we focus on the food-service and retail industries. We present this

analysis in Table 8. Panel A presents estimates of the impact of minimum wage increases on

these individuals' union membership rates, while Panel B presents estimates of impacts on

wages. Each column presents an analysis of a different subsample, with individuals differentiated

based on age and education.

       The estimates in columns 1 and 2 focus on individuals who are employed in food-service

and retail industries and who are between ages 16 and 21. The estimates in columns 1 and 2 of

Panel B reveal that these individuals' wages are quite strongly impacted. On average, a $1

increase in the minimum wage predicts a wage increase of around 32 cents for these individuals.

                                                 29
The estimate is modestly larger in column 1, where we do not include controls for

macroeconomic covariates, relative to column 2.

       The estimates in columns 1 and 2 of Panel A reveal that young individuals in low-wage

occupations are less likely to belong to unions following minimum wage increases. Note that this

sample consists of individuals who are employed and who experienced wage gains due to

minimum wage increases. The sample thus contains the minimum wage's direct beneficiaries.

The decline in this group's union membership thus appears inconsistent with theories that view

membership and payment of dues as a form of reciprocity.

       While the evidence in columns 1 and 2 is inconsistent with a reciprocity-oriented theory

of union membership, it is consistent with "free riding." The free-rider problem has received

attention in research on the effects of Right to Work laws on union membership. Right to Work

laws tend to reduce union membership because they enable workers to benefit from union-

negotiated wages without paying dues (Baird, 1998). More generally, these laws allow workers

to sidestep union restrictions on who can work. For young retail and food-service workers, a

minimum wage increase and union membership can be viewed as substitutable sources of

bargaining leverage. Consequently, the minimum wage increase reduces the direct material

benefit these individuals might obtain from joining a union.

       Among moderately skilled individuals in minimum-wage-intensive industries, we find no

evidence of changes in union membership. Interestingly, while the estimates lack statistical

significance, we tend to find a positive relationship between minimum wages and union

membership for older workers in these industries. This is of interest because these individuals

may benefit indirectly if minimum wage increases result in increases in employers' skill

                                                30
requirements (Clemens, Kahn, and Meer, 2020). Because the estimates are imprecise, however,

the evidence is less strong than the evidence we see elsewhere.




Estimates of the Relationship Between Minimum Wage Increases and Union Wage Differentials

       In this section, we present estimates of the relationship between minimum wage increases

and union wage differentials. Effects of minimum wage increases on union wage differentials

may shed light on the relevance of direct material interests for individuals' decisions to join

unions. That said, our estimates must be interpreted with caution due to concerns linked to

selection. That is, we have shown that minimum wage increases predict increases in union

membership rates. Observed changes in union wage differentials may thus be driven by changes

in the composition of which workers are in unions.

       Our estimates of the relationship between minimum wages and union wage differentials

are in Table 9. In column 1, we estimate that the relationship between minimum wages and the

union wage differential is negative across all employed workers. In columns 2 and 3, we estimate

the relationship separately for private- and public-sector workers. Columns 4 and 5 focus on

workers in low-wage industries. Finally, in columns 6, 7, and 8 we analyze sub-samples that are

differentiated by educational attainment. The relationship between minimum wage increases and

the union wage differential is positive for workers in the food-service and retail industries, but

negative in all other groupings we consider.

       In most specifications, we observe a negative relationship between minimum wages and

union wage differentials. This provides additional evidence that a narrow notion of material

interest is unlikely to be the primary driver of changes in union membership. A key caveat to this
                                                 31
interpretation is that union wage premiums may shift due to changes in the composition of union

workers. This may explain the positive relationship we observe in column 4 of Table 9, for

example, since the analysis in Table 8 revealed that young workers in the food-service and retail

industries become less likely to be members of unions following minimum wage increases. That

said, our evidence on union wage premiums has implications that are consistent with our earlier

subsample analyses. That is, we see no evidence to suggest that increases in union membership

among high-education individuals are driven by material benefit in the form of higher wage.




Section VII: Investigating Mechanisms Underlying the "Effective Advocacy"

Model of Interest-Group Membership

       In this section, we consider mechanisms through which the "effective advocacy" model

of interest-group membership might operate. We first analyze patterns of news coverage of

minimum wage legislation and the labor movement. We then present evidence on the

relationship between minimum wage increases and public sentiment toward unions.




Newspaper Mentions of Key Moments in the Fight for $15 Movement

       Figure 6 provides a descriptive look at our time series for counts of newspaper articles

that reference the minimum wage. Panels A, B, and C present time series for New York,

California, and Washington, while Panel D presents a time series for all states that enacted no

minimum wage increases during our analysis period. For ease of visual comparison, we

normalize by the population associated with the states in question.

                                                32
       The series in Figure 6 track important events in states' minimum wage histories. The

series for New York (Panel A) exhibits a substantial increase from January through April 2016.

This period corresponds with coverage of the introduction and passage of New York's legislation

to increase the minimum wage to $15. There is also a sustained elevation in New York's

coverage of the minimum wage beginning early in 2012, which follows the disbandment of the

Occupy Wall Street encampment. Turning to California (Panel B), the most dramatic spike in

coverage corresponds with the signing of SB 3, which is California's legislation for raising the

minimum wage to $15. In Washington, coverage of the minimum wage escalated substantially

with the election of Seattle mayor Ed Murray, who made the $15 minimum wage one of his

signature issues. Washington's most noticeable spike in coverage corresponds with the months

surrounding the November 2016 passage of Ballot Initiative 1433, which called for the statewide

minimum wage to rise to $13.50 in 2020. Elsewhere in the country, the largest coverage spikes

occurred around the months of national strikes by food-service workers.

       We draw three conclusions from our inspection of data on news coverage of the

minimum wage. First, we are reassured by the fact that the series exhibits spikes at key moments

in the legislative and political histories of states' minimum wages. Second, the figures provide

evidence on the appropriate functional form for tracking the relationship between news coverage

and various events. While most key events generate short-lived spikes in news coverage, some

generate sustained increases in coverage. Third, the figures provide evidence that news coverage

tracks a diverse set of events, including moments in legislative histories, moments in protest

movements, and electoral moments like the victory of Seattle mayor Ed Murray. These facts

guide the empirical specification we use to track the relationship between minimum wage

coverage and key legislative and political events.
                                                33
        Table 10 presents our analysis of the relationship between newspaper coverage and key

legislative and political events. That is, the table presents estimates of equation (4). The

dependent variable is the count of newspaper articles at the state-by-month level. The entries in

the table are exponential transformations of the coefficients estimated from equation (4). The

table entries can thus be interpreted as changes in the relative frequency of news articles. An

estimate of 1.2, for example, implies that newspapers published 1.2 times more minimum wage

articles in months associated with a particular class of events relative to other months.

         The estimates are consistent with the descriptive anecdotes from Figure 6. We find that

there are substantial increases in news coverage of the minimum wage following both the

passage and implementation of minimum wage increases.12 Further, we find that New York

City's Occupy Wall Street protests and the election of Seattle mayor Ed Murray predict sustained

increases in the intensity of minimum wage coverage. These estimates reveal that key moments

in the Fight for $15's history predict appreciable increases in news coverage of minimum wages.




Analysis of Newspaper Mentions of Minimum Wages and the Labor Movement

        Tables 11 through 15 present our analysis of the relationship between legislative events

and newspaper articles about the minimum wage and the labor movement. As in Table 10, the

presented estimates associated are exponential transformations of key coefficients from equation

(4). In this analysis, our paper joins past work like that by Schmidt (1993) and Panagopoulos and



12
  The point estimate of 1.17 from Column 6 implies that newspapers publish roughly 1.17 times more articles on
the minimum wage in months with a minimum wage increase. Coverage also increases in months when state or local
minimum wage legislation is passed, with about 2.5 times more articles published in months when new statewide
legislation is passed and about 1.3 times more articles written in months when new local legislation is passed.
                                                      34
Francia (2009) in using "content analysis" of the news to study unions.13 We find that the

passage and implementation of minimum wage changes predicts increases in news articles that

simultaneously reference minimum wages and key players in the labor movement.

        In Table 11, the dependent variable we analyze captures counts of newspaper articles that

discuss the minimum wage and make broad references to labor unions, organized labor, or the

labor movement. We observe strong increases in the number of articles connecting the minimum

wage and the labor movement when states pass new minimum wage legislation. We do not see

increases, however, when municipalities pass minimum wage legislation. Organized labor was

also quite strongly linked to minimum wages in news coverage in the wake of the Occupy Wall

Street movement and the election of Ed Murray. For minimum wage articles that make general

references to organized labor, we do not detect significant movement in the months surrounding

the implementation of minimum wage changes.

        Table 12 provides a more tangible connection between the labor movement and news

articles about the minimum wage. For Table 12, the dependent variable captures counts of

articles that jointly reference the minimum wage and either the Economic Policy Institute (EPI)

or the National Employment Law Project (NELP). Both of these organizations have close

connections to the labor movement and advocate regularly for progressive policies. The




13
   Schmidt (1993) examines media coverage and public perceptions of unions during the 1980s and finds that
coverage centered on strikes negatively affects perceptions of unions, particularly among people who have no group
attachment to unions. Analyzing Gallup and ANES survey data, Panagopoulos and Francia (2009) find that union
approval was high from the 1940s to 1970s, decreased during the 1970s and 1980s, and has risen since then, even as
union membership has simultaneously declined.
                                                        35
governing boards of both organizations, for example, include officers of key groups in the labor

movement.14

         For Table 13, the dependent variable captures counts of articles that jointly reference the

minimum wage and the Service Employees International Union (SEIU). SEIU was an early

supporter of the Fight for $15 movement and efforts to unionize low-wage workers in the food-

service and retail industries. SEIU is also the second-largest union in the United States, with

nearly two million members as of 2020.

         In the months surrounding the enactment of minimum wage increases, we observe

increases in the prevalence of news articles that link minimum wages and key players in the

labor movement. Our estimates of these increases in news coverage are statistically strongest in

the month when a new state minimum wage increase goes into effect, as well as the month just

before it goes into effect. These articles sometimes include announcements that an upcoming

minimum wage increase will raise wages for some precisely specified number of workers. There

is also evidence, though estimated less precisely, of substantial increases in coverage during the

months in which state bills mandating new minimum wage increases are passed. Our reading of a

sample of the underlying article suggests that journalists may solicit quotes from labor policy

advocates as they write articles about impending or recently enacted minimum wage increases.




14
  As of September 2020, for example, NELP's governing board included the director of policy and legislation for
the SEIU chapter 32BJ, which has 145,000 members, and the secretary-treasurer of the American Federation of
State, County, and Municipal Employees (AFSCME): https://www.nelp.org/about-us/board-of-directors/. EPI has a
more direct link to organized labor, as the organization was funded by a set of labor unions at its inception. As of
March 2020, EPI's board of directors was chaired by the chairman of the AFL-CIO, with other board members
having leadership roles in AFSCME, the Communication Workers of America, and the International Association of
Machinists and Aerospace Workers: https://www.epi.org/about/board/.
                                                         36
Conversely, policy advocates may approach journalists with analyses and commentary to support

their journalistic writing.

        While minimum wage increases predict substantial increases in articles that connect the

minimum wage with NELP and EPI, we find much smaller effects for the SEIU. The absence of

increases in news coverage of the SEIU at the time of minimum wage increases is quite

interesting. SEIU appears to have made relatively modest progress in its effort to organize food-

service workers. This is reflected in SEIU's aggregate membership figures, as well as in our

earlier finding that minimum wage increases have had no detectable effect on unionization

among food-service and retail workers. As emphasized above, this may reflect the fact that the

minimum wage is a substitute for a union's bargaining clout among the very low-wage workers

SEIU is attempting to organize.

        Other results of interest involve select events in the history of the Fight for $15

movement. The tenure of Seattle mayor Ed Murray, for example, predicts sustained increases in

news coverage that connects the minimum wage and the labor movement. The same is also true

over an extended period following the Occupy Wall Street protests in New York. Unlike the

other events we study, news coverage following Occupy Wall Street is far more likely to connect

the minimum wage to the SEIU.

        In Table 14, we turn to overall coverage of the labor movement. The dependent variable

analyzed in Table 14 captures counts of articles that reference the labor movement whether they

reference the minimum wage or not. Interestingly, we find essentially no evidence that events in

the history of minimum wage increases predict increases in the overall flows of articles about

organized labor. The sole exception involves a rise in newspaper articles that reference organized

                                                  37
labor in the wake of New York's Occupy Wall Street movement. Most coefficients are

statistically indistinguishable from null effects. The months in which a piece of minimum wage

legislation is introduced appear, if anything, to be associated with a reduction in the flow of

articles that reference organized labor.

       Table 15 ties our analysis of news coverage together by analyzing the minimum wage's

prevalence in articles that reference organized labor. That is, the estimates describe the

relationship between events in the history of minimum wage legislation and the fraction of

articles about organized labor that also make reference to the minimum wage. The results

presented in Tables 11 and 14 suggest that this relationship will tend to be positive, and indeed it

is. That is, in Table 14 we found that minimum wage events predict no change in the prevalence

of articles about organized labor, while in Table 11 we found that the passage of minimum wage

increases (and other events to varying extents) predict strong increases in counts of articles that

reference both organized labor and the minimum wage. Note that for Table 15 we estimate the

ordinary least squares counterpart of equation (4). Since the dependent variable is a share, it does

not exhibit the skewness that led us to estimate Poisson models for our analyses of article counts.

       The results in Table 15 reveal that a diverse set of events in the minimum wage's history

predict increases in the tendency for news coverage of organized labor to reference the minimum

wage. As in Table 11, the economically largest coefficients are associated with the month in

which minimum wage legislation was passed. The point estimates imply that in the month

minimum wage legislation is passed, articles that reference organized labor became, on average,

11 percentage points more likely to be articles that reference the minimum wage. The months in

which minimum wage increases are implemented, as well as the month prior to implementation,


                                                 38
are associated with more modest increases in the tendency for articles about organized labor to

reference the minimum wage. The same is true of key political events in the minimum wage's

recent history. Over the last decade, the forward movement of minimum wage legislation has

thus had tangible impacts on how organized labor is discussed by newspapers.

       Figure 7 shows that the relationship between state minimum wage legislation and news

coverage of organized labor can be seen in national trends. Panel A of Figure 7 displays several

facts involving yearly, national counts of news articles. First, it shows that the total number of

articles in our data set that mention the labor movement was quite stable from 2010 to 2019.

Second, it shows that the number of articles that mention either the minimum wage or both the

minimum wage and organized labor rose substantially between 2012 and 2014. These counts

then plateaued and declined moderately after 2016. Panel B shows that the share of articles about

organized labor that also mention the minimum wage follows a similar trend. That is, between

2012 and 2014, the composition of news articles about organized labor exhibit a sustained shift

towards articles that also discuss the minimum wage. This change in the composition of

coverage of organized labor coincides with the first wave of minimum wage legislation to be

introduced and subsequently passed between 2011 and 2019.




Regression Estimates of Minimum Wage Changes and Public Perceptions of Labor Unions

       Shifts in news coverage may influence how the public views labor unions. We turn to the

public's attitude toward labor unions in our final piece of analysis. Table 16 presents our analysis

of the relationship between minimum wage increases and unions' favorability ratings in public

opinion surveys. We find that increases in minimum wages predict modest increases in the
                                                 39
prevalence of favorable views of unions. Appendix B presents additional results on the

robustness of this finding.

       How might these results relate to our earlier findings? Earlier, we found that newspapers

change their coverage of unions when states legislate and enact minimum wage increases.

Specifically, news coverage of organized labor becomes more likely to reference the minimum

wage. Given the minimum wage's popularity, it is intuitive that news coverage of this sort may

lead the public to have more favorable views of unions. The public's views of unions may also

improve in states that enact minimum wage increases because their unions are establishing

themselves as effective policy advocates.




Section VI: Discussion and Conclusion

       Our analysis has investigated the interplay among labor unions, minimum wages, news

coverage, and public opinion. Unions have advocated extensively for recent minimum wage

increases. In the wake of recent minimum wage legislation, we find that union membership has

tended to rise among individuals in the first half of their careers.

       We use this setting to differentiate among several models of membership in unions or

other interest groups. We find support for the idea that minimum wage increases benefit unions

by improving their public image as effective advocates. Following minimum wage increases, we

find that workers whose wages are not affected become more likely to both join a labor union

and to have favorable views of labor unions. By contrast, the direct beneficiaries of minimum




                                                  40
wage increases become less likely to join. The latter finding points to the relevance of free-riding

concerns that have been emphasized in past research on the effects of Right to Work legislation.

       Finally, we analyze news coverage of political and legislative moments in the minimum

wage movement's recent history. This analysis provides evidence on a potential mechanism

behind the minimum wage's effects on union membership. We find that the passage and

enactment of minimum wage increases predict increases in newspaper coverage that discusses

both the minimum wage and key players in the labor movement. Inspection of the underlying

articles provides suggestive evidence of a successful public relations strategy. That is, analysts in

the labor movement help shape news coverage by disseminating analyses as journalists write

stories about the enactment of minimum wage increases. Improved access to analyses may, in

turn, shape the favorability of news coverage. At a minimum, by making their analyses

accessible, advocates can increase the likelihood that news coverage conveys their point of view.

       An understanding of the relationships among interest groups, news coverage, public

opinion, and public policy is important for understanding the democratic process. Our analysis

illustrates how groups can gain influence by developing reputations for being effective, public-

spirited advocates. Groups' competition for voters' loyalties may thus occur, at least in part,

through media strategies and demonstrations of effective advocacy. More research is needed,

however, to understand the mechanisms through which such strategies might work and to

explore their generality.




                                                 41
References
Akerlof, George A. 1982. "Labor Contracts as Partial Gift Exchange." Quarterly Journal of
       Economics 97, no. 4: 543­69.
Anzia, Sarah F. 2019. "Looking for Influence in All the Wrong Places: How Studying
       Subnational Policy Can Revive Research on Interest Groups." Journal of Politics 81, no.
       1: 343­51.
Anzia, Sarah F., and Terry M. Moe. 2016. "Do Politicians Use Policy to Make Politics? The
       Case of Public-Sector Labor Laws." American Political Science Review 110, no. 4: 763­
       77.
Baicker, Katherine, and Amy Finkelstein. 2019. "The Impact of Medicaid Expansion on Voter
       Participation: Evidence from the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment." Quarterly
       Journal of Political Science 14, no. 4: 383­400.
Baird, Charles W. 1998. "Right to Work Before and After 14 (b)." Journal of Labor Research
       19, no. 3: 471.
Berge, Travis J., and Òscar Jordà. 2011. "Evaluating the Classification of Economic Activity into
       Recessions and Expansions." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 3, no. 2:
       246­77.
Berman, Eli. 2000. "Sect, Subsidy, and Sacrifice: An Economist's View of Ultra-Orthodox
      Jews." Quarterly Journal of Economics 115, no. 3: 905­53.
Besley, Timothy, and Anne Case. 2003. "Political Institutions and Policy Choices: Evidence
       from the United States." Journal of Economic Literature 41, no. 1: 7­73.
Birz, Gene, and John R. Lott Jr. 2011. "The Effect of Macroeconomic News on Stock Returns:
       New Evidence from Newspaper Coverage." Journal of Banking & Finance 35, no. 11:
       2791­800.
Blanchflower, David G., and Alex Bryson. 2004. "What Effect Do Unions Have on Wages Now
       and Would Freeman and Medoff Be Surprised?" Journal of Labor Research 25, no. 3:
       383.
Blanchflower, David G., and Alex Bryson. 2010. "The Wage Impact of Trade Unions in the UK
       Public and Private Sectors." Economica 77, no. 305: 92­109.
Brummund, Peter, and Michael R. Strain. 2020. "Does Employment Respond Differently to
     Minimum Wage Increases in the Presence of Inflation Indexing?" Journal of Human
     Resources 55, no. 3: 999-1024.
Buchanan, James M. 1965. "An Economic Theory of Clubs." Economica 32, no 125: 1­14.



                                               42
Budd, John W. 2010. "When Do US Workers First Experience Unionization? Implications for
       Revitalizing the Labor Movement." Industrial Relations: A Journal of Economy and
       Society 49, no. 2: 209­25.
Campbell, Andrea Louise. 2003. How Policies Make Citizens: Senior Political Activism and the
     American Welfare State. Princeton University Press.
Card, David. 1996. "The Effect of Unions on the Structure of Wages: A Longitudinal Analysis."
       Econometrica (July): 957­79.
Card, David, Thomas Lemieux, and W. Craig Riddell. 2004. "Unions and Wage Inequality."
       Journal of Labor Research 25, no. 4: 519­59.
Clark, Peter B., and James Q. Wilson. 1961. "Incentive Systems: A Theory of Organizations."
        Administrative Science Quarterly 6(2):129-166.
Clemens, Jeffrey, Duncan Hobbs, and Michael R. Strain. 2018. "A Database on the Passage and
      Enactment of Recent State Minimum Wage Increases." IZA Discussion Paper, No.
      11748.
Clemens, Jeffrey, Lisa Khan, and Jonathan Meer. 2018. "Dropouts Need Not Apply: The
      Minimum Wage and Skill Upgrading." National Bureau of Economic Research, Working
      Paper 24635.
Clemens, Jeffrey, and Michael R. Strain. 2017. "Estimating the Employment Effects of Recent
      Minimum Wage Changes: Early Evidence, an Interpretative Framework, and a Pre-
      Commitment to Future Analysis." National Bureau of Economic Research, Working
      Paper 23084.
Clemens, Jeffrey, and Michael R. Strain. 2018a. "Minimum Wage Analysis Using a Pre-
      Committed Research Design: Evidence Through 2016." IZA Discussion Paper, No.
      11427.
Clemens, Jeffrey, and Michael R. Strain. 2018b. "The Short-Run Employment Effects of Recent
      Minimum Wage Changes: Evidence from the American Community Survey."
      Contemporary Economic Policy 36, no. 4: 711­22.
Clemens, Jeffrey, and Michael R. Strain. 2019. "Understanding Wage Theft: Evasion and
      Avoidance Responses to Minimum Wage Increases." IZA Discussion Papers, No. 12167.
Clinton, Joshua D., and Michael W. Sances. 2018. "The Politics of Policy: The Initial Mass
       Political Effects of Medicaid Expansion in the States." American Political Science
       Review 112, no. 1: 167­85.
Cornes, Richard, and Todd Sandler. 1996. The Theory of Externalities, Public Goods, and Club
       Goods. Cambridge University Press.


                                              43
Dewan, Torun, and Kenneth A. Shepsle. 2011. "Political Economy Models of Elections." Annual
      Review of Political Science 14: 311­30.
Ellwood, David T., and Glenn Fine. 1987. "The Impact of Right-to-Work Laws on Union
      Organizing." Journal of Political Economy 95, no. 2: 250­73.
Falk, Armin. 2007. "Gift Exchange in the Field." Econometrica 75, no. 5: 1501­11.
Falk, Armin, and Urs Fischbacher. 2006. "A Theory of Reciprocity." Games and Economic
       Behavior 54, no. 2: 293­315.
Farber, Henry S., Daniel Herbst, Ilyana Kuziemko, and Suresh Naidu. 2018. "Unions and
        Inequality Over the Twentieth Century: New Evidence from Survey Data." National
        Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 24587.
Federal Housing Finance Agency. 2020. "Quarterly All-Transactions State House Price Index."
       February 28. https://www.fhfa.gov/DataTools/Downloads/Pages/House-Price-Index-
       Datasets.aspx#qat.
Ferman, Bruno, Cristine Pinto, and Vitor Possebom. 2020. "Cherry Picking with Synthetic
      Controls." Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 39, no. 2: 510-532.
Sarah Flood, Miriam King, Renae Rodgers, Steven Ruggles and J. Robert Warren. Integrated
       Public Use Microdata Series, Current Population Survey: Version 7.0 [dataset].
       Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2020. https://doi.org/10.18128/D030.V7.0
Freeman, Richard B., and James L. Medoff. 1979. "The Two Faces of Unionism." Public
      Interest 57: 69­93.
Freeman, Richard B., and James L. Medoff. 1981. "The Impact of the Percentage Organized on
      Union and Nonunion Wages." Review of Economics and Statistics 63, no. 4: 561­72.
Freeman, Richard B., and James L. Medoff. 1984. What Do Unions Do? New York: Basic
      Books.
Freeman, Richard B. 1998. "Spurts in Union Growth: Defining Moments and Social Processes."
      In The Defining Moment: The Great Depression and the American Economy in the
      Twentieth Century. University of Chicago Press. 265­96.
Frymer, Paul, and Jacob M. Grumbach. Forthcoming. "Labor unions and white racial politics."
      American Journal of Political Science.
Gentzkow, Matthew, and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2010. "What Drives Media Slant? Evidence from US
      Daily Newspapers." Econometrica 78, no. 1: 35­71.
Gentzkow, Matthew, Jesse M. Shapiro, and Matthew Taddy. 2019. "Measuring Group
      Differences in HighDimensional Choices: Method and Application to Congressional
      Speech." Econometrica 87, no. 4: 1307­40.

                                              44
Groseclose, Tim, and Jeffrey Milyo. 2005. "A Measure of Media Bias." Quarterly Journal of
       Economics 120, no. 4: 1191­237.
Grossman, Gene M., and Elhanan Helpman. 1996. "Electoral Competition and Special Interest
      Politics." Review of Economic Studies 63, no. 2: 265­86.
Hacker, Jacob S., and Paul Pierson. 2014. "After the `Master Theory': Downs, Schattschneider,
      and the Rebirth of Policy-Focused Analysis." Perspectives on Politics 12, no. 3: 643­62.
Henry, Mary Kay. 2019. "SEIU's Henry: Fight for $15 and a Union Is Winning for America's
       Working People, Changing What's Possible." Press release. January 16.
       http://www.seiu.org/2019/01/seius-henry-fight-for-15-and-a-union-is-winning-for-
       americas-working-people-changing-whats-possible.
Hirsch, Barry T., and Edward J. Schumacher. 2001. "Private Sector Union Density and the Wage
       Premium: Past, Present, and Future." Journal of Labor Research 22, no. 3: 487­518.
Ho, Daniel E., and Kevin M. Quinn. 2008. "Measuring Explicit Political Positions of Media."
      Quarterly Journal of Political Science 3, no. 4: 353­77.
Lamla, Michael J., and Sarah M. Lein. 2014. "The Role of Media for Consumers' Inflation
       Expectation Formation." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 106: 62­77.
Lott, John R., and Kevin A. Hassett. "Is Newspaper Coverage of Economic Events Politically
        Biased?" Public Choice 160, no. 1­2 (2014): 65­108.
Lumsden, Keith, and Craig Petersen. 1975. "The Effect of Right-to-Work Laws on Unionization
     in the United States." Journal of Political Economy 83, no. 6: 1237­48.
Madestam, Andreas, Daniel Shoag, Stan Veuger, and David Yanagizawa-Drott. 2013. "Do
      Political Protests Matter? Evidence from the Tea Party Movement." Quarterly Journal of
      Economics 128, no. 4: 1633­85.
Moore, William J. 1998. "The Determinants and Effects of Right-to-Work Laws: A Review of
      the Recent Literature." Journal of Labor Research 19, no. 3: 445­69.
Murphy, Richard. Forthcoming. "Why Unions Survive: Understanding How Unions Overcome
      the Free-Rider Problem." Journal of Labor Economics.
National Conference of State Legislatures (NCSL). 2020. "State Partisan Composition
       Database." March 31, 2020. https://www.ncsl.org/research/about-state-
       legislatures/partisan-composition.aspx.
Olson, Mancur. 1965. Logic of Collective Action; Public Goods and the Theory of Groups.
       Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Panagopoulos, Costas, and Peter L. Francia. 2008. "The Polls--Trends: Labor Unions in the
      United States." Public Opinion Quarterly 72, no. 1: 134­59.

                                              45
Persson, Torsten. 1998. "Economic Policy and Special Interest Politics." Economic Journal 108,
       no. 447: 310­27.
Poole, Keith T., and Howard Rosenthal. 1984. "The Polarization of American Politics." Journal
       of Politics 46, no. 4: 1061­79.
Poole, Keith T., and Howard Rosenthal. 2000. Congress: A Political-Economic History of Roll
       Call Voting. Oxford University Press.
Poole, Keith T., and Howard L. Rosenthal. 2001. Ideology and Congress. Vol. 1. Transaction
       Publishers.
Schmidt, Diane E. 1993. "Public Opinion and Media Coverage of Labor Unions." Journal of
      Labor Research 14, no. 2: 151­64.
Schattschneider, Elmer Eric. 1935. Politics, Pressure, and the Tariff. New York: Prentice-Hall.
Schattschneider, Elmer Eric. 1960. The Semi-Sovereign People. New York: Holt, Reinhart and
       Winston.
Sobel, Joel. 2005. "Interdependent Preferences and Reciprocity." Journal of Economic Literature
        43, no. 2: 392-436.
Sorens, Jason, Fait Muedini, and William P. Ruger. 2008. "State and Local Public Policies in
       2006: A New Database." State Politics and Policy Quarterly 8, no. 3: 309­26.
US Bureau of Economic Analysis. 2020. "Quarterly State Personal Income: Personal Income,
      Population, and Per Capita Personal Income (SQINC1)."
      https://apps.bea.gov/iTable/iTable.cfm.
Vaghul, Kavya and Ben Zipperer. 2019. "Historical State and Sub-state Minimum Wages."
      Version 1.2.0, https://github.com/benzipperer/historicalminwage/releases/tag/v1.2.0.
Wilson, James Q. 1973. Political Organizations. New York: Basic Books.




                                               46
                                         Tables and Figures



Table 1. List of States with Minimum Wage Changes from 2011 to 2019, Year of First
Statutory Increase and Year of First Indexed Increase
                                               Year of First Statutory           Year of First Indexed
State
                                                     Increase                          Increase
Alaska                                                 2016
Arizona                                                2017                                  2012
Arkansas                                               2015
California                                             2014
Colorado                                               2017                                  2012
Connecticut                                            2014
Delaware                                               2014
District of Columbia                                   2014
Florida                                                                                      2011
Hawaii                                                     2015
Maine                                                      2017
Maryland                                                   2015
Massachusetts                                              2015
Michigan                                                   2014
Minnesota                                                  2014
Missouri                                                   2019                              2013
Montana                                                                                      2012
Nebraska                                                   2015
New Jersey                                                 2014
New York                                                   2013
Ohio                                                                                         2012
Oregon                                                     2016                              2012
Rhode Island                                               2013
South Dakota                                               2015
Vermont                                                    2015                              2012
Washington                                                 2017                              2012
West Virginia                                              2015
Note: Data on minimum wage changes come from Clemens, Hobbs, and Strain (2018), Vaghul and Zipperer
(2019), and a number of complementary sources. The table lists states that enacted minimum wage changes
over the course of our primary analysis sample. Unlisted states are those for which the minimum wage did
not change between January 1, 2011, and December 31, 2019. Note that this excludes New Mexico, Nevada,
and Illinois, which passed minimum wage legislation in 2019, but which did not enact a minimum wage
increase until 2020, which is outside of our analysis sample.




                                                   47
Table 2: Sample Summary Statistics: CPS MORG and Supplemental Data
for 2011-2014 and 2015-2019
                                                     (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)
Years                                           2011-2014 2015-2019              2011-2014       2015-2019
                                                  Never Increased Min
Sample                                                   Wage                      Increased Min Wage
Employed                                           0.654           0.687            0.642           0.683
                                                  (0.476)         (0.464)          (0.479)         (0.465)


Unionized                                         0.0389           0.0369          0.0646           0.0688
                                                  (0.193)         (0.189)          (0.246)         (0.253)


Hourly Wage ($)                                    14.14           16.32            15.04           17.74
                                                  (20.81)         (21.81)          (21.81)         (23.02)


Hours Worked per Week                              23.88           25.30            23.03           24.79
                                                  (20.84)         (20.64)          (20.50)         (20.34)


Age (years)                                        27.75           27.87            27.73           27.98
                                                  (7.165)         (7.158)          (7.163)         (7.106)


House Price Index                                  281.2           339.2            386.1           496.7
                                                  (51.43)         (57.83)          (114.3)         (144.3)


Income Per Capita ($1000s)                         41.97           48.00            47.37           56.38
                                                  (4.625)         (5.433)          (6.995)         (9.119)


Effective Minimum Wage ($)                         7.366           7.362            7.791           9.472
                                                  (0.317)         (0.311)          (0.516)         (1.230)
Observations                                      213,860         272,827         287,141          320,523
Notes: This table reports summary statistics for two sample groups. Columns 1 and 2 report averages and
standard deviations (in parentheses) for employed individuals, ages 16-40, living in states that had no
minimum wage increases. Columns 3 and 4 report averages and standard deviations (in parenthesis) for
employed individuals, ages 16-40, living in states which had at least 1 minimum wage change between
2011 and 2019. Entries for unionized, hourly wages, hours worked, and age summarize data from the
Current Population Survey Outgoing Rotation Groups (CPS ORG). There are 8,120 observations with
missing hourly wages. These observations are associated with individuals who are not paid hourly and did
not report their usual hours worked. The house price index is the quarterly all-transactions state-level index
published by the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA). Income per capita is average state-level
personal income per capita from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). The effective minimum wage
variable is the maximum of the state and federal minimum wage for large employers, as assembled
independently by Clemens, Hobbs, and Strain (2018) and Vaghul and Zipperer (2019) using a number of
sources.




                                                      48
Table 3. Relationship Between Minimum Wage Increases and Union
Membership Rates Among Individuals Ages 16-40, 2011-2019
                                                  (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)

Dependent Variable                                      Individual is a Union Member



Effective Minimum Wage                        0.0024***     0.0019**     0.0031***     0.0029***
                                               (0.0008)     (0.0009)      (0.0006)      (0.0006)
House Price Index Divided by 1,000                                        -0.0384*      -0.0410*
                                                                          (0.0208)      (0.0229)
Ln(Income per Capita)                                                      0.0223        0.0148
                                                                          (0.0188)      (0.0206)

Age and education controls                        No           Yes           No           Yes

Adjusted R-squared                                0.0144       0.0379        0.0144        0.038
Observations                                     1,094,351 1,094,351 1,094,351           1,094,351
Notes: This table reports regression results examining the effect of minimum wage increases on
the probability of union membership. The coefficients are from estimates of equation (1), which
is described in the main text. The sample is from the CPS ORG and consists of all individuals
ages 16 to 40. Columns 1 and 2 report the effect of minimum wage changes on the probability of
union membership, and columns 3 and 4 report the effect of minimum wage changes on the
probability of union membership controlling for quarterly state-level house prices and income
per capita. Variable definitions and sources are discussed in the note to Table 2 (and in the main
text of the paper). All specifications include month-year and state fixed effects. Age and
education controls consist of a dummy variable for each education group and age. Standard
errors are clustered at the state level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                49
Table 4: Relationship Between Minimum Wage Increases and Union
Membership Rates Matching on Membership Rates from 2011-2014 Among
Individuals Ages 16-40, 2011-2019
                                                     (1)         (2)         (3)           (4)

Dependent Variable                                         Individual is a Union Member



Effective Minimum Wage                           0.0019**      0.0015    0.0029***     0.0028***
                                                 (0.0009)     (0.0010)    (0.0006)      (0.0010)
House Price Index Divided by 1,000                                        -0.0410*     -0.0565**
                                                                          (0.0229)      (0.0274)
Ln(Income per Capita)                                                      0.0148        0.0309
                                                                          (0.0206)      (0.0257)

Matched on baseline membership rates                 No         Yes          No           Yes

Adjusted R-squared                                  0.0379       0.0306       0.0380        0.0306
Observations                                      1,094,351 732,098 1,094,351              732,098
Notes: This table reports regression results examining the effect of minimum wage increases on
the probability of union membership. The coefficients are from estimates of equation (1), which
is described in the main text. The sample is from the CPS ORG and consists of all individuals
ages 16 to 40. Columns 1 and 2 report the effect of minimum wage changes on the probability of
union membership, and columns 3 and 4 report the effect of minimum wage changes on the
probability of union membership controlling for quarterly state-level house prices and income
per capita. In columns 2 and 4, the sample is restricted to states with baseline union membership
rates between 2.5 and 7.5 percent, which roughly covers the range of common support for states
that did versus did not enact minimum wage increases. Variable definitions and sources are
discussed in the note to Table 2 (and in the main text of the paper). All specifications include
month-year, state, age, and education fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the state
level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                50
Table 5. Examining Heterogeneity in the Effect of the Minimum Wage on Union Membership and Hourly Earnings by
Worker Age, 2011-2019
                                    (1)            (2)              (3)             (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)           (8)          (9)
Panel A                                                               Dependent Variable: Individual is a Union Member
Effective Minimum Wage            -0.0005      0.0045***         0.0024*          0.0017       0.0043***       -0.0026         0.0007        -0.0004      -0.0010
                                 (0.0005)       (0.0012)        (0.0014)        (0.0018)        (0.0015)      (0.0017)        (0.0014)      (0.0016)     (0.0013)
House Price Index/1,000          0.0248*         -0.0597       -0.0932***         0.0004         -0.0431        0.0511         -0.0492        0.0643      0.0414
                                 (0.0136)       (0.0430)        (0.0241)        (0.0400)        (0.0404)      (0.0422)        (0.0309)      (0.0405)     (0.0462)
Ln(Income per Capita)              0.0220         0.0433          0.0473         -0.0633         -0.0159        0.0490         0.0216        -0.0700      -0.0549
                                 (0.0156)       (0.0387)        (0.0294)        (0.0541)        (0.0403)      (0.0522)        (0.0512)      (0.0555)     (0.0416)

Age range                         16-20           21-25           26-30            31-35           36-40         41-45         46-50         51-55        56-60
Adjusted R-squared                0.0090          0.0143          0.0249           0.0335          0.0357        0.0377        0.0359        0.0348       0.0310
Observations                     218,543         208,437         221,318          226,362         219,691       222,103       235,101       248,878      244,212
                                    (1)            (2)              (3)             (4)            (5)         (6)               (7)           (8)          (9)
Panel B                                                                   Dependent Variable: Hourly Wages Earned
Effective Minimum Wage          0.2837***      0.1703***          -0.0544      -0.0987***      -0.1029**    -0.0750          -0.1061**       -0.0702      -0.0210
                                 (0.0550)       (0.0495)         (0.0453)       (0.0359)        (0.0448)   (0.0464)           (0.0438)      (0.0438)     (0.0388)
House Price Index/1,000           1.3813         -1.3223          -0.0567         0.7689        2.1139**     1.6907          1.7809**        -0.5619      0.4296
                                 (1.1953)       (1.2867)         (1.1399)       (0.9777)        (0.9592)   (1.2678)           (0.8783)      (0.9841)     (1.1268)
                                  1.1663        2.6387**         2.4945*         -0.3446         -1.4774    -1.2546            -0.2816       -0.5703      -1.5049
Ln(Income per Capita)
                                 (1.1417)       (1.2905)         (1.3590)       (1.5616)        (1.1180)   (1.6476)           (1.1697)      (1.1003)     (1.1521)

Age range                            16-20          21-25           26-30            31-35           36-40        41-45          46-50        51-55         56-60
Adjusted R-squared                  0.1122         0.2137           0.2043          0.2145          0.2013        0.1842        0.1721        0.1557        0.1400
Observations                        74,795        142,489          168,984         174,522         171,303       173,772       181,498       184,085       163,733
Notes: This table reports regression results examining the effect of minimum wage increases on the probability of union membership (Panel A) and hourly
wages earned (Panel B). The coefficients are from estimates of equation (1), which is described in the main text. The sample is from the CPS ORG. Each
column reports estimates of the effect of minimum wage increases on union membership among workers within a 5-year age range. Panel A includes all
respondents in the indicated age range, and panel B includes all respondents in the indicated age range who are employed. Variable definitions and sources
are discussed in the note to Table 2 (and in the main text of the paper). All specifications include month-year, state, age, and education fixed effects. Standard
errors are clustered at the state level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


                                                                                51
Table 6. Relationship Between Minimum Wage Increases and Union Membership, and Hourly
Wages Earned Among Individuals Ages 16-40 Working in the Public or Private Sector, 2011-
2019
                                            (1)               (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)            (6)

Panel A DV: Worker is a Union
                                                  Any Union                   Public Union               Private Union
Member


Effective Minimum Wage                  0.0019**        0.0029***        0.0009*      0.0016***     0.0011**      0.0013***
                                        (0.0009)         (0.0006)        (0.0006)      (0.0005)     (0.0004)       (0.0003)
House Price Index/1,000                                  -0.0410*                       -0.0218                     -0.0204
                                                         (0.0229)                      (0.0141)                    (0.0134)
Ln(Income per Capita)                                     0.0148                        -0.0014                    0.0183*
                                                         (0.0206)                      (0.0160)                    (0.0096)

Adjusted R-squared                       0.0379          0.0380           0.0383       0.0383       0.0154         0.0154
Observations                            1,094,351       1,094,351        1,094,351    1,094,351    1,094,351      1,094,351
Panel B DV: Hourly Wages Earned             (1)               (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)            (6)

Sample                                        All Workers                     Public Sector              Private Sector



Effective Minimum Wage                    0.0301          0.0052          -0.0536       -0.0599      0.0425         0.0161
                                         (0.0280)        (0.0339)        (0.0396)      (0.0567)     (0.0274)       (0.0326)
House Price Index/1,000                                   0.2475                        -0.5742                     0.3611
                                                         (0.8313)                      (1.4072)                    (0.7885)
Ln(Income per Capita)                                     0.9124                         1.2149                     0.8201
                                                         (0.9120)                      (1.6080)                    (0.8585)

Adjusted R-squared                         0.3581          0.3581          0.3425       0.3425         0.3548          0.3548
Observations                              732,093         732,093          87,971       87,971        644,988         644,988
Notes: This table reports regression results examining the effect of minimum wage increases on the probability of union
membership (Panel A) and hourly wages earned (Panel B). The coefficients are from estimates of equation (1), which is
described in the main text. The sample is from the CPS ORG and consists of individuals ages 16 to 40. Columns 1 and 2
report the estimated effect of minimum wage changes on union membership among all workers, columns 3 and 4 report the
estimated effect of minimum wage changes on public-sector union membership, and columns 5 and 6 report the effect of
minimum wage changes on private-sector union membership. The samples in Panel A are not conditioned on public vs.
private sector employment, so that the relevant results roughly sum to the results from columns 1 and 2. For the wage
analysis in Panel B, the sample in columns 3 and 4 is restricted to those employed in the public sector, while the sample in
columns 5 and 6 is restricted to those employed in the private sector. Variable definitions and sources are discussed in the
note to Table 2 (and in the main text of the paper). All specifications include month, year, month-year, state, age, and
education fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                    52
Table 7. Relationship Between Minimum Wage Increases and Union Membership, and Hourly
Wages Earned Among Individuals with Some Education Beyond High School Ages 16-40 Working in
the Public or Private Sector, 2011-2019
                                                 (1)                 (2)      (3)          (4)           (5)             (6)

Panel A DV: Worker is a Union
                                                       Any Union                Public Union                Private Union
Member


Effective Minimum Wage                        0.0022*         0.0036***     0.0013     0.0025***      0.0010**        0.0011**
                                              (0.0012)         (0.0010)    (0.0008)     (0.0007)      (0.0004)        (0.0005)
House Price Index/1,000                                         -0.0471                  -0.0341                       -0.0133
                                                               (0.0326)                 (0.0213)                       (0.0147)
Ln(Income per Capita)                                           0.0026                   -0.0086                        0.0141
                                                               (0.0341)                 (0.0233)                       (0.0149)

Adjusted R-squared                             0.0354           0.0354       0.0344      0.0344         0.0130          0.0130
Observations                                  618,845          618,845      618,845     618,845        618,845         618,845
Panel B DV: Hourly Wages Earned                  (1)                 (2)      (3)          (4)           (5)             (6)

Sample                                                 All Workers              Public Sector               Private Sector



Effective Minimum Wage                         0.0124           0.0102      -0.0453      -0.0541        0.0232           0.0239
                                              (0.0248)         (0.0346)    (0.0469)     (0.0674)       (0.0240)        (0.0330)
House Price Index/1,000                                         -0.4302                  -0.3013                        -0.4764
                                                               (0.8429)                 (1.6718)                       (0.7817)
Ln(Income per Capita)                                           0.7890                    0.9318                         0.7059
                                                               (1.0287)                 (1.9572)                       (0.9252)

Adjusted R-squared                              0.3449          0.3449        0.3096      0.3096          0.3469            0.3469
Observations                                   474,469         474,469        73,409      73,409         402,305           402,305
Notes: This table reports regression results examining the effect of minimum wage increases on the probability of union
membership (Panel A) and hourly wages earned (Panel B). The coefficients are from estimates of equation (1), which is
described in the main text. The sample is from the CPS ORG and consists of individuals ages 16 to 40 with at least some
college education. Columns 1 and 2 report the estimated effect of minimum wage changes on union membership among all
workers with at least some college education, while columns 3 and 4 report the estimated effect of minimum wage changes on
public-sector union membership and columns 5 and 6 report the effect of minimum wage changes on private-sector union
membership. The samples in Panel A are not conditioned on public vs. private sector employment, so that the relevant results
roughly sum to the results from columns 1 and 2. For the wage analysis in Panel B, the sample in columns 3 and 4 is restricted to
those employed in the public sector, while the sample in columns 5 and 6 is restricted to those employed in the private sector.
Variable definitions and sources are discussed in the note to Table 2 (and in the main text of the paper). All specifications
include month, year, month-year, state, age, and education fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                   53
Table 8. Relationship Between Minimum Wage Increases and Union Membership, and Hourly Wages Earned
Among Individuals Working in the Restaurant or Retail Industries, 2011-2019
Panel A DV: Union Member                    (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)          (7)          (8)

                                                                                                   Ages 30-50 & Less          Ages 30-50 & High
Sample                                         Ages 16-21                    Ages 22-29
                                                                                                    than High School           School or Greater

Effective Minimum Wage                   -0.0021*     -0.0042***       -0.0009       -0.0005       0.0007        0.0008      -0.0008       0.0027
                                         (0.0012)      (0.0015)       (0.0016)      (0.0015)      (0.0016)     (0.0018)     (0.0023)     (0.0018)
House Price Index/1,000                                  0.0829                      -0.0403                     0.0336                   -0.0801
                                                       (0.0539)                     (0.0423)                   (0.0506)                  (0.0709)
Ln(Income per Capita)                                   -0.0144                       0.0407                    -0.0534                   -0.0598
                                                       (0.0430)                     (0.0477)                   (0.0553)                  (0.0536)

Adjusted R-squared                        0.0133         0.0134        0.0136        0.0136       0.0201        0.0201       0.0154       0.0156
Observations                              49,598         49,598        59,056        59,056       47,310        47,310       53,818       53,818
Panel B DV: Hourly Wages                    (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)          (7)          (8)

                                                                                                   Ages 30-50 & Less          Ages 30-50 & High
Sample                                         Ages 16-21                    Ages 22-29
                                                                                                    than High School           School or Greater

Effective Minimum Wage                  0.3383***      0.3085***     0.1585***     0.1733***       0.0796        0.0456      -0.0006    -0.1226**
                                         (0.0308)       (0.0359)      (0.0406)      (0.0637)      (0.0548)     (0.0852)     (0.0546)     (0.0582)
House Price Index Divided by 1000                        0.4648                      -1.5595                   2.0459*                  4.3435***
                                                        (0.9030)                    (1.6810)                   (1.1403)                  (1.6038)
Ln(Income per Capita)                                    0.9011                       1.5818                    -1.2810                   -0.2003
                                                        (1.0757)                    (1.7311)                   (2.0865)                  (2.1820)

Adjusted R-squared                          0.1395        0.1395         0.1696      0.1696         0.0721       0.0721       0.1217       0.1219
Observations                                49,542        49,542         58,890      58,890         47,115       47,115       53,380       53,380
Notes: This table reports regression results examining the effect of minimum wage changes on the probability an individual reports being a union
member (Panel A) and hourly wages earned (Panel B). The coefficients are from estimates of equation (1), which is described in the main text.
The samples are from the CPS ORG and consist of individuals working in the following industries: eating and drinking places (1990 Census
industry code 641) and retail (1990 Census industry codes 580-691). Columns 1 and 2 include all individuals ages 16 to 21, columns 3 and 4
include individuals ages 22-29, columns 5 and 6 include individuals ages 30-50 with less than a completed high school education, and columns 7
and 8 include individuals ages 30-50 with a completed high school or greater education. Variable definitions and sources are discussed in the
note to Table 2 (and in the main text of the paper). All specifications include month-year, state, age, and education fixed effects. Standard errors
are clustered at the state level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                        54
Table 9. Relationship Between Minimum Wages, Union Membership, and Wages Among Employed Individuals Ages 16-40, 2011-2019
DV: Hourly Wages              (1)                 (2)                 (3)                  (4)                 (5)                 (6)                 (7)                 (8)

                                               Privately           Publically        Narrow Low          Broader Low         Less than High      High School or         College or
Sample                  All Employed
                                               Employed            Employed         Wage Industries     Wage Industries          School             Greater              Greater


Effective Minimum            0.0231              0.0302              -0.0510           0.1686***            0.0780**            0.1016**               0.0150             -0.0401
Wage                        (0.0258)            (0.0240)            (0.0634)            (0.0350)            (0.0305)            (0.0466)             (0.0262)            (0.0331)
                           2.1312***           2.3178***           1.5033***            -0.8014*           2.5868***              0.9895            2.0893***           1.3434***
Union Member
                            (0.2129)            (0.2928)            (0.3244)            (0.4378)            (0.3305)            (0.8536)             (0.2161)            (0.3289)
Effective Minimum         -0.1101***          -0.1494***             -0.0341           0.1551***           -0.1639***            -0.0209           -0.1062***            -0.0655*
Wage X Union                (0.0297)            (0.0418)            (0.0375)            (0.0541)            (0.0428)            (0.0963)             (0.0304)            (0.0357)
House Price Index            0.6521              0.8322              -0.2293             0.5343              0.8204              2.2636*               0.4250             -0.0640
Divided by 1000             (0.6655)            (0.6254)            (1.3067)            (0.6485)            (0.7035)            (1.1664)             (0.6598)            (0.7809)
Ln(Income per                0.0748              -0.1342              1.3076             -0.3289             0.1542               0.9987              -0.0630             0.1802
Capita)                     (0.7503)            (0.7236)            (1.2984)            (0.7000)            (0.7629)            (1.3008)             (0.8226)            (1.0991)

Adjusted R-squared            0.4951               0.5023              0.4177               0.4489              0.4774               0.3505              0.4794                0.3136
Observations                 732,090              643,542              88,506              164,611             376,011               70,321             661,748               247,924
Notes: This table reports regression results examining the effect of minimum wage changes, union membership, and wages. The coefficients are from estimates of equation (3),
which is described in the main text. The samples are from the CPS ORG and consist of employed individuals ages 16-40. Column 1 includes all employed individuals, column 2
includes all individuals employed in the private sector, and column 3 includes all individuals employed in the public sector. Column 4 includes all individuals working in the
following industries: eating and drinking places (1990 Census industry code 641) and retail (1990 Census industry codes 580-691), and column 5 includes all individuals working in
eating and drinking and retail industries as well as manufacturing, construction, and personal services industries. Column 6 includes all employed individuals with less than a
completed high school education, column 7 includes all employed individuals who completed high school, and column 8 includes all individuals who have completed a four-year
college degree. Variable definitions and sources are discussed in the note to Table 2 (and in the main text of the paper). All specifications include month-year, state, age, and
education fixed effects as well as fixed effects for all 1990 Census 3-digit industry and occupation codes. Age and education controls consist of a dummy variable for each education
group and age. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                         55
Table 10. Relationship Between Minimum Wage Changes, New Minimum Wage Legislation, and
Mentions of Minimum Wages in Newspaper Articles By State, 2011-2019
                                          (1)               (2)            (3)          (4)             (5)               (6)

                                                  Dependent Variable: Count of Articles Mentioning "minimum wage"



Change in Minimum Wage from           1.1644***         1.1679***      1.1929***    1.1859***       1.1733***         1.1668***
Previous Month                         (0.0656)          (0.0665)       (0.0643)     (0.0667)        (0.0507)          (0.0510)
Change in Minimum Wage in                                 1.0833        1.1072*      1.1037*         1.0907*            1.0870
Following Month                                          (0.0554)       (0.0604)     (0.0638)        (0.0544)          (0.0572)
Month First State Minimum                                                1.1905       1.1807          1.1871            1.1715
Wage Legislation Introduced                                             (0.1535)     (0.1511)        (0.1518)          (0.1497)
Month First State Minimum                                              2.4411***    2.4304***       2.5226***         2.5056***
Wage Legislation Passed                                                 (0.4745)     (0.4747)        (0.4993)          (0.5057)
Month First Local Minimum                                              1.3417***    1.3304***       1.3526***         1.3421***
Wage Legislation Passed                                                 (0.1356)     (0.1314)        (0.1344)          (0.1314)
                                                                                    3.0093***                         3.2024***
Post Occupy Wall Street Protests
                                                                                     (0.2647)                          (0.3503)
Ed Murray Mayor of Seattle                                                          1.3957***                         1.4727***
                                                                                     (0.0611)                          (0.0906)
House Price Index Divided by                                                                          1.0014           1.0019*
1000                                                                                                 (0.0010)          (0.0011)
Income per Capita                                                                                     1.0000            1.0000
                                                                                                     (0.0000)          (0.0000)

Pseudo R-squared                        0.7913            0.7915         0.8012       0.8041          0.8033            0.8066
Observations                                5,508               5,508          5,508        5,508             5,508          5,508
Notes: This table reports regression results examining the effect of minimum wage changes and minimum wage legislation on how
often state newspapers mention minimum wages. The coefficients are from estimates of equation (4), which is described in the main
text. State newspaper articles come from LexisNexis. The dependent variable is the number of articles published in state newspapers
per month. Coefficients reported are incidence rate ratios. Data on dates in the legislative histories of state minimum wage come
largely from the National Council of State Legislatures and were compiled by Clemens, Hobbs, and Strain (2018). Data on local
minimum wage ordinances comes from the Inventory of City and County Wage Ordinances at the UC Berkeley Labor Center and
city websites. Variable definitions and sources are discussed in Appendix A. All specifications include month-year, and state fixed
effects. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                  56
Table 11. Relationship Between Minimum Wage Changes, Minimum Wage
Legislation, and Mentions of Minimum Wages and Unions in Newspaper Articles By
State, 2011-2019
                                      (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)
               Dependent Variable: Count of Articles "minimum wage" AND "organized labor"


Change in Minimum Wage              1.0739       1.0746        1.0788       1.0703        1.0448       1.0367
from Previous Month                (0.1295)     (0.1310)      (0.1319)     (0.1349)      (0.1041)     (0.1065)
Change in Minimum Wage in                        1.0219        1.0300       1.0282        0.9881       0.9854
Following Month                                 (0.0746)      (0.0807)     (0.0849)      (0.0715)     (0.0753)
Month First State Minimum                                       1.0445      1.0342        1.0501       1.0366
Wage Legislation Introduced                                    (0.1910)    (0.1888)      (0.1978)     (0.1966)
Month First State Minimum                                     1.6331***   1.6227***     1.7832***    1.7671***
Wage Legislation Passed                                        (0.1980)    (0.1988)      (0.2140)     (0.2176)
Month First Substate Minimum                                    1.0213      1.0136        1.0311       1.0250
Wage Legislation Passed                                        (0.1051)    (0.1022)      (0.1003)     (0.0982)
Post Occupy Wall Street                                                   2.8110***                  2.7151***
Protests                                                                   (0.3290)                   (0.2707)
Ed Murray Mayor of Seattle                                                1.4870***                  1.5171***
                                                                           (0.0767)                   (0.0913)
House Price Index Divided by                                                              1.0005       1.0010
1000                                                                                     (0.0009)     (0.0010)
Income per Capita                                                                       1.0001***    1.0001***
                                                                                         (0.0000)     (0.0000)

Pseudo R-squared                    0.7198       0.7198        0.7212       0.7232       0.7272        0.7291
Observations                           5,508       5,508        5,508         5,508         5,508          5,508
Notes: This table reports regression results examining the effect of minimum wage changes and minimum
wage legislation on how often state newspapers mention minimum wages and labor unions in the same article.
The coefficients are from estimates of equation (4), which is described in the main text. State newspaper
articles come from LexisNexis. The dependent variable is the number of articles published in state newspapers
per month. Coefficients reported are incidence rate ratios. Data on dates in the legislative histories of state
minimum wage come largely from the National Council of State Legislatures and were compiled by Clemens,
Hobbs, and Strain (2018). Data on local minimum wage ordinances comes from the Inventory of City and
County Wage ordinances at the UC Berkeley Labor Center and city websites. Variable definitions and sources
are discussed in Appendix A. All specifications include month-year, and state fixed effects. Standard errors are
clustered at the state level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                         57
Table 12. Relationship Between Minimum Wage Changes, Minimum Wage Legislation, and Mentions of
Minimum Wages and EPI or NELP in Newspaper Articles By State, 2011-2019
                                          (1)               (2)              (3)           (4)             (5)               (6)

Dependent Variable: Count of Articles Mentioning "minimum wage" AND "Economic Policy Institute" or "National Employment Law
                                                          Project"


Change in Minimum Wage from            1.6351**          1.6972***       1.7010***     1.6991***       1.6103***          1.6103***
Previous Month                         (0.3232)           (0.3354)        (0.3252)      (0.3254)        (0.2644)           (0.2649)
Change in Minimum Wage in                                1.9596***       1.9678***     1.9675***       1.8759***          1.8773***
Following Month                                           (0.3504)        (0.3470)      (0.3434)        (0.2977)           (0.2964)
Month First State Minimum                                                  0.8101        0.8062          0.8396             0.8368
Wage Legislation Introduced                                               (0.3241)      (0.3209)        (0.3338)          (0.3308)
Month First State Minimum                                                 2.5838*        2.5795         2.8748*            2.8700*
Wage Legislation Passed                                                   (1.4899)      (1.4864)        (1.5588)          (1.5572)
Month First Substate Minimum                                               1.3315        1.3260          1.3288             1.3264
Wage Legislation Passed                                                   (0.3109)      (0.3051)        (0.2946)          (0.2919)
Post Occupy Wall Street Protests                                                         1.3825                             1.1112
                                                                                        (0.3857)                          (0.2705)
Ed Murray Mayor of Seattle                                                             1.2238***                          1.1716**
                                                                                        (0.0649)                          (0.0775)
House Price Index Divided by                                                                             0.9992             0.9993
1,000                                                                                                   (0.0023)          (0.0024)
Income per Capita                                                                                       1.0001**          1.0001**
                                                                                                        (0.0000)          (0.0000)

Pseudo R-squared                        0.3900            0.3941           0.3977        0.3978          0.4032            0.4032
Observations                               5,508              5,508             5,508         5,508           5,508              5,508
Notes: This table reports regression results examining the effect of minimum wage changes and minimum wage legislation on how
often state newspapers mention minimum wages and EPI or NELP in the same article. The coefficients are from estimates of equation
(4), which is described in the main text. State newspaper articles come from LexisNexis. The dependent variable is the number of
articles published in state newspapers per month. Coefficients reported are incidence rate ratios. Data on dates in the legislative
histories of state minimum wage come largely from the National Council of State Legislatures and were compiled by Clemens, Hobbs,
and Strain (2018). Data on local minimum wage ordinances comes from the Inventory of City and County Wage Ordinances at the UC
Berkeley Labor Center and city websites. Variable definitions and sources are discussed in Appendix A. All specifications include
month-year, and state fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                   58
Table 13. Relationship Between Minimum Wage Changes, Minimum Wage Legislation, and Mentions of
Minimum Wages and SEIU in Newspaper Articles By State, 2011-2019
                                            (1)                (2)              (3)            (4)              (5)               (6)

          Dependent Variable: Count of Articles Mentioning "minimum wage" AND "Service Employees International Union"



Change in Minimum Wage from               0.9088             0.9144           0.9049        0.9044           0.8927             0.8920
Previous Month                           (0.1896)           (0.1900)         (0.1846)      (0.1846)         (0.1859)           (0.1860)
Change in Minimum Wage in                                   1.2772**         1.2785**      1.2771**         1.2749**           1.2724**
Following Month                                             (0.1491)         (0.1512)      (0.1509)         (0.1557)           (0.1548)
Month First State Minimum Wage                                                1.1985         1.1973           1.1902            1.1885
Legislation Introduced                                                       (0.4295)       (0.4295)         (0.4330)          (0.4335)
Month First State Minimum Wage                                                1.2969         1.2983           1.4157            1.4192
Legislation Passed                                                           (0.5203)       (0.5219)         (0.5376)          (0.5406)
Month First Substate Minimum                                                0.6490***      0.6475***        0.6563***         0.6553***
Wage Legislation Passed                                                      (0.1088)       (0.1087)         (0.1039)          (0.1039)
Post Occupy Wall Street Protests                                                           2.6417***                          2.1906***
                                                                                            (0.5180)                           (0.5991)
Ed Murray Mayor of Seattle                                                                   0.9917                             0.9541
                                                                                            (0.0728)                           (0.0811)
House Price Index Divided by                                                                                  0.9982            0.9983
1,000                                                                                                        (0.0016)          (0.0017)
Income per Capita                                                                                           1.0001***         1.0001***
                                                                                                             (0.0000)          (0.0000)

Pseudo R-squared                          0.5412             0.5415           0.5421         0.5422          0.5444             0.5445
Observations                                5,300              5,300            5,300          5,300             5,300            5,300
Notes: This table reports regression results examining the effect of minimum wage changes and minimum wage legislation on how often
state newspapers mention minimum wages and the Service Employees International Union in the same article. The coefficients are from
estimates of equation (4), which is described in the main text. State newspaper articles come from LexisNexis. The dependent variable is
the number of articles published in state newspapers per month. Coefficients reported are incidence rate ratios. Data on dates in the
legislative histories of state minimum wage come largely from the National Council of State Legislatures and were compiled by
Clemens, Hobbs, and Strain (2018). Data on local minimum wage ordinances comes from the Inventory of City and County Wage
Ordinances at the UC Berkeley Labor Center and city websites. Variable definitions and sources are discussed in Appendix A. All
specifications include month-year, and state fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                      59
Table 14. Relationship Between Minimum Wage Changes, Minimum Wage Legislation, and Mentions of
Organized Labor in Newspaper Articles By State, 2011-2019
                                            (1)                (2)             (3)           (4)             (5)                (6)

                                   Dependent Variable: Count of Articles Mentioning "organized labor"



Change in Minimum Wage from                1.0661            1.0691          1.0633        1.0568           1.0279            1.0242
Previous Month                            (0.0679)          (0.0688)        (0.0691)      (0.0727)         (0.0723)          (0.0734)
Change in Minimum Wage in                                   1.1047*          1.0928        1.0869           1.0662            1.0623
Following Month                                             (0.0612)        (0.0615)      (0.0607)         (0.0634)          (0.0625)
Month First State Minimum                                                  0.7863**       0.7839**        0.7666**          0.7702**
Wage Legislation Introduced                                                (0.0956)       (0.0937)        (0.0944)           (0.0930)
Month First State Minimum                                                   0.9627         0.9621          1.0142             1.0101
Wage Legislation Passed                                                    (0.1280)       (0.1277)        (0.1342)           (0.1360)
Month First Substate Minimum                                                1.0206         1.0159          1.0121             1.0095
Wage Legislation Passed                                                    (0.0759)       (0.0731)        (0.0687)           (0.0679)
Post Occupy Wall Street Protests                                                         1.5843***                          1.4123***
                                                                                          (0.1073)                           (0.1616)
Ed Murray Mayor of Seattle                                                                 1.0346                             0.9852
                                                                                          (0.0279)                           (0.0434)
House Price Index Divided by                                                                               0.9984             0.9987
1000                                                                                                      (0.0012)           (0.0012)
Income per Capita                                                                                         1.0001**          1.0001**
                                                                                                          (0.0000)           (0.0000)

Pseudo R-squared                          0.8367             0.8368          0.8371        0.8385          0.8408             0.8415
Observations                                 5,508             5,508          5,508        5,508             5,508              5,508
Notes: This table reports regression results examining the effect of minimum wage changes and minimum wage legislation on how
often state newspapers mention organized labor in articles. The coefficients are from estimates of equation (4), which is described in the
main text. State newspaper articles come from LexisNexis. The dependent variable is the number of articles published in state
newspapers per month. Coefficients reported are incidence rate ratios. Data on dates in the legislative histories of state minimum wage
come largely from the National Council of State Legislatures and were compiled by Clemens, Hobbs, and Strain (2018). Data on local
minimum wage ordinances comes from the Inventory of City and County Wage Ordinances at the UC Berkeley Labor Center and city
websites. Variable definitions and sources are discussed in Appendix A. All specifications include month-year, and state fixed effects.
Standard errors are clustered at the state level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                  60
Table 15: Relationship Between Minimum Wage Changes, Minimum Wage Legislation, and the Share
of Newspaper Articles Mentioning Organized Labor that also Mention Minimum Wages, 2011-2019
                                           (1)               (2)             (3)          (4)             (5)                (6)

              Dependent Variable: Share of Articles Mentioning "organized labor "that also Mention "mini mum wage"



Change in Minimum Wage from             0.0184*            0.0195*        0.0210**     0.0209**         0.0203*            0.0203*
Previous Month                          (0.0100)          (0.0100)        (0.0101)     (0.0101)        (0.0102)           (0.0102)
Change in Minimum Wage in                                 0.0235**        0.0248**     0.0250**        0.0241**           0.0243**
Following Month                                           (0.0113)        (0.0113)     (0.0113)        (0.0112)           (0.0112)
Month First State Minimum                                                  0.0237        0.0230          0.0225             0.0220
Wage Legislation Introduced                                               (0.0182)      (0.0185)        (0.0178)          (0.0180)
Month First State Minimum                                                0.1134***     0.1127***       0.1147***         0.1141***
Wage Legislation Passed                                                   (0.0352)      (0.0352)        (0.0343)          (0.0343)
Month First Substate Minimum                                               0.0397        0.0391          0.0392             0.0387
Wage Legislation Passed                                                   (0.0251)      (0.0252)        (0.0250)          (0.0251)
Post Occupy Wall Street Protests                                                       0.0148***                           0.0088*
                                                                                        (0.0032)                          (0.0050)
Ed Murray Mayor of Seattle                                                             0.0290***                         0.0247***
                                                                                        (0.0051)                          (0.0057)
House Price Index Divided by                                                                           -0.0002*           -0.0001*
1,000                                                                                                  (0.0001)           (0.0001)
Ln(Income per Capita)                                                                                   0.2441*             0.2308
                                                                                                       (0.1437)           (0.1478)

Adjusted R-squared                       0.2599            0.2606          0.2655       0.2656          0.2663             0.2662
Observations                               5,508             5,508            5,508        5,508            5,508            5,508
Notes: This table reports regression results examining the effect of minimum wage changes and minimum wage legislation on the
share of newspaper articles that mention organized labor and minimum wages. State newspaper articles come from LexisNexis. The
coefficients are from estimates of an ordinary least squares variant of equation (4), which is described in the main text. The
dependent variable is the share of articles mentioning organized labor that also mention minimum wages published in state
newspapers per month. Data on dates in the legislative histories of state minimum wage come largely from the National Council of
State Legislatures and were compiled by Clemens, Hobbs, and Strain (2018). Data on local minimum wage ordinances comes from
the Inventory of City and County Wage Ordinances at the UC Berkeley Labor Center and city websites. Variable definitions and
sources are discussed in Appendix A. All specifications include month-year, and state fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at
the state level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                   61
Table 16. Relationship Between Minimum Wage Increases
and Attitudes Toward Unions, Ages 18-64
                                  (1)           (2)          (3)         (4)

Dependent Variable                      Approve of Unions 4-category



Effective Minimum Wage        0.0221***      0.0225***    0.0216**    0.0212**
                               (0.0077)       (0.0082)    (0.0083)    (0.0083)

State Fixed Effects               Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Year Fixed Effects                Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Education Fixed Effects           No           Yes          Yes          Yes
Age Fixed Effects                 No           No           Yes          Yes
Income Fixed Effects              No           No           No           Yes

Adjusted R-squared               0.0131         0.0257        0.0329      0.0365
Observations                      6,421          6,421        6,421       6,421
Notes: This table reports regression results examining the effect of minimum
wage increases on attitudes toward unions. The coefficients are from
estimates of equation (5), which is described in the main text. The sample is
respondents ages 18-64 from Pew Political Attitudes Surveys in 2011, 2013,
2014, 2015, and 2018. The dependent variable is equal to 1 if an individual
responded "very favorable" 0.75 if "favorable", 0.25 if "unfavorable", and 0 if
"very unfavorable" to the question: "What is your overall opinion of labor
unions?" Responses "Don't know", "Can't choose", and "Refused" were coded
as missing. Column 1 reports results from our baseline specification, column
2 includes education-level fixed effects, and column 3 and 4 include age and
income group fixed effects. Variable definitions and sources are discussed in
appendix B (and in the main text). All specifications include year and state
fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                        62
Figure 1. States Enacting Minimum Wage Increases 2011­19: This map shows states that did and did not have minimum wage increases between January 1,
2011, and December 31, 2019. Data on minimum wage changes come from Clemens, Hobbs, and Strain (2018), Vaghul and Zipperer (2019), and a number of
complementary sources.

                                                                         63
Figure 2. Changes in Unionization Rates and Changes in Minimum Wages: This figure plots the percentage point change in the unionization rate among
individuals ages 16-40 against the change in the minimum wage in dollars between 2011­14 and 2016­19. Each bubble represents a state, and the size of the
bubbles is proportional to state population. The red line represents the simple linear fit of changes in unionization rates against changes in minimum wages.

                                                                               64
Figure 3. Time Series of Unionization Rates: This figure shows the evolution of unionization rates over time for individuals ages 16-40 in states that did versus
did not increase minimum wages. Panel A displays unadjusted unionization rates from 2011 to 2019. Panel B restricts the sample of states to those with baseline
unionization rates greater than 2.5 percent or less than 7.5 percent. Panels C and D display average unionization rates for increaser states relative to synthetic
control groups constructed as described in the main text. In these panels, time 1 corresponds with the year of the treatment state's first minimum wage increase.


                                                                               65
Figure 4. Event Study of Minimum Wage Increases on Union Membership. This figure plots coefficients and 95 percent confidence intervals from event
study regressions of union membership on state minimum wage increases, as described by equation (2). The underlying regression is our baseline model, which
includes quarterly, state-level controls for a housing price index and personal income per capita.

                                                                             66
Figure 5. Event Studies of Minimum Wage Increases on Union Membership. This figure plots coefficients and 95 percent confidence intervals from event
study regressions of union membership on state minimum wage increases, as described by equation (2). Panels A­D include all minimum wage increases, while
Panels E­H exclude increases driven by inflation indexation provisions. Other variations across panels involve the inclusion (Panels A, C, E, and G) or exclusion
(Panels B, D, F, and H) of macroeconomic covariates as control variables and whether the dependent variable is restricted to union membership (Panels A, B, E,
and F) or includes individuals who report that they are covered by union contracts despite not reporting that they are members (Panels C, D, G, and H).
                                                                               67
Figure 6. News Coverage of the Minimum Wage Over Time. This figure displays the number of minimum wage articles per million residents in state
newspapers, as constructed using counts of articles from LexisNexis. Panels A­C display results for New York, California, and Washington. Panel D displays
average results for all states that did not increase their minimum wages over our primary analysis period. Labeled events include months in which state or local
minimum wage increases were voted on or enacted, months associated with events including the election of Seattle mayor Ed Murray (Washington only) and the
disbandment of the original Occupy Wall Street encampment (New York only), and months associated with local or national strikes by food-service workers.




                                                                               68
Figure 7. Minimum Wage and Organized Labor Articles Over Time. These figures plot the evolution of media coverage of
minimum wages and organized labor over time. Panel A plots the annual counts of US newspaper articles that mention the minimum
wage or organized labor (left axis) and the number of US newspaper articles that mention both the minimum wage and organized
labor in the same article (right axis). Panel B plots the share of articles mentioning organized labor that also mention minimum wages.
Panel B also illustrates the number of states in which new and ultimately successful minimum wage legislation was introduced, the
number of states in which such legislation passed, and the number of states enacting a minimum wage increase in a given year. The
count of the number of states enacting a minimum wage increase includes increases enacted due to inflation indexing provisions. The
newspaper articles come from LexisNexis and the searches used are described in more detail in Appendix A.




                                                                  69
                                   Appendix A. Additional Details on LexisNexis Data
                   LexisNexis includes full text articles from 787 US state newspapers.15 Previous research

           has utilized LexisNexis searches to analyze issues including media coverage intensity and

           sentiment regarding economic issues. Berge and Jordà (2011) use counts of news articles from

           LexisNexis mentioning "recession" to track the business cycle. Birz and Lott (2011) use

           newspaper articles from LexisNexis to examine how news coverage of the economy affects stock

           returns. Lamla and Lin (2014) use articles from LexisNexis to examine the effect of media

           reporting on consumer inflation expectations in Germany. Many papers have also used data from

           LexisNexis searches to estimate political bias in media reporting (Groseclose and Milyo, 2005;

           Ho and Quinn, 2008; Lott and Hassett, 2014).

                   We query the database to construct measures capturing how frequently minimum wages

           are mentioned in state newspapers over time, using the following searches:

           "minimum wage"

           "minimum wage" AND "Economic Policy Institute"

           "minimum wage" AND "National Employment Law Project"

           "minimum wage" AND "Service Employees International Union"

           "minimum wage" AND ("organized labor" OR "labor group*" OR "labor union**" OR

           "National Employment Law Project" OR "Economic Policy Institute" OR "Service Employees

           International Union")




15
     As of September 22,2020.
                                                          70
          We also query the database to see how often organized labor or labor advocacy groups

are mentioned (whether or not the article mentions the minimum wage) using the following

search:

"organized labor" OR "labor group*" OR "labor union**" OR "National Employment Law

Project" OR "Economic Policy Institute" OR "Service Employees International Union"

          In our analysis, we also include indicator variables for a set of political events that were

associated with increases in the counts of news articles that reference the minimum wage. The

first is for New York on all dates following the beginning of the Occupy Wall Street protests.

The second is for the tenure of Ed Murray as mayor of Seattle. Finally, we include indicator

variables for dates of local and national strikes related to the Fight for $15.

Local strike dates:


   ·      New York: November 2012 and April 2013

   ·      Illinois: April 2013

   ·      Michigan: May 2013

   ·      Missouri: May 2013

   ·      Washington: May 2013

   ·      Wisconsin: May 2013

National strike dates:


   ·      July 2013

   ·      August 2013

   ·      December 2013

   ·      December 2014

                                                    71
   ·   April 2015

   ·   November 2015




       Table A1 displays the number of articles mentioning "minimum wage" and related terms

by state. From these results, we observe more populous states tend to have more articles written

about the minimum wage over this period. Additionally, states with more articles referencing the

minimum wage do not necessarily also have more articles referencing unions, organized labor, or

pro-union organizations. There is considerable regional variation in how often these terms are

mentioned in conjunction with the minimum wage.

       Table A2 displays the number of unique newspapers mentioning the minimum wage and

related terms by state, as well as the total number of newspapers queried by state. We observe

most states have articles from a large number of newspapers published in that state, except for

low-population states with relatively few articles about the minimum wage or organized labor.

This finding suggests our results are not driven by reporting preferences in a small number of

publications, but are broad trends across the majority of newspapers available.




                                                72
Table A1: Newspaper Articles Mentioning Minimum Wages and Related Terms by State, January 1, 2011 - December 31, 2019
             State                 "minimum wage"          "org labor"          "min wage" AND "org labor"                  AND "EPI"           AND "NELP"           AND "SEIU"
          Alabama                       2,128                 1,143                           128                                34                   32                   18
           Alaska                        635                   513                            38                                  8                    5                   1
           Arizona                      3,653                 1,273                           131                                14                   26                   25
          Arkansas                      1,530                  357                            53                                 10                   14                   6
          California                    19,893                21,446                         1,991                              250                   185                 574
          Colorado                      2,463                 1,110                           129                                41                   30                   24
         Connecticut                    3,702                 2,134                           241                                64                   19                   60
          Delaware                      1,235                  506                            100                                25                   26                   24
    District of Columbia                6,616                 6,679                           787                               183                   85                  197
           Florida                      11,739                6,184                           778                               224                   179                 165
           Georgia                      1,612                  791                            86                                 19                   13                   14
           Hawaii                       1,419                  966                            71                                 16                   13                   9
            Idaho                       2,852                 1,046                           110                                22                   12                   28
           Illinois                     12,486                9,559                          1,061                              248                   126                 220
           Indiana                      3,762                 3,340                           268                                80                   51                   37
             Iowa                       8,288                 4,183                           590                               141                   53                  123
           Kansas                       2,352                 1,338                           164                                40                   33                   29
          Kentucky                      3,596                 1,616                           234                                78                   39                   17
          Louisiana                     2,516                 1,076                           147                                43                   22                   22
            Maine                       4,082                 2,181                           292                                55                   27                   14
          Maryland                      3,829                 2,270                           268                               115                   41                   42
       Massachusetts                    13,054                6,879                           905                               200                   119                 183
          Michigan                      6,792                 7,235                           416                                69                   39                  103
          Minnesota                     4,138                 2,175                           272                                48                   39                   64
         Mississippi                    1,352                  725                            70                                 26                   17                   8
          Missouri                      4,199                 2,517                           304                                64                   62                   70
          Montana                        880                   463                            31                                  3                    7                   4
          Nebraska                      1,806                  929                            86                                 15                   15                   5
           Nevada                        841                   708                            74                                 26                   18                   17
      New Hampshire                     2,867                 2,513                           271                                60                   26                   62
         New Jersey                     7,890                 5,474                           646                               137                   80                  159
        New Mexico                      3,653                 1,420                           141                                40                   17                   8
          New York                      24,647                14,889                         1,838                              361                   299                 347
       North Carolina                   6,505                 2,664                           261                                88                   36                   41
        North Dakota                    1,116                  745                            93                                 24                   21                   7
             Ohio                       7,399                 5,611                           625                               151                   151                 196
          Oklahoma                      1,046                  592                            47                                 17                    3                   3
           Oregon                       1,945                 1,629                           145                                21                   23                   49
        Pennsylvania                    7,928                 7,363                           714                               160                   76                  155
        Rhode Island                    2,545                 2,405                           234                                49                   26                   60
       South Carolina                   2,579                 1,441                           150                                39                   34                   24
        South Dakota                     437                   216                            51                                 13                   17                   7
          Tennessee                     2,584                 2,036                           160                                52                   22                   23
            Texas                       5,728                 3,351                           379                                94                   55                   83
             Utah                       1,408                 1,001                           78                                 37                   13                   6
          Vermont                       1,936                 1,127                           149                                49                   43                   23
           Virginia                     4,735                 2,728                           279                                73                   33                   68
         Washington                     6,813                 4,180                           529                                88                   49                  158
        West Virginia                   2,091                 1,833                           176                                53                   24                   35
          Wisconsin                     3,669                 2,957                           296                                72                   38                   52
          Wyoming                        124                    39                             5                                  5                    0                   0
            Total                      233,095               157,556                        17,092                             3,844                 2,433               3,669
Notes: Data on newspaper articles containing search terms come from LexisNexis. Searches were restricted to English news articles from newspapers located in the 50 US
states and Washington DC. Articles were assigned to states using the publication location metadata provided by LexisNexis. Articles were assigned to all states included in the
publication location data in cases where more than one state was included. Because of this, the totals indicated in this table are slightly larger than the number of newspapers
articles on LexisNexis.




                                                                                      73
Table A2: Unique Newspapers Mentioning Minimum Wages and Related Terms by State, January 1, 2011 - December
31, 2019
                                    "minimum           "org                                        AND             AND             AND                Total
            State
                                      wage"           labor"     "min wage"AND "org labor"         "EPI"         "NELP"           "SEIU"          Newspapers
           Alabama                       6               6                    6                       5              6                5                  7
            Alaska                       3               3                    3                       1              2                1                  4
            Arizona                      8               8                    8                       4              4                5                 11
           Arkansas                      4               4                    3                       3              3                2                  8
           California                   47              48                   44                      34             33               40                 82
           Colorado                      8               8                    7                       6              5                6                  9
          Connecticut                    4               4                    3                       3              3                3                  5
           Delaware                      2               2                    2                       2              2                2                  2
    District of Columbia                12              12                   11                      11              8                8                 35
            Florida                     32              31                   28                      25             20               24                 52
            Georgia                      8               8                    7                       4              3                5                 18
            Hawaii                       5               4                    3                       3              3                1                  7
             Idaho                       7               7                    7                       6              2                3                  7
            Illinois                    15              15                   14                      12             11               13                 27
            Indiana                      9               9                    9                       8              7                6                 18
             Iowa                        6               6                    6                       6              5                6                  8
            Kansas                       6               6                    5                       5              4                2                  8
           Kentucky                      5               5                    4                       4              4                4                  7
           Louisiana                    11              10                    9                       8              5                5                 17
             Maine                       7               7                    5                       5              5                3                  7
           Maryland                      8               8                    7                       8              6                7                 11
        Massachusetts                   15              15                   14                      14             10               13                 20
           Michigan                     20              20                   18                      13              7               16                 24
          Minnesota                      6               6                    6                       5              6                5                 11
          Mississippi                    6               6                    4                       4              3                2                  8
           Missouri                      5               5                    5                       5              5                5                 10
           Montana                       5               5                    5                       2              2                2                  6
           Nebraska                      3               3                    3                       2              2                2                  4
            Nevada                       4               4                    4                       4              2                3                 10
       New Hampshire                     4               4                    4                       3              4                3                  5
          New Jersey                    18              17                   17                      15             12               15                 24
         New Mexico                     12              13                   12                      10              5                5                 13
          New York                      34              33                   30                      22             23               26                 56
        North Carolina                  16              16                   12                      10              8                8                 22
         North Dakota                    2               2                    2                       2              2                2                  2
             Ohio                       26              26                   24                      16             20               20                 39
          Oklahoma                       4               5                    3                       3              2                1                  6
            Oregon                       7               6                    6                       4              4                5                 12
         Pennsylvania                   25              25                   24                      19             14               17                 33
         Rhode Island                    3               3                    3                       3              3                3                  3
        South Carolina                   9               8                    7                       5              7                5                 13
         South Dakota                    1               1                    1                       1              1                1                  2
          Tennessee                     12              11                   11                      10              6                5                 15
             Texas                      17              16                   16                      11             10               12                 32
              Utah                       5               4                    3                       3              2                3                  6
           Vermont                       6               5                    6                       5              5                5                  5
            Virginia                     9               9                    9                       7              6                6                 10
          Washington                    13              13                   12                      12             12               11                 19
        West Virginia                    3               3                    3                       3              2                2                  3
          Wisconsin                     18              18                   17                      15              9               14                 21
           Wyoming                       2               2                    1                       1              0                0                  3
Total Number of Newspapers              523            515                   473                    392             335             368                787
Notes: Data on newspapers publishing articles containing search terms come from LexisNexis. Searches were restricted to English news articles from
newspapers located in the 50 US states and Washington DC. Newspapers were counted based on their unique publication name, and were assigned to states
using the publication location metadata provided by LexisNexis. Newspapers were assigned to all states included in the publication location data in cases where
more than one state was included.




                                                                                74
            Appendix B. Additional Information on PEW Data



Table B1: Relationship Between Minimum Wage Increases
and Attitudes Toward Unions, Ages 21­40
                                   (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)

Dependent Variable                       Approve of Unions 4-Category



Effective Minimum Wage         0.0323**      0.0323**   0.0319**     0.0306*
                               (0.0154)      (0.0151)   (0.0150)     (0.0160)

State Fixed Effects               Yes           Yes        Yes          Yes
Year Fixed Effects                Yes           Yes        Yes          Yes
Education Fixed Effects           No            Yes        Yes          Yes
Age Fixed Effects                 No            No         Yes          Yes
Income Fixed Effects              No            No         No           Yes

Adjusted R-Squared                 0.0154       0.0279       0.035     0.0401
Observations                        2,241       2,241        2,241       2,241
Note: This table reports regression results examining the effect of minimum
wage increases on attitudes toward unions. The coefficients are from
estimates of equation (5), which is described in the main text. The sample is
from Pew Political Attitudes Surveys in 2011, 2013, 2014, 2015, and 2018.
The dependent variable is equal to 1 if an individual responded "very
favorable," 0.75 if "favorable," 0.25 if "unfavorable," and 0 if "very
unfavorable" to the question: "What is your overall opinion of labor
unions?" The responses "Don't know," "Can't choose," and "Refused"
were coded as missing. Column 1 reports results from our baseline
specification, Column 2 includes education-level fixed effects, and Columns
3 and 4 include age and income group fixed effects. Variable definitions
and sources are discussed in Appendix B (and in the main text). All
specifications include year and state fixed effects. Standard errors are
clustered at the state level. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                     75
Table B2: Relationship Between Minimum Wage Increases
and Attitudes Toward Unions, Ages 18­97
                                  (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)

Dependent Variable                      Approve of Unions 4-Category



Effective Minimum Wage        0.0201***      0.0202***    0.0190***    0.0190***
                               (0.0055)       (0.0055)     (0.0057)     (0.0056)

State Fixed Effects              Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Year Fixed Effects               Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Education Fixed Effects          No            Yes           Yes           Yes
Age Fixed Effects                No            No            Yes           Yes
Income Fixed Effects             No            No            No            Yes

Adjusted R-Squared                0.0142        0.0245        0.0318        0.0353
Observations                       8,571         8,571         8,571         8,571
Note: This table reports regression results examining the effect of minimum
wage increases on attitudes toward unions. The coefficients are from estimates
of equation (5), which is described in the main text. The sample is from Pew
Political Attitudes Surveys in 2011, 2013, 2014, 2015, and 2018. The
dependent variable is equal to 1 if an individual responded "very favorable,"
0.75 if "favorable," 0.25 if "unfavorable," and 0 if "very unfavorable" to the
question: "What is your overall opinion of labor unions? " The responses
"Don't know," "Can't choose," and "Refused" were coded as missing. Column
1 reports results from our baseline specification, Column 2 includes education-
level fixed effects, and Columns 3 and 4 include age and income group fixed
effects. Variable definitions and sources are discussed in Appendix B (and in
the main text). All specifications include year and state fixed effects. Standard
errors are clustered at the state level. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                        76
Table B3: Relationship Between Minimum Wage Increases
and Attitudes Toward Unions, Ages 18­64
                                     (1)          (2)        (3)         (4)

Dependent Variable                          Approve of Unions Binary



Effective Minimum Wage            0.0211*       0.0218*    0.0209*    0.0205*
                                  (0.0108)      (0.0114)   (0.0114)   (0.0116)

State Fixed Effects                 Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes
Year Fixed Effects                  Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes
Education Fixed Effects             No            Yes        Yes        Yes
Age Fixed Effects                   No            No         Yes        Yes
Income Fixed Effects                No            No         No         Yes

Adjusted R-Squared                   0.0106      0.0208      0.0303      0.0337
Observations                          6,421       6,421       6,421       6,421
Note: This table reports regression results examining the effect of minimum
wage increases on attitudes toward unions. The coefficients are from
estimates of equation (5), which is described in the main text. The sample is
respondents age 18­64 from Pew Political Attitudes Surveys in 2011, 2013,
2014, 2015, and 2018. The dependent variable is equal to 1 if an individual
responded "very favorable" or "favorable" and equal to 0 if an individual
responded "unfavorable" or "very unfavorable" to the question: "What is
your overall opinion of labor unions?" The responses "Don't know," "Can't
choose," and "Refused" were coded as missing. Column 1 reports results
from our baseline specification, Column 2 includes education-level fixed
effects, and Columns 3 and 4 include age and income group fixed effects.
Variable definitions and sources are discussed in Appendix B (and in the
main text). All specifications include year and state fixed effects. Standard
errors are clustered at the state level. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                           77
    Appendix C. Robustness Analyses Involving State Politics and State Labor Law



Table C1: Relationship Between Minimum Wage Increases and Union
Membership Controlling for Party Control of State Government, Ages 16-40
                                             (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)

Dependent Variable                                         Individual is a Union Member



Effective Minimum Wage                   0.0029***       0.0029***   0.0029***    0.0029***     0.0029***
                                          (0.0006)        (0.0006)    (0.0006)     (0.0006)     (0.0006)
House Price Index/1,000                   -0.0410*        -0.0418*    -0.0412*     -0.0411*     -0.0426*
                                          (0.0229)        (0.0229)    (0.0228)     (0.0227)     (0.0229)
Ln(Income per Capita)                      0.0148          0.0143      0.0147       0.0145      0.0148
                                          (0.0206)        (0.0213)    (0.0206)     (0.0210)     (0.0213)
Democratic control of legislature                          0.0013                               0.0027
                                                          (0.0023)                              (0.0043)
Split control of legislature                               0.0022                               0.0031
                                                          (0.0025)                              (0.0028)
Democrat governor                                                      0.0003                   0.0015
                                                                      (0.0012)                  (0.0032)
Democrat governor and legislature                                                    0.0000     -0.0006
                                                                                   (0.0011)     (0.0032)
Republican governor and legislature                                                 -0.0003     0.0017
                                                                                   (0.0018)     (0.0037)

Observations                              1,094,351 1,094,351 1,094,351 1,094,351 1,094,351
Notes: This table reports regression results examining the effect of minimum wage increases on the
probability of union membership. The coefficients are from estimates of equation (1), which is
described in the main text. The sample is from the CPS ORG and consists of all individuals ages 16 to
40. Column 1 reports results from our baseline specification, in table 3, column 4. Column 2 includes
controls for whether Democrats had a majority in the state legislature and whether control was split
between Democrats and Republicans. Column 3 includes controls for whether the state governor was
Democratic. Column 4 controls for whether Democrats or Republicans control both the governorship
and the state legislature, and column 5 includes all controls. Information on state government control
comes from the National Conference of State Legislatures. All specifications include year-month, state,
age and education fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1




                                                    78
Table C2: Correlations Between Labor Market Policies and
State Government Control
                                              (1)                  (2)

                                          Effective          Right to Work
Main Variable
                                       Minimum Wage              Law


Democrat control of legislature           0.535***              -0.633***

Split control of legislature              0.0460***             -0.184***

Democrat governor                         0.395***              -0.604***

Democrat governor and legislature         0.506***              -0.551***

Republican governor and
                                          -0.438***             0.694***
legislature

Notes: This table reports correlations between the effective minimum wage
in a given state (column 1) or whether a state has a right to work law (column
2), with whether the state legislature and/or governorship is controlled by
Republicans or Democrats. Information on state government control comes
from the National Conference of State Legislatures. Correlation coefficients
are weighted by state population. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                     79
Table C3. Relationship Between State Labor Market Policies and Minimum Wage Variation
                                 (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)              (5)               (6)            (7)          (8)
                                                         Mandatory        WC                                                 Paid         Non-
                              Right to     Prevailing                                                       Employer
Dependent Variable                                        Worker        Covered      Antidiscrimination                     Family      competes
                             Work Law      Wage Law                                                        Verification
                                                          Comp           Share                                              Leave       Allowed


Effective Minimum Wage         ­0.0239       0.0098        0.0076        0.0002           ­0.0723*           ­0.0236        0.0854        No
                              (0.0262)      (0.0219)      (0.0078)      (0.0023)          (0.0407)           (0.0169)      (0.0589)     Variation
House Price Index/1,000       ­0.7703*       0.3921        0.2607        0.0049            ­0.3477           ­0.0640       ­1.1077
                              (0.4240)      (0.3547)      (0.2549)      (0.0144)          (0.6352)           (0.2480)      (0.7848)
Ln(Income per Capita)           0.5459      ­0.1366       ­0.4605       ­0.0236             0.8493           ­0.4413        0.4984
                              (0.4086)      (0.3010)      (0.4363)      (0.0585)          (0.7490)           (0.4066)      (0.5528)

Observations                     860,742        860,742       734,984      614,876           493,114            860,742       613,616    860,742
Note: This table reports regression results examining the effect of minimum wage variation on the probability that states also have enacted other
labor legislation. The coefficients are from estimates of equation (1), which is described in the main text. The sample is from the CPS ORG and
consists of individuals age 16­40. Each column reports results from a regression with the indicated labor law as the dependent variable. Labor
law data are from Sorens, Muedini, and Ruger (2008). Differences in sample sizes across columns reflect differences in the years and states for
which labor law data were available. Column 1 reports results for state Right to Work laws. Column 2 reports results for whether a state has a
prevailing wage law. Column 3 uses a law requiring that employers pay worker compensation. Column 4 uses the share of workers covered by
unemployment insurance also covered by worker 's compensation. Column 5 uses an indicator for whether a state has additional employer
antidiscrimination laws. Column 6 uses an indicator for whether private employers are required to verify workers are legal residents. Column 7
uses an indicator for whether a state has a paid family leave policy, and Column 8 uses an indicator for whether states allow noncompete
agreements for broad groups of workers. All specifications include year-month, state, age and education fixed effects. Standard errors are
clustered at the state level. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                                                       80
