                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     RESEARCH FUNDING AND COLLABORATION

                                      Benjamin Davies
                                        Jason Gush
                                      Shaun C. Hendy
                                       Adam B. Jaffe

                                     Working Paper 27916
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27916


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2020




The research discussed in this paper was supported by Te Pnaha Matatini. We thank Ben Jones,
Dave Maré and seminar participants at Motu for helpful suggestions. Jason Gush is employed by
the administrator of the Fund being studied, i.e., the Royal Society of New Zealand, as their
"Programme Manager - Insights and Evaluation". The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Benjamin Davies, Jason Gush, Shaun C. Hendy, and Adam B. Jaffe. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Research Funding and Collaboration
Benjamin Davies, Jason Gush, Shaun C. Hendy, and Adam B. Jaffe
NBER Working Paper No. 27916
October 2020
JEL No. O31,O38

                                         ABSTRACT

We analyse whether research funding contests promote co-authorship. Our analysis combines
Scopus publication records with data on applications to the Marsden Fund, the premiere source of
funding for basic research in New Zealand. On average, and after controlling for observable and
unobservable heterogeneity, applicant pairs were 13.8 percentage points more likely to co-author
in a given year if they co-proposed during the previous ten years than if they did not. This co-
authorship rate was not significantly higher among funded pairs. However, when we increase
post-proposal publication lags towards the length of a typical award, we find that funding, rather
than participation, promotes co-authorship.


Benjamin Davies                                 Shaun C. Hendy
Stanford University                             University of Auckland
bldavies@stanford.edu                           Auckland 1010
                                                New Zealand
Jason Gush                                      shaun.hendy@auckland.ac.nz
Royal Society of New Zealand
11 Turnbull St, Thorndon                        Adam B. Jaffe
Wellington 6011                                 188 Brookline Avenue
New Zealand                                     Apartment 26A
jason.gush@royalsociety.org.nz                  Boston, MA 02215
                                                and Brandeis University
                                                and Queensland University of Technology
                                                and also NBER
                                                adam.jaffe@motu.org.nz
1 Introduction
Research is increasingly conducted by teams (Adams et al., 2005; Wuchty et al., 2007). 1
Collaboration allows researchers to divide labour and overcome the rising "burden of knowledge"
required to generate new knowledge (Jones, 2009). Therefore, collaboration can boost productivity
(Ductor, 2015). However, the extent to which teamwork leads to more impactful research depends
on team composition (Ahmadpoor and Jones, 2019). Such dependence motivates studies of team
formation processes and the mechanisms underlying those processes. 2 This paper explores one
potential mechanism: participation in research funding contests (Ayoubi et al., 2018; Defazio et al.,
2009; Ubfal and Maffioli, 2011).

Research funding contests may promote collaboration through several channels. First, preparing and
submitting funding proposals requires proposal team members to develop joint plans for their
proposed research and to invest resources in the pursuit of a shared idea. Second, funding
application processes allow researchers to discover complementarities among their sets of
knowledge and skills, and to screen for productive collaborators. Finally, if the most promising
proposals win funding then shared proposal success signals that teams' ideas are worth pursuing
and provides resources that may foster further collaboration.

In this paper, we study a specific form of collaboration: co-authorship of research papers. We
analyse the relationship between co-authorship and proposal outcomes empirically, using data from
New Zealand. 3 Our empirical strategy allows us to control for observable and unobservable factors
that may confound the relationship between co-authorship and proposal outcomes. Our data
include Scopus publication records on New Zealand researchers and their international co-authors.
We link these records to data on applications to the Marsden Fund, the "premiere funding
mechanism for basic research in New Zealand" (Gush et al., 2018, p. 227). The substantial financial
and reputational rewards offered by the Fund encourage most serious New Zealand researchers to
apply at least once during their careers. Consequently, our linked data provide representative
information about the collaborative behaviour of New Zealand researchers during our period of
study.




1
  Explanations for this trend include increasing knowledge specialisation (Agrawal et al., 2016; Jones, 2009;
McDowell and Melvin, 1983), changing institutional incentives (Barnett et al., 1988; Bikard et al., 2015;
Hamermesh, 2013), and decreasing communication and travel costs (Agrawal and Goldfarb, 2008; Catalini et
al., 2019; Katz and Martin,1997; Kim et al., 2009; Rosenblat and Mobius, 2004).
2
  See, e.g., Boudreau et al. (2017), Fafchamps et al. (2010), Guimerà et al. (2005), and Rivera et al. (2010).
3
  The code used to conduct our analysis is available at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4041257.

                                                       1
We use our linked data to construct a sequence of co-authorship networks among Marsden Fund
applicants. These networks capture the birth and decay of active collaborations over time. The mean
degree in these networks grew between 2009 and 2018, consistent with the rise in co-authorship
shown in previous studies. Researchers with more successful Marsden Fund applications tended to
have more co-authors. However, this relationship may be driven by confounding factors, such as
researchers' willingness and ability to generate publishable research.

We control for such factors by analysing co-authorship dynamics econometrically. We construct
panel data on pairs of New Zealand researchers who collaborated as co-authors or as proposal team
co-members between the years 2000 and 2018. We use these data to model pairwise co-authorship
rates as functions of pairs' time-varying characteristics. Our models capture the relationship
between co-authorship and proposal outcomes, conditional upon pairs' match qualities and
assortative preferences. We control for selection bias and unobservable heterogeneity by including
pair fixed effects.

On average, and after controlling for observable and unobservable heterogeneity, researcher pairs
were 13.8 percentage points more likely to co-author in a given year if they had co-proposed during
the previous ten years than if they had not. This co-authorship rate was not significantly larger
among applicant pairs who received funding. However, increasing the lag between our dependent
and independent variables delivers the opposite result: funding, rather than mere participation,
promotes co-authorship. These patterns suggest that the "treatment effect" of research funding
contest participation on co-authorship is limited to successful participants only. Our estimates are
robust to dyadic clustering (Aronow et al., 2017; Graham, 2020) and to relaxing our pair selection
criteria.

Our estimates suggest three behaviours among pairs of New Zealand researchers. First, pairs who
were innately suited to co-authorship were more likely to submit Marsden Fund proposals and to
receive funding during our period of study. Second, pairs were more likely to submit proposals at
times when they had fruitful ideas and research success. Third, funding receipt increased the
probability of co-authorship several years later, either because it increased the publication output of
existing collaborations or because it encouraged new publication-focused collaborations.

This paper contributes to the literature on the impact of research funding on collaboration and
output. Ebadi and Schiffauerova (2013) survey this literature, noting that "knowledge about the
effects of funding on collaboration is very limited." Ayoubi et al. (2018), Defazio et al. (2009), and
Ubfal and Maffioli (2011) analyse the impact of funding on collaboration, with generally positive
results. However, none of these studies analyse the extent to which funding contests themselves

                                                    2
foster collaboration. We fill this gap in the literature by estimating how different stages of the grant
application process--submitting proposals and receiving funding--contribute to subsequent co-
authorship rates. Consequently, our analysis informs research and science funding system design by
showing which features of the funding application process appear to be the most successful at
encouraging collaboration.

This paper also contributes to the broader literature on research team formation. This literature
draws upon sociological theories of network formation, and large bibliometric databases, to explain
and analyse how teams form. For example, Ahmadpoor and Jones (2019) show that the quality of
teams (measured by the citation intensity of team outputs) is heavily influenced by the minimum of
the quality of teams' members (measured by previous team-member citation intensity). This leads
teams to assemble among researchers with similar citation profiles, reflecting the assortative
mechanisms through which collaborative networks evolve (Rivera et al., 2010). We analyse these
mechanisms in an econometric setting, using dyadic regression (Graham, 2020) to estimate the
determinants of pairwise co-authorship. We describe the empirical challenges associated with
constructing and analysing pairwise co-authorship data, offer solutions to these challenges, and
discuss how our solutions affect inference.


2 The Marsden Fund
The New Zealand Government established the Marsden Fund in 1994. The Fund "invests in excellent,
investigator-led research aimed at generating new knowledge, with long-term benefit to New
Zealand" (Royal Society of New Zealand, 2017). The Royal Society of New Zealand (RSNZ) administers
the Fund on behalf of the Marsden Fund Council, appointed by the Minister of Science and
Innovation. The Council oversees proposal assessment, and recommends to the RSNZ which
proposals to fund and how much funding to award. Funding rounds occur annually. Typical awards
last up to three years.

Proposal teams may contain one to eight researchers, who may be Principal Investigators (PIs),
Associate Investigators (AIs), post-doctoral researchers, post-graduate students, or research
assistants. Every team must contain a PI, who must be New Zealand-based. PIs and AIs cannot
belong to more than two proposal teams per funding round. Applicants cannot be PIs on more than
one proposal per funding round or, since 2011, more than one active grant. For example, if an
applicant receives funding as a PI then they cannot submit another proposal as a PI during the
following two years.




                                                    3
The Marsden Fund application process comprises two stages. In the first stage, teams submit a one-
page abstract of their proposed research. These abstracts are reviewed by discipline-specific
assessment panels. Each panel comprises six to ten panelists appointed by the RSNZ. The number of
proposals received by each panel determines the panel's share of the overall allocable budget.
Panels rank proposals on their potential scholarly impact, their rigour, and their ability to enhance
New Zealand's research capacity. Based on these rankings, each panel selects about 20% of their
received proposals to progress to the second stage.

In the second stage, teams submit "full" proposals detailing their research methods and objectives.
Panels rank full proposals based on external reviews, applicants' responses to those reviews, and
panelists' discussions and judgments. The highest ranked proposals within panels' budgets receive
funding. Historically, about half of the full proposals submitted to assessment panels have received
funding, implying an overall application success rate of about 10%.

The two stages of the Marsden Fund application process imply four levels of interaction among
applicants: not applying, submitting a first round proposal, submitting a second round proposal, and
receiving funding. Later levels require more intellectual engagement among researchers. To the
extent that such engagement leads to co-authorship, researchers with more successful Marsden
Fund applications may co-author more often, all else equal. Funded applicants may also feel obliged
to publish together so as to demonstrate the outputs of their grant.

Marsden Fund application success may also correlate positively with co-authorship due to selection.
Assessment panels rank proposals according to their expected impact, which may depend on
proposal team members' perceived ability to work together productively. However, Gush et al.
(2018) show that assessment panels' rankings in the second round are uncorrelated with proposal
teams' subsequent performance, conditional on their past performance. Thus, even if panels
indirectly attempt to select teams more likely to co-author, there is no evidence that these attempts
succeed.


3 Publication and proposal data
We use Scopus data on publications generated by New Zealand researchers and their international
co-authors between the years 1996 and 2018. These data contain 7,854,938 publications matched to
7,141,834 Scopus author IDs. However, this author ID count is unlikely to equal the true number of
unique authors in the data due to author name disambiguation issues, which Scopus' internal
systems appear to resolve only partially. Some author IDs errantly merge the records of multiple
authors, while some authors have multiple author IDs.


                                                   4
We link our Scopus data to data on Marsden proposals submitted between the years 2000 and 2018.
Our Marsden data describe 18,811 unique proposals, of which 22% proceeded to the second round
and 10% received funding. The research teams on these proposals drew from a set of 16,400
applicants from New Zealand and overseas.

We link Marsden applicants to Scopus author IDs by constructing two sets of applicant-author pairs.
Our first set comprises pairs with common email addresses and ORCID profiles. Our second set
comprises pairs for which the applicant and author have full names that share a cosine similarity no
smaller than 0.95. 4 We restrict this second set to pairs with (i) an exact full name match or (ii) at
least two proposal team co-members whose matched authors have co-authored with the same
matched author. 5

We use our sets of applicant-author matches to construct data on researchers with observable
proposal and publication behaviour. First, we take the two sets' union and discard all matches with
multiple Marsden applicants linked to the same Scopus author. This leaves 15,557 matches, 11,428
of which are one-to-one. Second, we remove all matches where an applicant is linked to 10 or more
authors. This leaves a set of 13,193 researchers, whom we associate with 15,438 unique Scopus
author IDs. We refer to this set as our "linked data" for the remainder of this paper.

Our linking procedure doubles as a data cleaning procedure. Our applicant-author matching criteria
disambiguate researcher profiles by cross-referencing the characteristics of researchers in our
publication and proposal data sets against each other. Researchers outside our linked data do not
have the same opportunities to have their characteristics cleaned. Therefore, we restrict our analysis
to the researchers in our linked data.

Although we have publication data from 1996 to 2018, we ignore publications during the years 1996
through 1999 so that the years covered by our linked publication and proposal data are consistent.
Thus, our period study comprises the years 2000 through 2018. Appendix Table 1 counts the unique
publications, authors, proposals, and applicants in our linked data for each of these years. Overall,
the researchers in our linked data generated 613,899 publications and 18,065 proposals during our
period of study.


4
  This threshold is small enough to catch slight mis-spellings and middle initials, and large enough for us to
efficiently compute the number of potential common co-authors between matched applicants. We use cosine
similarities, rather than other string metrics (e.g., Levenshtein distances), for its low computational cost and its
ability to handle character block rearrangements (e.g., mis-labelled forenames and surnames).
5
  Applicant-author pairs selected using criterion (ii) must have at least two proposal team co-members and at
least two co-authors, potentially biasing the observed extent of collaboration upwards due to selecting on
researchers with observable collaborators. Excluding such pairs from our analysis leaves our econometric
results unchanged.

                                                         5
4 Co-authorship network trends
Our ultimate goal to analyse whether, and to what extent, joint participation in the Marsden Fund
application process promotes co-authorship. We begin by describing how the co-authorship network
among Marsden Fund applicants evolved during our period of study. This description helps us
demonstrate the aggregate behaviour of the researchers discussed in this paper.

We construct a sequence of co-authorship networks among the 13,193 researchers in our linked
data. For each year   {2009, 2010, ... , 2018}, we define the set  of researchers who published
during the years ( - 9) through  and the set    ×  of pairs of researchers who co-
authored at least one publication during those years. We then define a co-authorship network 
with node set equal to  and edge set equal to  . Thus, nodes in  represent researchers while
edges join "recent" co-authors. Each researcher    has degree

                                  deg  ( ) = |{   : { ,  }   }|,

which counts researcher  's co-authors during the years ( - 9) through . Since each edge in 
joins exactly two researchers, the nodes in any non-empty subset  of  have mean degree

                                       1             2| |
                                          deg  ( ) =      .
                                      ||              ||
                                          


Our `rolling window' definition of  allows us to capture the birth and decay of active
collaborations over time. We could instead define  `cumulatively' as the network among
researchers who had ever co-authored before or during year . However, this cumulative definition
has two drawbacks. First, we do not observe publications prior to the year 1996, meaning that the
cumulative network created using our data may exclude some edges non-randomly. Second,
defining  cumulatively may create spurious relationships between observed co-authorship
patterns and proposal outcomes due to older researchers having more time to generate publications
and submit Marsden Fund proposals. Our rolling definition of  avoids both of these issues.

We partition the set of researchers in  based on whether they belonged to a funded, second
round, first round, or no proposal team(s) between the years ( - 9) and . The resulting partition
 comprises four disjoint parts--one for each `best' round reached. We then compute the mean
degree of researchers in each part, allowing us to determine whether researchers with different
proposal outcomes tended to have different co-authorship propensities among the researchers in
our linked data.




                                                 6
The number of researchers in the co-authorship network  grew from 11,808 in the year 2009 to
12,823 in the year 2018. Figure 1 shows the distribution of these researchers across parts    .
The percentage of researchers in  who never interacted with the Marsden Fund during the years
( - 9) through  fell from 42.2% in 2009 to 23.3% in 2018. In contrast, the percentage of
researchers in  who had worked on second round or funded proposals remained relatively
constant.

Co-authorship rates increased during our period of study. Figure 2 plots the normalised mean degree

                               100     1            200| |
                                       deg  ( ) =                                               (1)
                              | | - 1 | |         | |(| | - 1)
                                            


among researchers in each part    across years   {2009, 2010, ... , 2018}. Multiplying by
100/(| | - 1) converts node degrees from counts to percentages of possible co-authors. Thus, the
normalised mean degree (1) equals the mean percentage of nodes in  with whom researchers in 
co-author. This percentage grew for each part    during our period of study, consistent with the
rise in co-authorship shown in other studies (e.g., Adams et al., 2005; Wuchty et al., 2007).

More successful Marsden Fund applicants tended to have more co-authors in our data during our
period of study. For example, researchers who worked on funded proposals during the years 2009
through 2018 had, on average, 16.9 co-authors within our linked data during that period, compared
to 13.8 for researchers who progressed to the second round but never received funding and 9.1 for
researchers who submitted proposals but never progressed beyond the first round. These
differences suggest that researchers with different proposal outcomes have different co-authorship
patterns. The remainder of this paper analyses these patterns econometrically, allowing us to
control for observable and unobservable factors that may influence both proposal outcomes and co-
authorship.


5 Researcher pair panel construction
We use our linked publication and proposal data to construct panel data on researcher pairs.
Observations in these data correspond to researcher pairs in a given year. We use our panel data to
estimate models of the form

                               Pr = 1 = -1   +                                                  (2)

where

                                  1 if researchers  and  co-authored in year 
                    = 
                                  0                  otherwise,

                                                   7
()  ln /(1 - ) is the logit link function,  is a row vector of pair { , }'s time-varying
characteristics,  is a vector of coefficients to be estimated, and  is an error term. The following
subsections describe the variables included in  and the criteria we use to select pair panel
observations.

5.1 Covariate definitions
5.1.1 Proposal outcomes
Our primary interest is in how  covaries with the indicator variables  ,  ,
and  for the events in which researchers  and  were co-members on a first-round,
second round, and funded proposal team during the years ( - 10) through ( - 1). These three
variables capture pairs' shared proposal outcomes during the ten years prior to possible co-
authorship. The variables are cumulative in the sense that pairs who worked together on a funded
proposal during the first and second rounds have  =  =  = 1. Hence,
the coefficients on these variables capture the marginal increase in the probability of co-authorship
associated with progressing to each stage of the Marsden Fund application process. This increase
may arise from two distinct effects. First, it could reflect an increase in pair { , }'s propensity to
collaborate with each other. Second, it could reflect an increase in the frequency at which pair { , }'s
collaborative outputs are accepted for publication. We do not attempt to isolate these two effects
but encourage further research on methods for such isolation.

Co-authorship rates may also covary with other pair-level factors, such as research field overlaps,
prior co-authorship, collaborative propensities, and citation impacts. We control for these factors by
including additional covariates in the vector  . We describe these covariates below.

5.1.2 Research field overlaps
First, we control for the amount of overlap among the sets of fields in which researchers publish.
This overlap reveals similarity in research interest, which is "probably the single most important
factor in determining the likelihood of collaboration" (Fafchamps et al., 2010, p. 217).

We identify research fields using the All Science Journal Classification (ASJC) system used by Scopus.
This system matches each Scopus publication with one or more of 334 unique fields, such as Organic
Chemistry, Logic, and Numerical Analysis. Each field belongs to one of 27 field groups, such as
Chemistry and Mathematics. Appendix Table 2 presents the proportion of publications in our linked
data matched to each of these field groups.

Let  denote the number of publications by researcher  in field  , `fractionally' counted so that
publications with  matched fields contribute 1/ to the count for each researcher-field pair. Then

                                                     8
                                                       
                                                 =
                                                        

is the proportion of researcher  's publications in field  . We measure the research field overlap for
researchers  and  via the cosine similarity6

                                                            
                                      =                                 .
                                                    2   2
                                                         



This variable equals zero if researchers  and  never publish in the same field, and equals one if
researchers  and  publish in the same fields in the exact same proportions. Following Fafchamps et
al. (2010), we include both  and its square in the vector  . Researchers may prefer
coauthors with overlaps large enough to enable communication about field-specific ideas but small
enough to allow for knowledge and skill complementarities. Including a quadratic term allows us to
model this hypothesised inverted U-shaped relationship between co-authorship and overlap.

5.1.3 Prior co-authorship
Second, we control for whether researcher pairs co-authored recently by including in  the
indicator variable

                                                      1 if {,  }  -1
                                     = 
                                                      0    otherwise

for the event in which researchers  and  were adjacent in the co-authorship network -1. The
coefficient on  captures pairs' tendencies to co-author again if they co-authored during
the previous ten years.

5.1.4 Collaborative propensities
Third, we control for researchers' collaborative propensities. The more researchers collaborate, the
more likely we are to observe them co-authoring, independently of their Marsden Fund proposal
outcomes. Moreover, Figure 2 shows that more successful Marsden Fund applicants tend to have
more co-authors. Therefore, including collaborate propensities in  controls for base rates, and
mitigates omitted variable bias when we estimate coefficients on  ,  , and
 .

We measure researchers' collaborative propensities using their co-authorship network degrees. In
particular, we define


6
 Researchers' interests may change over time. However, the time-varying components of pairs' research
overlaps are small--that is, indistinguishable from noise--during the 19-year period spanned by our data.

                                                      9
                                    deg -1 ( ) if researcher  is a node in -1
                       = 
                                        0                 otherwise

for each researcher  and year , where deg -1 ( ) denotes researcher  's degree in the co-
authorship network -1 . The variable  counts the New Zealand and international
researchers in our linked data with whom researcher  co-authored during the years ( -
10) through ( - 1). This count varies at the researcher-year level. However, our model
specification (2) includes pair-year level covariates only. We generate such covariates by computing
the (adjusted) mean

                                         + 
                           =                -                                                          (3)
                                         2

and absolute difference

                                 =  -  

in co-author counts for each pair of researchers { , } and year . Subtracting  in (3) yields
the mean number of co-authors among researchers  and , excluding each other, during the years
( - 10) through ( - 1). Subtracting  also allows us to include it in  separately
without introducing collinearity.

Including  in (2) controls for researcher  and 's baseline propensities to co-author.

Consequently, we expect the coefficient on  to be positive and significant. In contrast,

including  in (2) controls for the extent to which researchers  and  have different
collaborative propensities. Consequently, the coefficient on  may be positive or negative,
depending on whether the co-authorship network exhibits negative or positive assortative mixing
with respect to node degrees (Newman, 2002).

5.1.5 Citation impacts
Last, we control for pairs' citation impacts. Researchers with more highly cited publications may be
more able to attract new collaborators due to having demonstrated willingness and ability to
conduct high quality research. Moreover, researchers with more highly cited publications tend to
have more publications overall, increasing the probability that we observe them co-author with
existing collaborators. Controlling for citation impacts helps us control for these sorting and base
rate effects.

We capture citation impacts as follows. First, we divide the number of citations accrued to each
publication in our data by the mean number of citations accrued to publications in the same year


                                                  10
and ASJC field globally. 7 This division makes citation counts comparable across years and fields
(Waltman et al., 2011). Then, for each researcher  and year , we sum the mean-normalised
citations accrued to researcher  's publications during the years ( - 10) through ( - 1). We
fractionalise these sums so that publications with  authors and  mean-normalised citations add
 / mean-normalised citations to each author's sum. This fractional summing procedure delivers a
mean-normalised citation score  for each researcher  and year . This score is greater for
researchers who published more highly cited papers during the years ( - 10) through ( - 1).
We then compute the mean

                                                       + 
                                         =
                                                       2

and absolute difference

                                       =  -  ,

and include both  and  in the covariate vector  .

The coefficients on  and  in (2) capture the extent to which researchers consider
citation impact when forming co-authorship teams. For example, more impactful researchers may
be more likely to become co-authors because they are more attractive to each other as productive,
career-enhancing collaborators, in which case we would expect a positive coefficient on  .
Likewise, more impactful researchers may avoid co-authoring with less impactful researchers, in
which case we would expect a negative coefficient on  .

5.1.6 Geographic proximity
Several studies examine the geography of research team formation processes. Teams may be more
likely to form among researchers at the same or geographically proximate institutions due to
relatively low communication and travel costs (Agrawal and Goldfarb, 2008; Catalini et al., 2019).
Likewise, institutional activities and facilities, such as departmental seminars and shared meeting
spaces, create environments for sharing ideas and forging collaborations.

Nevertheless, we do not include institutional co-location or geographic proximity as covariates in (2).
Our justifications are two-fold. First, the geographic information in our data is of very low quality.
Scopus often assigns all of a publication's authors to a single institution, which is seldom accurate. In
other cases, institutional affiliations are missing or out-of-date. Where affiliations are available and




7
    For publications matched to multiple ASJC fields, we use the mean of the field-specific means.

                                                        11
correct, they are not always associated with an address, preventing calculations of geographic
proximity.

Second, New Zealand is geographically small: all research institutions in New Zealand share the same
time zone and are within a few hours travel from each other. Indeed, Aref et al. (2008) document
widespread cross-institutional collaboration in New Zealand. Therefore, the effect of geography on
collaboration is likely to be less important in New Zealand than in other contexts.

5.2 Restrictions on panel data observations
Our linked data contain 13,193 researchers, implying

                                13,193 × (13,193 - 1)
                                                      = 87,021,028
                                          2

potential researcher pairs. It is computationally infeasible to analyse a set of this size. Moreover,
most pairs never collaborated: 82,240 (0.09%) were co-authors and 40,541 (0.05%) were proposal
team co-members during our period of study. 8 Such sparsity prevents reliable estimation of (2)
because the heterogeneity among pairs who never co-author likely exceeds the mean differences
between pairs who did and did not co-author. Sampling pairs randomly would lower the
computational burden but maintain our data's sparsity.

The researchers in our data also face heterogeneous incentives to submit, and collaborate on,
Marsden Fund proposals. Our data contain New Zealand and international researchers who
collaborated on Marsden Fund proposals. However, international researchers are not able to receive
direct funding support for their time or institutional costs spent collaborating on Marsden funded
projects (Royal Society of New Zealand, 2017). If individual financial incentives contribute to the
relationship between co-authorship and proposal team co-membership, then pooling researchers
who can and cannot benefit from Marsden funding may bias our estimate of the strength of that
relationship.

We overcome these challenges--large and sparse data, and heterogeneous incentives--by
restricting our analysis to the 67,569 pairs of New Zealand researchers who collaborated at least
once during our period of study, either as co-authors or as proposal team co-members. 9 We denote
the set of such pairs by  .




8
  17,494 pairs were both co-authors and proposal team co-members. Among these pairs, 41% were co-authors
first, 46% were co-members first, and 13% were first-time co-authors and co-members in the same year.
9
  Lack of data prevents us from considering pairs who attempted joint work but neither published nor
submitted Marsden Fund proposals jointly.

                                                   12
We also restrict our panel data to the years during which both researchers in each pair { ,  }  
were `active'. We identify researchers as active during the years between their first publication or
proposal, and their last publication or proposal.

We construct our observation set as follows. First, we let  = {2000, 2001, ... , 2018} be the set of
years for which we have publication and proposal data, and let  be the set of researchers in our
data who were active in year    . The Cartesian product

                                  ×  = {,  }:    and    

of  with itself contains all pairs of researchers who were both active in year . By definition, every
pair { ,  }   must belong to the product  ×  for some year    . However, we want our panel
data to include all years during which both  and  were active. Such years belong to the intersection

                                      = {  : {,  }   ×  }


of the sets  = {   :    } and  = {  :    } of years in which researchers  and  were

active. Thus, our panel data contain observations of  and  for each pair-year tuple
({ , }, ) belonging to the set

                         ({ ,  }, ): {,  }   and      and   2010 .


We identify 105,287 pairs of researchers who collaborated as co-authors or proposal team co-
members during our period of study. Restricting our analysis to these pairs may bias our coefficient
estimates if collaborating pairs' characteristics differ systematically from non-collaborating pairs'.
Further restricting to the 67,569 pairs of New Zealand researchers who collaborated may exacerbate
this bias. We investigate this possibility by comparing the mean and standard deviation of 
and our covariates within three panels: random pairs of researchers, pairs of researchers who ever
collaborated, and pairs of New Zealand researchers who ever collaborated. We generate the panel
of random pairs by uniformly sampling 105,287 pairs from the set of pairs of researchers who were
ever active concurrently during our period of study. This random panel provides an unbiased
estimate of our covariates' distributions among all pairs in our linked data who were active
concurrently.

Table 1 presents the sample means and standard deviations of the variables in our random pair,
collaborator, and New Zealand collaborator panels. We lose the first ten years of each panel as
starting values for  . Consequently, pairs containing researchers who were inactive after 2009 fall
out of our analysis. The variables  ,  ,  , and  have zero means in
our panel of random pairs because most pairs of researchers in our data never collaborated.

                                                    13
Restricting to collaborators increases all four of these means, and restricting to New Zealand

collaborators increases them further. These restrictions also increase the mean of  by

increasing the representation of researchers with high collaborative propensities. The means of
 suggest that New Zealand researchers in our data had lower citation impacts than non-
New Zealanders. This could be because non-New Zealanders appear in our data only if they have
collaborated with a New Zealander. Such international collaboration reveals a commitment to
research and to pursuing topics of global interest, which may lead to an increase in mean-normalised
citation scores. 10

Table 1 shows that our panel of New Zealand researchers who collaborated differs statistically from
the panel of all pairs in our data who were active concurrently. This difference arises due to non-
random selection. However, the "both are New Zealanders" and "ever collaborated" criteria we use
to select pairs are time-invariant. Therefore, we can control for selection bias by including pair-level
fixed effects in the error term  in (2) because such effects are perfectly collinear with all time-
invariant pair characteristics. We assess the robustness of our results to our panel selection criteria
in subsection 6.3.


6 Logistic regression estimates
We estimate (2) using the panel of collaborating New Zealander pairs described in the right-most

column of Table 1. For each variable    ,  ,  ,  , we define

the zero-indicator variable

                                                     1 if  = 0
                                          = 
                                                     0 otherwise

and the adjusted natural logarithm

                                                      0       if  = 0
                                       =                                                                 (4)
                                                  ln  otherwise,

which is well-defined because   0. We include   and   in  in place of  . Thus,
we have

                           = 0
                               +1   + 2   + 3  


10
   Alternatively, international collaborators may have access to larger networks of colleagues among which to
disseminate their research, leading to greater visibility of such research and more opportunities to attract
citations.

                                                     14
                              +4  

                              +5     + 6    

                              +7    + 8   

                              +9    + 10   
                              +11    + 12   
                                          2
                              +13   + 14  


for each pair { , } and year , where 0 , 1 , ... , 14 are coefficients to be estimated. Replacing our
degree and citation covariates with their zero-indicators and adjusted natural logarithms allows us
to capture the positive skew in the distributions of these covariates. Such skewness may arise from a
cumulative advantage process (de Solla Price, 1976; Merton, 1968) wherein `success breeds success.'

We lose the first ten years of our data as starting values for  . This leaves 247,110 observations
among 46,052 pairs of New Zealand researchers between 2010 and 2018. Table 2 summarises the
distributions of  and our covariates across these observations. The table excludes the zero-
indicator variables for our co-authorship propensity and citation covariates. However, the means of
these excluded variables are captured by the "% zero" statistic for the corresponding adjusted
natural logarithms.

Table 3 summarises our regression estimates. Column (1) shows how  covaries with
 ,  , and  . Pairs who were co-members on Marsden Fund proposal teams
during the previous ten years were more likely to co-author than pairs who were not co-members
during that period. Pairs who worked together on funded proposals were most likely to co-author.
On average, pairs who worked on funded proposals were 8.1 percentage points more likely to co-
author than pairs who worked on first and second round proposals but did not receive funding. 11

Column (2) controls for pairs' collaborative propensities, citation impacts, and research field
overlaps. Adding these controls changes the estimated coefficients on our proposal outcome
variables, implying that our controls capture determinants of co-authorship that covary with
proposal outcomes. In particular, our controls remove the co-authorship rate gain from working
together on second round proposals and reduce the gain from working together on funded
proposals. This could be because proposal outcomes are driven partially by pairs' match qualities,
the observable components of which are captured by our control variables.



11
  We obtain this estimate by computing the average partial effect of a one unit increase in  using
the model and data in column (1) of Table 3.

                                                   15
The strongest predictor of whether pairs co-authored in year  was whether they co-authored during
the years ( - 10) through ( - 1), captured by the variable  . The positive coefficient

on    reflects a base rate phenomenon: pairs were more likely to co-author with each

other if they co-authored more often in general. Likewise, the positive coefficient in  
implies that pairs were more likely to co-author if they were more productive.

The positive coefficient on  in column (2) suggests that pairs who published in more similar
fields were more likely to co-author. We estimate a convex relationship between  and
 , contradicting our hypothesised inverted U-shaped relationship. This may be due to our
panel selection criteria, which truncate the distribution of research field overlaps among the pairs
we analyse relative to the set of all pairs in our linked data.

Similarly, column (2) suggests a positive and significant relationship between co-authorship and
 , in contrast to Ahmadpoor and Jones' (2019) claim that teams tend to assemble among
researchers with similar citation impacts. The positive coefficient on   implies negative
assortative matching: pairs were more likely to co-author if their citation impacts differed than if
they were equal. This result likely reflects the inter-generational nature of Marsden Fund proposal
teams, which often comprise seasoned academics working with post-graduate students and post-
docs. 12

The estimates in columns (1) and (2) of Table 3 may be biased by unobservable pair- and year-
specific factors that are correlated with our covariates of interest. They may also be biased from
restricting our data to pairs of New Zealand researchers who ever collaborated during our period of
study. We control for such biases by including pair and year fixed effects. However, our fixed effect
estimator requires a dependent variable that, for each pair of researchers, varies across time. Thus,
including fixed effects removes all pairs of researchers { , } with no variation in  . This
leaves 124,619 observations among 19,091 pairs. 13 Table 2 reports descriptive statistics for this
restricted panel. The means of  and  are larger in our restricted panel than in
our full panel because our restricted panel excludes pairs who never co-author.

Including fixed effects changes both the observations and the source of variation used to identify
coefficient estimates. We present the intermediate effect of restricting to pairs with variation in
 in columns (3) and (4) of Table 3, which re-estimate the models in columns (1) and (2)

12
   During our period of study, 61% of funding contracts awarded had budget for post-graduate students and
36% had budget for post-docs.
13
   Among the 26,961 pairs with no variation in  , 1,625 (6%) co-authored every year in which they
were active concurrently. Among these 1,625 pairs, 726 (44.7%) were active concurrently for one year only.

                                                     16
using our restricted panel. Columns (2) and (4) present qualitatively similar patterns. Pairs who were
co-members on first round or funded proposal teams were more likely to co-author. In contrast,
pairs who were co-members on second round teams, but not funded teams, were not significantly
more likely to co-author. These patterns may reflect successful identification of productive teams by
assessment panels. If more productive teams were more likely to receive funding then pairs with
 = 1 but  = 0 will, all else equal, be less likely to co-author, driving a negative
coefficient on  . However, it is unclear whether panels can successfully identify productive
teams in the second round (Gush et al., 2018).

Column (5a) introduces pair and year fixed effects. This allows us to identify the effects of cross-
sectional variation in pairs' characteristics, controlling for the components of those characteristics
that do not vary over time. However, we lose the ability to identify coefficients on  and
2
  separately because these covariates are perfectly collinear with our pair fixed effects.
Including fixed effects may bias our coefficient estimates due to the incidental parameters problem
(Neyman and Scott, 1948): our data contain at most nine observations with which to estimate each
pair fixed effect. We correct for such bias using the analytical procedure suggested by Fernández-Val
and Weidner (2016).

To ease interpretation, column (5b) reports average partial affects (APEs) using the estimated model
and data in column (5a). These APEs estimate the mean change in  resulting from a one-
unit increase in each covariate while holding other covariates constant. For example, the APE of
0.138 associated with  implies that, on average and holding all else constant, pairs who co-
submitted first round proposals during the years ( - 10) through ( - 1) were 13.8 percentage
points more likely to co-author in year  than pairs who did not co-submit such proposals during
those years. In contrast,  and  have small and insignificant APEs. These patterns
suggest that applying for Marsden Funding promoted co-authorship, but more successful applicants
were not significantly more likely to co-author than less successful applicants when we control for
observable and unobservable heterogeneity. This result may reflect a self-selection effect, wherein
pairs with greater innate match qualities were more likely to submit proposals and receive funding.
Including pair fixed effects controls this effect, washing out the association of co-authorship with
proposal submission and funding receipt. The positive coefficient on  would then capture
another self-selection effect: pairs were more likely to submit proposals when they shared research
ideas worth pursuing to publication independently of their proposals' outcomes.

Columns (5a) and (5b) in Table 3 also show how  covaries with co-authorship propensities
and citation impacts after controlling for unobservable pair- and year-specific factors. Pairs who co-

                                                   17
authored during the years ( - 10) through ( - 1) were 32.8 percentage points less likely to co-
author in year  than pairs who did not co-author during those years, on average and holding our
other covariates constant. In contrast, pairs with greater mean collaboration propensities and
citation impacts were more likely to co-author. Together, these patterns suggest that pairs were
more likely to co-author if they had not co-authored recently, and if they were at a stage in their
careers when they were co-authoring widely and publishing impactfully.

While suggestive, the results presented in Table 3 do not establish a causal link between proposal
outcomes and co-authorship. First, the Marsden Fund application process may simply act as a screen
that filters out unsuccessful collaborations. Preparing proposals allows researchers to trial
collaborations before committing to research projects. These trials allow researchers to learn about
their match qualities and, consequently, whether they would be likely to collaborate productively.
Teams among researchers with low quality matches may choose not to submit proposals, leaving
only those collaborations likely to generate co-authored publications. In this way, our finding that
proposal submission covaries positively and significantly with co-authorship rates may represent a
self-selection effect rather than a treatment effect. Controlling for citation impacts, collaborative
propensities, research overlaps, and pair fixed effects helps control for variation in match qualities,
and isolate the variation in whether pairs submitted proposals and received funding. However, this
isolation may be partial only.

Second, even if our covariates isolate the variation in proposal outcomes fully, we cannot rule out
reverse causality. Pairs may co-author to demonstrate their ability to collaborate productively and,
consequently, improve their chances of receiving funding. Alternatively, pairs may apply for funding
for ongoing research projects (or derivatives of those projects) that generate publications soon after
the application process ends, independently of the application's outcome. If these behaviours are
systematic among the researchers in our panel data then our coefficient estimates will be biased
(upwards) due to endogeneity. We address this issue in the following subsection.

6.1 Varying publication lags
Our estimates in Table 3 come from modelling  as a function of pair {,  }'s characteristics
in year ( - 1). However, decisions to co-author may be made several years before we observe
such co-authorship in our data. Research projects can take years to complete, submit to journals,
and pass through peer review. Thus, to the extent that our covariates  capture factors relevant to
researchers' co-authorship decisions, we may obtain better estimates of these factors' strengths by
lagging our independent variables by more than one year.



                                                   18
Table 4 reports coefficient estimates for the model in column (5a) of Table 3 when we lag our
covariates by one, two, three, and four years. Each additional lag drops an additional year of data.
Moreover, because our fixed effect estimator requires variation in  across years , each lag
also drops pairs with no such variation during the remaining years. 14

Table 4 shows that  covaries strongly with  for short publication lags only. In
contrast,  covaries strongly with  when we assume three or four year
publication lags. We attribute this shift in strength to two effects. First, increasing the lag between
 and our proposal outcome dummies reduces the impact of endogeneity bias because
most collaborations pursued prior to submitting proposals would be complete before we observe
 's value. Second, increasing the lag between  and  more accurately captures
the time it takes to conduct and publish the research outlined in researchers' Marsden Fund
proposals. 15 For these two reasons, we believe that the right-most columns in Table 4 provide our
closest estimates of the `treatment effect' of different proposal outcomes on co-authorship rates.

The patterns in Table 4 suggest that our results are unlikely to reflect self-selection into the Marsden
Fund application process by pairs with high innate match qualities. If such selection was systematic
in our data, then the relationship between co-authorship and proposal outcomes, conditional on
innate match quality (captured by our pair fixed effects), would not change when we introduce
additional lags in our independent variables. However, Table 4 shows precisely such change.
Likewise, if the positive coefficient on  in columns (5a) and (5b) of Table 3 represents only
the fact that productive collaborators submitted proposals when they had ideas to pursue, then that
positive coefficient should persist when we allow more time for pairs' ideas to spawn co-authored
publications. In contrast, Table 4 shows that the relationship between co-authorship and proposal
submission disappears when we allow for publication delays.

However, we cannot rule out selection effects entirely. To receive Marsden Funding, proposal teams
must have a high-quality research idea, and demonstrate serious commitment to working together
on that idea and pursuing it to publication. Thus, one might expect that funded teams may have
been more likely to co-author independently of funding receipt. This "selectivity problem" (Jaffe,
2002, p. 22) is common to evaluations of all research funding mechanisms in which funding is
awarded to proposals judged in advance most likely to succeed. However, we find no persistent


14
   Re-estimating the model with a one-year lag among pairs remaining after taking each additional lag
generates quantitatively and qualitatively similar estimates. Therefore, the patterns shown in Table 4 are
unlikely to be an artefact of restricting the set of pairs we analyse.
15
   Most Marsden grants are for three years, so if funding itself facilitates publication then four years makes
sense as a publication lag.

                                                       19
`effect' of proposal submission or progression to the second round, but a significant longer-term
effect of funding receipt. Viewing our results in combination with Gush et al. (2018), who find that
second round assessment panels show no tendency to award higher ranks to proposals that
subsequently have the most publication success, there appears to be little room for selection
processes to explain away our results.

6.2 Comparison with previous studies
Ayoubi et al. (2018) find that Swiss scientists are more likely to co-author with research grant co-
applicants if their proposals receive funding. However, the authors do not control for whether
scientists applied for funding when estimating this effect. Thus, their estimate compares funded
applicants to the combined pool of unfunded applicants and non-applicants, rather than the more
relevant comparison of funded to unfunded applicants that we present in Tables 3 and 4. Table 4
shows that Ayoubi et al.'s finding is consistent with the patterns in our data when we allow more
time for proposal outcomes to influence co-authorship rates.

Using Web of Science data on journal articles published between 1945 and 2005, Ahmadpoor and
Jones (2019) find that teams tend to assemble among researchers with similar citation impacts. If
this were true for researchers in our data then we would expect a negative and significant
coefficient on  . In contrast, we estimate a positive coefficient on   using
the in column (2) of Table 3, which is closest of our models to the analysis of time-invariant
characteristics that Ahmadpoor and Jones conduct. 16 However, our estimate is economically small: it
implies that, on average and holding all else constant, doubling the difference in pairs' citation
impacts corresponds to a 0.4 percentage point rise in the probability of co-authorship.

Ahmadpoor and Jones (2019) do not control for pair-level factors that covary with similarities in
citation impact. One such factor is whether pairs co-authored a highly cited paper. If this occurs
often then pairs with many citations will appear to work together, but only because they attracted
their citations while working together rather than because prior citations were an attractive force.
We control for this scenario by including  as a covariate in (2). Fafchamps et al. (2010)
control for pair characteristics in a similar logistic regression setting to ours and estimate similarly
weak sorting with respect to citation impacts.

Finally, the coefficient on   is insignificant in all the models presented in Table 4. Such
insignificance suggests that researchers in our data may sort into teams based on the time-constant



16
  Introducing pair fixed effects controls for time-invariant characteristics, meaning that our coefficients are
identified using within-pair variation in researchers' characteristics over time.

                                                       20
component of citation impacts but not the time-varying component, consistent with Ahmadpoor
and Jones' analysis of time-invariant characteristics. However, our estimates imply negative sorting
with respect to such characteristics in our data, whereas Ahmadpoor and Jones (2019) find positive
sorting in their Web of Science data. We encourage further research on this issue to advance our
understanding of the assortative mechanisms through which researchers form teams.

6.3 Robustness tests
We believe that our coefficient estimates in the right-most column of Table 4 are the closest to the
coefficients in the true data generating process. Therefore, we focus on these estimates throughout
our robustness tests.

6.3.1 Adjusting standard errors for dyadic clustering
The standard errors in Tables 3 and 4 may be biased by non-independence among observations in
our data. Such non-independence arises due to dyadic clustering (Aronow et al., 2017; Graham,
2020). The co-authorship rates for pairs { , } and {, } covary because they share researcher  in
common, whose collaboration choices affect both  and  . Thus, our estimation
errors are likely to be correlated across pair observations. Failing to control for such correlation may
lead us to under-estimate our standard errors and, consequently, over-estimate the statistical
significance of our coefficients (Cameron and Miller, 2014).

Estimating dyadic cluster-robust standard errors requires estimating the variance of our coefficient
estimates under dyadic clustering. Study of such variance estimators began only recently (Graham,
2020). Aronow et al. (2017) propose the sandwich-type estimator

                              = (  )-1 (  (    ))(  )-1 ,
                             

where  is the design matrix,   is the transpose of ,  = diag( (1 -  )) is a diagonal

matrix computed using the predicted probabilities  = -1   ,  is a square matrix with  th

entry

            1 if the pairs associated with observations  and  share a common researcher
      = 
            0                                   otherwise,

 is the vector of residuals, and     is the element-wise product of the matrices  and   . This
product captures the covariances of the errors associated with observations of pairs with common
researchers. Aronow et al. show that  is a consistent estimator for the variance of the vector  of




                                                   21
coefficient estimates under dyadic clustering. Thus, we can obtain dyadic cluster-robust standard
error estimates by computing  and taking the square roots of its diagonal entries. 17

Table 5 compares the standard errors on the coefficient estimates in the right-most column of Table
4 before and after adjusting for dyadic clustering. Adjusting for dyadic clustering increases our
standard errors by a factor of about 1.25­2. However, these increases barely affect our inferences
because the unadjusted standard errors are small.

6.3.2 Relaxing selection criteria
Our estimates in Table 4 come from analysing pairs of New Zealand researchers who ever
collaborated during our period of study. However, New Zealanders may differ systematically in their
co-authorship patterns to non-New Zealanders. Likewise, restricting our data to pairs who
collaborate may lead us to draw different inferences than we would from analysing the entire set of
potential pairs if such analysis were computationally feasible.

We investigate these possibilities as follows. First, we re-estimate the model in the right-most
column of Table 4 among the researcher pairs in the "Collaborators" panel described in Table 1,
before and after including fixed effects. We present the resulting coefficient estimates in columns (3)
and (4) of Table 6. To ease comparison, we present coefficients estimated using the "NZ
collaborators" panel in columns (1) and (2). Expanding our data to include pairs containing non-New
Zealand researchers produces quantitatively and qualitatively similar estimates. Thus, it appears that
our inferences are not sensitive to restricting to pairs of New Zealand researchers.

Second, we re-estimate the model in the right-most column of Table 4 among the pooled set of
researcher pairs in the "Random pairs" and "Collaborators" panels described in Table 1. We report
the resulting coefficient estimates in column (5) of Table 6. Including pairs from the "Random pairs"
panel weakens the selection on observable collaboration while maintaining computational
feasibility. 18 Pooling the "Random pairs" and "Collaborators" panels preserves the positive
association between co-authorship and funding receipt. Relaxing our selection criteria increases the


17
   Computing    is very computer-intensive when there are many observations and covariates. With 
observations and  covariates, computing the  ×  "bread" matrix (  )-1 requires multiplying the  × 
matrix  by the  ×  matrix , pre-multiplying the result by the  ×  matrix   , and inverting the resulting
matrix. Computing the  ×  "meat" matrix   (    ) requires similar multiplications but no inversion.
The bread and meat matrices can be computed efficiently when  and  are small, or when  is sparse. But
the bread and meat matrices are generally not sparse themselves. Therefore, computing   requires
multiplying three dense  ×  matrices, which is computer-intensive when  is large (e.g., when there are
many fixed effects).
18
   We do not estimate a fixed effects model among pairs in the pooled panel because we would have to drop
pairs with no variation in  , which includes all pairs who never collaborate. Therefore, we would
obtain the same coefficient estimates as in column (4) of Table 6.

                                                   22
coefficient on  and decreases the coefficient on  . Both coefficients are significant at
the 5% level using our pooled panel data. However, this significance disappears when we control for
pair and year fixed effects.

The coefficients on  ,   , and   are larger in column (5) than in

columns (1) and (3). This is likely because the co-authorship network among researchers in the
pooled pair panel is relatively sparse, so variables that covary with local network density provide
relatively strong signals of which pairs are more likely to co-author. Column (5) shows a concave
relationship between co-authorship and research overlap, consistent with our initial hypothesis.
Thus, the convex relationships we estimate in columns (1) and (3) appear to arise from restricting
our data to collaborating pairs, which truncates the distribution of research field overlaps.


7 Conclusion
Scientific collaboration has grown in incidence and importance. Consequently, there has been an
increasing interest in understanding its determinants and consequences. Researchers' decisions to
collaborate are inextricably linked with their decisions regarding research topics and efforts to
secure funding for their research. In this paper, we focus on the interactions among the seeking of
research funding, success in winning grants, and the publication of co-authored research papers.
Because each of these events is related positively to the quality of research ideas, to inclinations to
collaborate, and to the strength or success of collaborations, the events are all positively associated
with each other. We demonstrate that such associations exist, and we use the structure of our data
and of the New Zealand research funding process to tease out the extent to which participation in
that process may increase co-authorship causally.

New Zealand provides a useful laboratory for studying these issues. This is, in part, because the RSNZ
has kept excellent data on all Marsden Fund applications and makes those data available for
research purposes. Further, because the Marsden Fund is central to the research enterprise in New
Zealand, the set of researchers who interacted with the Fund during our period of study provides a
representative sample of New Zealand's research system overall. Finally, New Zealand is a small,
isolated country, which provides all of its researchers and scientists roughly equal access to
collaborators. To exploit this situation, we construct a dataset comprised of almost all researchers
who interacted with the Marsden Fund between the years 2000 and 2018, their proposals and
publications during that period, and their collaborators on such proposals and publications.

Co-authorship rose among the researchers in our data during our period of study. The extent of co-
authorship was highest among researchers who received Marsden Funding, lowest among

                                                   23
researchers who did not apply for funding, and at an intermediate level among researchers who
applied for, but did not receive, funding.

We analyse pairs of collaborators over time, allowing us to identify both (i) innate attributes of pairs
that affect their propensity to co-author and (ii) time-varying factors associated with the probability
that they co-author in a given year. Pairs were more likely to co-author in a given year if they had co-
authored previously, if they co-authored with others often, if they published in similar fields, or if
their prior publications were more highly cited. Interestingly, pairs were also more likely to co-
author if their prior citation impacts differed, which cuts against an expectation of assortative
matching of researchers of similar prestige into teams.

Turning to the relationship between co-authorship and Marsden Fund proposal outcomes, we find
that pairs who co-submitted proposals were more likely to co-author and that more successful co-
submissions were associated with greater co-authorship rates. When we control for observable and
unobservable researcher and pair characteristics using pair fixed effects, we find that there remains
an association between co-authorship and proposal submission, but no further effect of funding
receipt. In contrast, when we increase the delay between proposal outcomes and potential co-
authorship, we find no association with submission but a significant association with funding.

Our results suggest that funding receipt increased co-authorship rates causally. We justify this claim
by noting (i) the positive association between funding and delayed co-authorship, (ii) the lack of
association between funding and contemporaneous co-authorship, and (iii) evidence from previous
analysis (Gush et al., 2018) that assessment panels cannot identify which second round proposal
teams are most likely to generate successful publications. However, we cannot determine whether
this `funding effect' comes directly from the resources conveyed, or indirectly through the generic
benefits associated with the signal and prestige of winning a Marsden grant. 19

Our results complement and amplify those of Ayoubi et al. (2018), who find that funded grant
applicants are more likely to co-author than other researchers, but do not compare co-authorship
among funded teams with that of unfunded teams. Our results also connect to those of Gush et al
(2018), who find that Marsden Funding increases the overall publication and citation rates of teams
relative to that of unsuccessful applicant teams, but do not examine the collaboration patterns
underlying that effect. Together, these findings raise the question of whether funding, in addition to



19
  We do not analyse whether the funding effect raises co-authorship overall. Funded proposal team co-
members may co-author with each other instead of potential collaborators outside the Marsden Fund
application process. Such potential substitution effects are intrinsic to the partial equilibrium analysis that we
conduct.

                                                        24
increasing the likelihood of co-authored publication, also increases the quality of co-authored
publications (e.g., as measured by citations or journal impact factor). We leave this question for
future research.

We think of co-authorship as situating researchers and scientists within a complex network of
collaborative relationships. However, we do not analyse in detail how this network evolves. It is
interesting that the pairwise propensity to co-author is associated with co-authorship overall, even
after controlling for pair fixed effects. This hints at a preferential attachment process in which
experience with collaboration breeds further collaboration. However, such a process is difficult to
distinguish from one in which unobserved propensity to collaborate changes over time for other
reasons. Data of the kind constructed in this paper could, in principle, permit investigation of these
more complex dynamics.

Finally, we say nothing about exactly why pairs of researchers (or larger teams) decide to
collaborate. Presumably, collaboration facilitates the combination of complementary knowledge and
skills (in addition, perhaps, to simply making research more enjoyable). Understanding the nature
and significance of these complementarities would require granular and complex information about
individual researchers that is hard to conceive, let alone collect. However, at some point, further
advancing our understanding of team formation processes will require taking on this data challenge.


References
Adams, J. D., Black, G. C., Clemmons, J. R., and Stephan, P. E. (2005). Scientific teams and
        institutional collaborations: Evidence from U.S. universities, 1981-1999. Research Policy,
        34(3):259­285.

Agrawal, A. and Goldfarb, A. (2008). Restructuring research: communication costs and the
        democratization of university innovation. American Economic Review, 98(4):1578­1590.

Agrawal, A., Goldfarb, A., and Teodoridis, F. (2016). Does knowledge accumulation increase the
        returns to collaboration? American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 8(1):100­128.

Ahmadpoor, M. and Jones, B. F. (2019). Decoding team and individual impact in science and
        invention. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 116(28):13885­13890.

Aref, S., Friggens, D., and Hendy, S. (2008). Analysing scientific collaborations of New Zealand
        institutions using Scopus bibliometric data. Proceedings of the Australasian Computer
        Science Week Multiconference.



                                                   25
Aronow, P. M., Samii, C., and Assenova, V. A. (2017). Cluster-robust variance estimation of dyadic
        data. Political Analysis, 23(4):564­577.

Ayoubi, C., Pezzoni, M., and Visentin, F. (2018). The important thing is not to win, it is to take part:
        What if scientists benefit from participating in research grant competitions? Research Policy,
        48(1):84­97.

Barnett, A. H., Ault, R. W., and Kaserman, D. L. (1988). The rising incidence of co-authorship in
        economics: Further evidence. Review of Economics and Statistics, 70(3):539­543.

Bikard, M., Murray, F., and Gans, J. S. (2015). Exploring trade-offs in the organisation of scientific
        work: Collaboration and scientific reward. Management Science, 61(7):1473­1495.

Boudreau, K. J., Brady, T., Ganguli, I., Gaule, P., Guinan, E., Hollenberg, A., and Lakhani, K. R. (2017).
        A field experiment on search costs and the formation of scientific collaborations. Journal of
        Economics and Statistics, 99(4):565­576.

Cameron, A. C. and Miller, D. L. (2014). Robust inference for dyadic data. Technical report, University
        of California, Davis.

Catalini, C., Fons-Rosen, C., and Gaulé, P. (2019). How do travel costs shape collaboration?
        Management Science, 66(8):3295­3798.

de Solla Price, D. (1976). A general theory of bibliometric and other cumulative advantage processes.
        Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 27(5):292­306.

Defazio, D., Lockett, A., and Wright, M. (2009). Funding incentives, collaborative dynamics and
        scientific productivity: Evidence from the EU framework program. Research Policy,
        38(2):293­305.

Ductor, L. (2015). Does co-authorship lead to higher academic productivity? Oxford Bulletin of
        Economics and Statistics, 77(3):385­407.

Ebadi, A. and Schiffauerova, A. (2013). Impact of funding on scientific output and collaboration: A
        survey of literature. Journal of Information and Knowledge Management, 12(4):1350037.

Fafchamps, M., Goyal, S., and van der Leij, M. J. (2010). Matching and network effects. Journal of the
        European Economic Association, 8(1):203­231.

Fernández-Val, I. and Weidner, M. (2016). Individual and time effects in nonlinear panel models with
        large , . Journal of Econometrics, 192(1):291­213.



                                                    26
Graham, B. S. (2020). Dyadic regression. In Graham, B. S. and de Paula, A., editors, The Econometric
        Analysis of Network Data. Academic Press, Amsterdam.

Guimerà, R., Uzzi, B., Spiro, J., and Amaral, L. A. N. (2005). Team assembly mechanisms determine
        collaboration network structure and team performance. Science, 308(5722):697­702.

Gush, J., Jaffe, A., Larsen, V., and Laws, A. (2018). The effect of public funding on research output:
        the New Zealand Marsden Fund. New Zealand Economic Papers, 52(2):227­248.

Hamermesh, D. S. (2013). Six decades of top economics publishing: Who and how? Journal of
        Economic Literature, 51(1):162­172.

Jaffe, A. B. (2002). Building program evaluation into the design of public research-support
        programmes. Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 18:22­34.

Jones, B. F. (2009). The burden of knowledge and the "death of the renaissance man": is innovation
        getting harder? Review of Economic Studies, 76(1):283­317.

Katz, J. S. and Martin, B. R. (1997). What is research collaboration? Research Policy, 26(1):1­18.

Kim, E. H., Morse, A., and Zingales, L. (2009). Are elite universities losing their competitive edge?
        Journal of Financial Economics, 93(3):353­381.

McDowell, J. M. and Melvin, M. (1983). The determinants of co-authorship: An analysis of the
        economics literature. Review of Economics and Statistics, 65(1):155­160.

Merton, R. K. (1968). The Matthew effect in science. Science, 159(3810):56­63.

Newman, M. E. J. (2002). Assortative mixing in networks. Physical Review Letters, 89(20):208701.

Neyman, J. and Scott, E. L. (1948). Consistent estimates based on partially consistent observations.
        Econometrica, 16(1):1­32.

Rivera, M. T., Soderstrom, S. B., and Uzzi, B. (2010). Dynamics of dyads in social networks:
        Assortative, relational, and proximity mechanisms. Annual Review of Sociology, 36:91­115.

Rosenblat, T. S. and Mobius, M. M. (2004). Getting closer or drifting apart? Quarterly Journal of
        Economics, 119(3):971­1009.

Royal Society of New Zealand (2017). Marsden Fund Terms of Reference. Retrieved from
        https://www.royalsociety.org.nz/what-we-do/funds-and-opportunities/marsden/about/tor/
        on June 11, 2020.



                                                   27
Ubfal, D. and Maffioli, A. (2011). The impact of funding on research collaboration: Evidence from a
        developing country. Research Policy, 4(9):1269­1279.

Waltman, L., van Eck, N. J., van Leeuwen, T. N., Visser, M. S., and van Raan, A. F. J. (2011). Towards a
        new crown indicator: An empirical analysis. Scientometrics, 87(3):467­481.

Wuchty, S., Jones, B. F., and Uzzi, B. (2007). The increasing dominance of teams in production of
        knowledge. Science, 316(5827):1036­1039.




                                                   28
Figures and tables




Figure 1: Proportion ||/| | of researchers in each part   




                                           29
Figure 2: Normalised mean degree among researchers in each part   




                                          30
Table 1: Variable means in random pair, collaborator, and NZ collaborator panels

 Variable                                    Random pairs     Collaborators    NZ collaborators
 Co-authored in year  ( )                    0.000 (0.016)    0.142 (0.349)     0.153 (0.360)
 First round co-members ( )                  0.000 (0.015)    0.160 (0.367)     0.187 (0.390)
 Second round co-members ( )                 0.000 (0.008)    0.068 (0.251)     0.077 (0.267)
 Funded co-members ( )                       0.000 (0.007)    0.037 (0.188)     0.043 (0.203)
 Adjacent in co-auth. network ( )            0.001 (0.023)    0.351 (0.477)     0.379 (0.485)
 Mean degree ( )                             5.355 (5.663)   17.341 (14.231)   19.610 (14.816)
 Diff. in degrees ()                         6.499 (8.419)   15.101 (15.965)   16.079 (16.488)
 Mean citation impact ()                     5.330 (8.771)   17.009 (22.073)   14.303 (18.555)
 Diff. in citation impacts ()               6.897 (15.892)   19.532 (34.797)   16.569 (30.100)
 Research field overlap ( )                  0.049 (0.122)    0.513 (0.293)     0.481 (0.291)
 Observations                                   312,279          355,911           247,110
 Pairs                                          74,529           68,367            46,052
 Researchers                                     3,398            8,997             5,823
 Notes: Sample standard deviations in parentheses. NZ = New Zealand.




                                                   31
Table 2: Researcher pair panel descriptive statistics

 Variable                                          Full panel              Restricted panel
                                              Mean (s.d.)     % zero     Mean (s.d.)     % zero
 Co-authored in year  ( )                    0.153 (0.360)    84.749    0.266 (0.442)    73.431
 First round co-members ( )                  0.187 (0.390)    81.312    0.156 (0.363)    84.392
 Second round co-members ( )                 0.077 (0.267)    92.257    0.078 (0.268)    92.240
 Funded co-members ( )                       0.043 (0.203)    95.681    0.050 (0.217)    95.034
 Adjacent in co-auth. network ( )            0.379 (0.485)    62.092    0.509 (0.500)    49.131
 Log mean degree (( ))                       2.632 (0.947)      1.843   2.760 (0.893)    1.136
 Log diff. in degrees (( ))                  2.236 (1.153)      9.946   2.315 (1.141)    8.744
 Log mean citation impact (( ))              2.168 (1.024)      0.045   2.237 (0.978)    0.017
 Log diff. in citation impacts (( ))         1.902 (1.485)      0.057   1.949 (1.467)    0.032
 Research field overlap ( )                  0.481 (0.291)      0.492   0.519 (0.284)    0.000
 Observations                                       247,110                    124,619
 Pairs                                               46,052                     19,091
 Notes: Sample standard deviations in parentheses.  denotes adjusted natural logarithm (4).




                                                    32
Table 3: Logistic regression estimates

Dependent variable: Co-authored in year  ( )
                                   All pairs (coefficients)             Pairs with variation in 
                                                                           Coefficients                APEs
                                      (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)          (5a)        (5b)
First round co-members             0.248    
                                                  0.223    
                                                                0.728   
                                                                            0.650    
                                                                                          0.715   
                                                                                                      0.138
                                   (0.017)        (0.018)       (0.022)     (0.022)       (0.057)     (0.012)
Second round co-members            0.137    
                                                   0.013        -0.017       -0.046       -0.087      -0.015
                                   (0.029)        (0.030)       (0.037)     (0.037)       (0.099)     (0.016)
Funded co-members                  0.631    
                                                  0.409    
                                                                0.129   
                                                                             0.101   
                                                                                           0.086       0.015
                                   (0.031)        (0.032)       (0.040)     (0.040)       (0.125)     (0.021)
Adjacent in co-auth. network                      0.881    
                                                                            0.067    
                                                                                          -2.193   
                                                                                                      -0.328
                                                  (0.012)                   (0.014)       (0.031)     (0.015)
Log mean degree                                   0.062    
                                                                            0.046    
                                                                                          0.944   
                                                                                                      0.163
                                                  (0.009)                   (0.010)       (0.044)     (0.008)
Log diff. in degrees                               0.016   
                                                                             -0.001       -0.016      -0.003
                                                  (0.007)                   (0.008)       (0.017)     (0.003)
Log mean citation impact                          0.032                      0.019        0.184       0.032
                                                  (0.010)                   (0.011)       (0.042)     (0.007)
Log diff. in citation impacts                     0.032                     0.033          0.014       0.002
                                                  (0.006)                   (0.007)       (0.014)     (0.002)
Research field overlap                            0.581    
                                                                             0.205   

                                                  (0.086)                   (0.099)
Squared research field overlap                    0.596    
                                                                            0.522
                                                  (0.081)                   (0.093)
Pair and year fixed effects                                                                 Yes         Yes
Observations                       247,110        247,110       124,619     124,619       124,619     124,619
Pairs                               46,052         46,052       19,091       19,091        19,091      19,091
Log-likelihood                   -104,531.110 -98,515.945 -71,096.536 -70,469.881 -56,206.543 -56,206.543
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses (  < 0.05,   < 0.01,   < 0.001). Intercept and zero-indicators
suppressed. Column (5b) reports average partial effects for the model in (5a).




                                                           33
Table 4: Coefficient estimates with varying publication lags

 Dependent variable: Co-authored in year  ( )
                                                Publication lags (years)
                                    One           Two           Three         Four
 First round co-members           0.715  
                                                0.324  
                                                                0.046       -0.173
                                  (0.057)       (0.066)        (0.078)      (0.097)
 Second round co-members          -0.087        -0.218         -0.141       -0.128
                                  (0.099)       (0.114)        (0.132)      (0.159)
 Funded co-members                 0.086         0.268         0.501   
                                                                            0.635
                                  (0.125)       (0.137)        (0.157)      (0.191)
 Adjacent in co-auth. network    -2.193     
                                               -1.902   
                                                              -1.612   
                                                                           -1.155
                                  (0.031)       (0.034)        (0.041)      (0.054)
 Log mean degree                  0.944         0.703          0.383        0.313
                                  (0.044)       (0.048)        (0.053)      (0.063)
 Log diff. in degrees             -0.016        -0.001          0.035        0.006
                                  (0.017)       (0.019)        (0.022)      (0.027)
 Log mean citation impact         0.184  
                                                0.279  
                                                               0.302  
                                                                            0.457
                                  (0.042)       (0.047)        (0.054)      (0.065)
 Log diff. in citation impacts     0.014        -0.019         -0.014       -0.024
                                  (0.014)       (0.015)        (0.017)      (0.020)
 Observations                     124,619        97,450         73,263       51,841
 Pairs                             19,091        16,620         14,060       11,408
 Years                               9             8              7            6
 Log-likelihood                  -56,206.543   -46,741.286   -37,486.585   -28,170.943
 Notes: Standard errors in parentheses (  < 0.05,  < 0.01,  < 0.001). Intercept
                                                               

 and zero-indicators suppressed. All columns include pair and year fixed effects.




                                                      34
Table 5: Adjusting standard errors for dyadic clustering

                                                   Standard errors
 Covariate                       Coefficients   Unadjusted   Adjusted
 First round co-members            -0.173         0.097        0.132
 Second round co-members           -0.128         0.159        0.234
 Funded co-members                  0.635        0.191
                                                               0.297
 Adjacent in co-auth. network      -1.155        0.054        0.080
 Log mean degree                    0.313        0.063        0.109
 Log diff. in degrees               0.006         0.027        0.035
 Log mean citation impact           0.457        0.065
                                                              0.125
 Log diff. in citation impacts     -0.024         0.020        0.025
 Notes: Based on model in right-most column of Table 4. One, two,
 and three stars denote significance at the 5%, 1%, and 0.1% levels.
 Intercept and zero-indicators suppressed.




                                                      35
Table 6: Coefficient estimates with relaxed selection criteria

 Dependent variable: Co-authored in year  ( )
                                     NZ collaborators                 Collaborators             Pooled pairs
                                     (1)           (2)              (3)            (4)              (5)
 First round co-members           -0.017        -0.173            0.052   
                                                                                -0.170           0.163
                                  (0.028)       (0.097)           (0.026)       (0.090)           (0.027)
 Second round co-members          -0.031        -0.128            -0.039        -0.103           -0.113
                                  (0.047)       (0.159)           (0.044)       (0.147)           (0.045)
 Funded co-members                0.627    
                                                0.635    
                                                                 0.578    
                                                                                0.516    
                                                                                                 0.574
                                  (0.047)       (0.191)           (0.045)       (0.170)           (0.046)
 Adjacent in co-auth. network     0.238    
                                               -1.155    
                                                                 0.380    
                                                                               -1.115    
                                                                                                 0.443
                                  (0.017)       (0.054)           (0.015)       (0.048)           (0.015)
 Log mean degree                  -0.015        0.313            0.045          0.260            0.146
                                  (0.012)       (0.063)           (0.010)       (0.052)           (0.010)
 Log diff. in degrees             0.050    
                                                 0.006            0.018   
                                                                                 0.024            0.017
                                  (0.009)       (0.027)           (0.008)       (0.024)           (0.008)
 Log mean citation impact          0.024        0.457    
                                                                  -0.002        0.446    
                                                                                                 0.138
                                  (0.013)       (0.065)           (0.010)       (0.058)           (0.010)
 Log diff. in citation impacts    0.028    
                                                -0.024           0.032    
                                                                                -0.023            0.018
                                  (0.008)       (0.020)           (0.007)       (0.018)           (0.007)
 Research field overlap           0.768    
                                                                 0.554    
                                                                                                 5.195
                                  (0.113)                         (0.099)                         (0.090)
 Sq. research field overlap       0.474    
                                                                 0.523    
                                                                                                 -3.007
                                  (0.107)                         (0.093)                         (0.086)
 Pair fixed effects                                Yes                            Yes
 Year fixed effects                                Yes                            Yes
 Observations                     121,581       121,581           170,773        67,661           293,457
 Pairs                            33,093         11,408           47,917         15,111           89,441
 Years                               6              6                6              6                6
                                      -                              -
 Log-likelihood                               -28,170.943                     -36,911.377       -78,214.470
                                 54,239.964                     73,444.022
 Notes: Four-year lag between dependent and independent variables. Standard errors in parentheses
 (  < 0.05,   < 0.01,   < 0.001). Intercept and zero-indicators suppressed. "NZ collaborators" and
 "Collaborators" correspond to panels described in Table 1. "Pooled pairs" corresponds to union of panels
 described in Table 1.




                                                     36
Appendix


Appendix Table 1: Publication, author, proposal, and applicant counts in our linked data

  Year     Publications     Authors     Proposals      Applicants
 2000         18,455         6,052         714            1,234
 2001         19,812         6,389         844            1,435
 2002         21,230         6,694         763            1,441
 2003         22,554         7,030         714            1,569
 2004         25,299         7,520         910            1,984
 2005         27,472         7,888         858            1,843
 2006         30,218         8,302         885            1,933
 2007         31,940         8,639         864            1,900
 2008         33,838         8,881         784            1,784
 2009         35,447         9,111         887            1,959
 2010         36,553         9,408        1,061           2,403
 2011         38,807         9,665        1,053           2,403
 2012         38,987         9,709        1,080           2,499
 2013         39,984         9,824        1,114           2,638
 2014         40,172         9,754        1,178           2,749
 2015         39,499         9,719        1,166           2,767
 2016         39,814         9,729        1,069           2,531
 2017         39,062         9,652        1,070           2,585
 2018         34,746         9,090        1,051           2,510
 Total       613,889                      18,065
 Notes: Researchers can be authors or applicants in multiple years.




                                                     37
Appendix Table 2: Distribution of linked publications across ASJC field groups

 Field group                                       Publications (000)   Share (%)
 Medicine                                                 83.731          13.648
 Agricultural and Biological Sciences                     72.380          11.798
 Biochemistry, Genetics and Molecular Biology             68.092          11.099
 Earth and Planetary Sciences                             57.758          9.414
 Physics and Astronomy                                    40.628          6.622
 Engineering                                              35.921          5.855
 Computer Science                                         35.704          5.820
 Environmental Science                                    31.684          5.164
 Chemistry                                                26.128          4.259
 Social Sciences                                          20.760          3.384
 Mathematics                                              19.471          3.174
 Materials Science                                        18.372          2.995
 Immunology and Microbiology                              14.931          2.434
 Multidisciplinary                                        13.837          2.255
 Neuroscience                                             12.442          2.028
 Psychology                                               10.866          1.771
 Pharmacology, Toxicology and Pharmaceutics                8.017          1.307
 Chemical Engineering                                      7.735          1.261
 Business, Management and Accounting                       6.793          1.107
 Arts and Humanities                                       6.631          1.081
 Economics, Econometrics and Finance                       4.621          0.753
 Nursing                                                   3.996          0.651
 Energy                                                    3.917          0.638
 Veterinary                                                3.365          0.548
 Health Professions                                        2.766          0.451
 Decision Sciences                                         2.228          0.363
 Dentistry                                                 0.736          0.120
 Total                                                    613.509        100.000
 Notes: Counts are fractional and exclude publications with no matched ASJC fields
 (of which there are 300 among the 613,889 publications in our linked data).




                                                     38
