                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 FIRM-EMBEDDED PRODUCTIVITY AND CROSS-COUNTRY INCOME DIFFERENCES

                                     Vanessa I. Alviarez
                                       Javier Cravino
                                      Natalia Ramondo

                                     Working Paper 27915
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27915


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2020




We thank our discussant Todd Schoellman, as well as Agostina Brinatti, Ariel Burstein, David
Lagakos, Andrei Levchenko, Sebastian Sotelo, Jonathan Vogel, and seminar participants at
various conferences and institutions for helpful suggestions. Javier Cravino thanks the
Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute at the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis for its
hospitality and funding during part of this research. This paper was previously circulated as
"Accounting for cross-country income differences: New evidence from multinational firms". The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Vanessa I. Alviarez, Javier Cravino, and Natalia Ramondo. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Firm-Embedded Productivity and Cross-Country Income Differences
Vanessa I. Alviarez, Javier Cravino, and Natalia Ramondo
NBER Working Paper No. 27915
October 2020
JEL No. F0,O0

                                         ABSTRACT

We measure the contribution of firm-embedded productivity to cross-country income differences.
By firm-embedded productivity we refer to the components of productivity that differ across
firms and that can be transferred internationally, such as blueprints, management practices, and
intangible capital. Our approach relies on microlevel data on the cross-border operations of
multinational enterprises (MNEs). We compare the market shares of the exact same MNE in
different countries and document that they are about four times larger in developing than in high-
income countries. This finding indicates that MNEs face less competition in less-developed
countries, suggesting that firm-embedded productivity in those countries is scarce. We propose
and implement a new measure of firm-embedded productivity based on this observation. We find
a strong positive correlation between our measure and output per-worker across countries. In our
sample, differences in firm-embedded productivity account for roughly a third of the cross-
country variance in output per-worker.

Vanessa I. Alviarez                             Natalia Ramondo
HA267                                           Boston University
Henry Angus Building                            Department of Economics
University of British Columbia                  270 Bay State Rd # 445
2053 Main Mall                                  Boston, MA 02215
V6T 1Z2                                         and NBER
Vancouver, BC. Canada                           nramondo@bu.edu
vanessa.alviarez@sauder.ubc.ca

Javier Cravino
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street, Lorch Hall 365B
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
jcravino@umich.edu
1      Introduction

Differences in income per-capita across countries are enormous. Development accounting
decomposes these differences into two components, factor stocks and total factor produc-
tivity (TFP), by measuring factor stocks across countries and computing TFP as a residual.
The decomposition is silent about the determinants of TFP. Some theories emphasize the
role of country-embedded factors, such as institutions, natural amenities, infrastructure,
and workers' quality.1 Others highlight the role of productivity embedded in individ-
ual firms in the form of blue-prints, know-how, management practices, and intangible
capital.2

This paper introduces a new framework for disentangling firm-embedded productivity
from country-embedded factors and decomposing their contributions to cross-country
income differences. By `firm-embedded productivity' we refer to the components of pro-
ductivity that differ across firms inside a country, and that can be transferred internation-
ally. In contrast, by `country-embedded factors' we refer to those components that are
internationally immobile and affect all firms operating in a country. As noted by Burstein
and Monge-Naranjo (2009), separating between these two components is not straightfor-
ward, as different combinations of firm-embedded productivity and country-embedded
factors can result in the same level of aggregate output per-worker.3

Our approach separates these components by exploiting firm-level data on the cross-
border operations of multinational enterprises (MNEs). We compare the market shares
of the exact same MNE in different countries and document that they are roughly four
times larger in developing than in high-income countries. We propose and implement
a new measure of firm-embedded productivity based on this observation. Our central
idea is that MNEs should have larger market shares in countries where aggregate firm-
embedded productivity is relatively scarce, as they face less competition in those coun-
tries. The observed differences in MNE market shares are indicative of large differences
in the firm-embedded productivity of the competitors that MNEs face in each country.

We develop this logic in a development accounting framework and measure aggregate
firm-embedded productivity using market-share data on the foreign affiliates of MNEs
    1 See,for example, Hall and Jones (1999), Acemoglu et al. (2014), or Caselli (2016). Parente and Prescott
(2000) refer to these factors as 'dissembodied TFP'.
   2 See, for example, Prescott and Visscher (1980), Klette and Kortum (2004), Atkeson and Kehoe (2005),

Bloom and Van Reenen (2007), or McGrattan and Prescott (2009).
   3 Burstein and Monge-Naranjo (2009) is an early attempt to separate these two components using aggre-

gate data. We explain how we relate to their work below.


                                                     1
that simultaneously operate in multiple countries. The framework assumes that produc-
ers in a country are heterogeneous in their efficiency and quality (what we call 'firm-
embedded productivity') but access the same country-embedded factors and set a con-
stant markup over their marginal cost. Thus, the market share of a MNE in a country
is driven by its productivity relative to the aggregate firm-embedded productivity in the
country.4 MNEs can transfer their productivity around the world but face different com-
petitors in each country where they operate. Differences in market shares of the same
MNE in different countries pin-down the difference in aggregate firm-embedded pro-
ductivity between those countries. The residual differences in income per-capita across
countries can be attributed to differences in country-embedded factors. Our measure of
firm-embedded productivity takes into account the fact that MNEs are a selected sample
of firms since it compares the market shares of the exact same MNE (in the same sector)
in different countries.

Of course, MNEs may not be able to fully transfer their productivity across countries. We
allow for imperfect technology transfers by assuming that MNEs can only use a fraction
of their productivity when operating abroad. Under this assumption, the market share
of an affiliate can be relatively low in a country both if aggregate firm-embedded pro-
ductivity in that country is high, or if the MNE faces large technology transfer costs.5
We control for technology transfer costs in two straightforward ways. First, by focus-
ing on the cross-country variation in the market shares of MNE's foreign affiliates, we
control for MNE-specific costs of transferring technology that are common across foreign
destinations. Second, we control for the country-pair specific component of the tech-
nology transfer costs using a gravity specification that follows Waugh (2010).6 If there
are destination-specific costs not captured by our gravity controls, and if it is harder for
MNEs to transfer technology into developing countries, then our results provide a lower
bound to the true cross-country differences in firm-embedded productivity.7
    4 The model does not take into account that, given their relatively large market shares, MNEs may be able

to set higher markups in developing countries. Higher markups would push down MNEs market shares
in these countries, so that the observed market shares would understate the true differences in competition
and firm-embedded productivity across countries.
    5 Or equivalently, if there is home-bias in preferences.
    6 The gravity specification models bilateral costs as a function of the distance and other country-pair

specific characteristics, and it is common in the International Trade and Multinational Production literature.
Waugh (2010) also controls for source-specific costs using fixed effects. See Head and Mayer (2014) for a
survey.
    7 If transferring technology into developing countries is relatively harder, foreign MNEs should have low

market shares there. Section 5.1 shows how to incorporate data on parent firms to estimate firm-embedded
productivity in this case.




                                                      2
We implement our framework using data on MNE revenues from ORBIS, a worldwide
dataset maintained by Bureau van Dijk. The main advantage of ORBIS is the scope and
accuracy of its ownership information: it details the full list of direct and indirect sub-
sidiaries and shareholders of each company in the dataset, along with a company's global
ultimate owner and other companies in the same corporate family. This information al-
lows us to build ownership links between affiliates of the same MNE, including cases
where the affiliates and the parent are in different countries. We build these links at the
firm-sector level to ensure that the affiliates in our comparisons are producing similar
goods and services across countries. We focus on destinations for which ORBIS has the
best coverage, so that our sample is mainly comprised of Eastern and Western European
countries.8

We estimate the key structural equation from our model, which states that the log of a
MNE market share in a country and sector can be written as the sum of a MNE-sector
component, a destination-sector component, and the technology transfer costs. We fit a
two-way fixed-effect specification to measure cross-country differences in firm-embedded
productivity from the estimated destination-sector fixed-effects.9 We find that for the av-
erage country in our sample, firm-embedded productivity is 0.20 log points lower than
in France, our reference country.10 The relative importance of the differences in firm-
embedded productivity vs. country-embedded factors varies considerably across coun-
tries. For example, country-embedded factors are similar in Greece and Italy, but firm-
embedded productivity in Italy is 0.28 log-points higher than in Greece, accounting for
three quarters of the observed differences in output per-worker between these two coun-
tries. In contrast, firm-embedded productivity is similar for Greece and Bulgaria, though
output per-worker in Greece is 0.5 log points higher than in Bulgaria due to the difference
in country-embedded factors between these countries.

We show that there is a strong positive correlation between firm-embedded productiv-
ity and output per-worker. It is worth noting that while the development accounting
literature documents a positive correlation between TFP and output per-worker, it com-
putes TFP as a residual using output per-worker data. In contrast, we directly measure a
component of TFP (firm-embedded productivity) using data on MNE market shares, and
    8 Our sample of destination countries also includes Japan, Korea, and Mexico. In contrast, every country

in the world is potentially a source of MNEs in our data.
    9 Destination-sector fixed effects are unbiased estimates of the destination-sector components of the mar-

ket shares if the assignment of MNEs to countries is not driven by a firm-destination component of the
technology transfer costs. We evaluate this assumption and how it affects our results in Section 5.2.
  10 We use France as our reference country since this country has the best coverage among the large rich

countries in ORBIS.


                                                      3
show that this component is strongly correlated with independent measures of output
per-worker. In fact, differences in firm-embedded productivity account for about one-
third of the cross-country variance in output per-worker.

We then study cross-country differences in firm-embedded productivity at the sector
level. The cross-country differences in firm-embedded productivity are larger in Man-
ufacturing than in Services, but so are the cross-country differences in output per-worker.
Remarkably, the contribution of firm-embedded productivity to the cross-country vari-
ance in output per-worker ends up being roughly a third in these two broad sectors. We
further show that the foreign output of a country's MNEs is concentrated in sectors where
the country's firm-embedded productivity is relatively high. For example, Japan and Fin-
land have a particularly large stock of firm-embedded productivity in Manufacturing,
and the foreign output of the MNEs from these countries is concentrated in the Manu-
facturing sector. In contrast, Latvia and Lithuania have relatively more firm-embedded
productivity in Services, and the foreign output of the MNEs from these countries is con-
centrated in the Service sector.

Finally, we evaluate the sources of the observed cross-country differences in firm-embedded
productivity along two dimensions. First, we evaluate if these differences stem from ag-
gregate scale, or variety, effects by focusing on the component of firm-embedded produc-
tivity that is orthogonal to a country's population, removing scale effects from our mea-
sure. We show that there is still a very strong correlation between this residualized com-
ponent of firm-embedded productivity and output per-worker. Second, we separately
compute differences in firm-embedded productivity across domestic firms and across the
foreign affiliates of the MNEs that operate in each country. Differences in firm-embedded
productivity across domestic firms account for roughly 88 percent of the observed differ-
ences in firm-embedded productivity across countries, while differences across the for-
eign affiliates of MNEs account for the remaining 12 percent.


Related literature: Our paper is closely related to Burstein and Monge-Naranjo (2009),
who separate firm-embedded productivity from country-embedded factors using aggre-
gate data on Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) stocks and the equilibrium conditions of
a structural model of MNEs location choices. Their framework is based on the Lucas
`span of control' model and assumes that each firm or manager must choose one country
where to produce. Under these assumptions, firm-embedded productivity can be recov-
ered from aggregate data using a non-arbitrage condition that equates after-tax manage-
rial profits across countries. In contrast, our approach treats firm-embedded productivity

                                            4
as a non-rival factor that can be used simultaneously in many countries, and is based on
firm-level data on MNE operations in multiple countries rather than on a structural model
of MNE's location choices.11 In that sense, our approach is similar to that in Hendricks
and Schoellman (2018), who exploit the idea that workers can take their human capital
with them when moving to a foreign country. Using data on wage gains upon migration,
they tease out the role of human-capital in explaining cross-country income differences.

More broadly, our paper is related to the extensive literature on development account-
ing, which measures directly the contribution of factors of production to cross-country
income differences and computes TFP as a residual (see Caselli 2005 for a survey). Like
this literature, our approach decomposes cross-country income differences, but provides
a direct measure of one of the components of TFP, firm-embedded productivity, using
market-share data on MNEs.

Finally, our paper is also related to the large literature studying technology transfers
through MNEs. One branch of the literature uses parent-affiliate matched data to estimate
how productivity and shocks are transmitted across parties of a MNE (see e.g. Cravino
and Levchenko 2017 and Bilir and Morales 2020). In contrast, our focus is on measur-
ing the contribution of firm-embedded productivity vs. country-embedded factors in
explaining cross-country income differences. A different branch of the literature param-
eterizes structural models of location choices of MNEs to measure their contribution to
welfare and TFP (see e.g. Ramondo and Rodriguez-Clare 2013, Irarrazabal et al. 2013,
Alviarez 2019, or Arkolakis et al. 2018). Our measurement strategy is based on parent-
affiliate matched data rather than on the general equilibrium conditions of a structural
model.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the accounting frame-
work. Section 3 describes the data and our empirical strategy. Section 4 presents the
quantitative results. Section 5 conducts robustness exercises, and Section 6 concludes.



2       Accounting framework

In this section, we first develop a stylized framework to formalize the distinction be-
tween firm-embedded productivity and country-embedded factors, and to illustrate how
    11 This
         is the standard assumption in the multinational production literature, starting with Markusen
(1984), Helpman (1984), and more recently Helpman et al. (2004), among others.



                                                  5
firm-level data on the cross-border operations of MNEs can be used to decompose cross-
country income differences into these two components. Next, we present a quantitative
version of this framework that allows for multiple sectors and factors of production.



2.1   A model economy

Preliminaries: We consider a world economy consisting of N countries indexed by i
and n. Each country is populated by a continuum of differentiated intermediate good
producers that are owned by firms from different source countries. We refer to a firm that
simultaneously operates in multiple countries as a MNE. Intermediate goods cannot be
traded internationally. In each country, intermediates are aggregated into a final tradable
good by a competitive producer.


Technologies: The production function for the final good in each country n is given by
                                                                         
                                                               -1        -1

                      Yn =          in
                                         [ Qin ( ) Yin ( )]         d         ,          (1)
                               i


where Yin ( ) is the output of firm  from source country i operating in country n, and
  1 is the elasticity of substitution across intermediate goods. in denotes the set of
firms from country i that are active in country n. Qin ( ) is a shifter for firm  , which we
interpret as product quality. Note that the idiosyncratic quality Qin ( ) can differ across
production locations.

The production function for intermediate goods is

                             Yin ( ) = Zn Xin ( ) Lin ( ) ,                              (2)

where Lin ( ) is the amount of labor employed by firm  in country n. The productivity
of the firm depends on a country-specific component, Zn , and a firm-specific compo-
nent, Xin ( ). Following Burstein and Monge-Naranjo (2009) we refer to Zn as "country-
embedded productivity", as it captures factors that are fixed in the country and are not
internationally mobile, such as infrastructure, workers' quality, and natural amenities.
In contrast, Xin ( ) is idiosyncratic to firm  , and like product quality, can differ across
production locations.

It is useful to define Ain ( )  [ Qin ( ) × Xin ( )]-1 . In what follows, we will refer to

                                              6
Ain ( ) as "firm-embedded productivity". It captures production, managerial, and mar-
keting know-how that is specific to the firm. In contrast to country-embedded productiv-
ity, firm-embedded productivity can be transferred internationally within the boundaries
of the firm.

We assume that firm-embedded productivity is transferred imperfectly across countries,
so that the productivity of an MNE from country i when it operates in country n is

                           Ain ( ) = Ai ( ) × exp (-in ( )) ,                            (3)

with ii ( ) = 0. Here, Ai ( ) is the productivity embedded in MNE  in its home
country, and in ( ) is a technology transfer cost that captures the degree to which firm-
embedded productivity can be moved across countries. If in ( ) = 0, the MNE can use
the same productivity in all the countries where it produces.


Aggregate output and TFP: Aggregate output can be written as

                                                   1
                                                   -1
                                    Yn = Zn n Ln ,                                       (4)

where

                                n           in
                                                  Ain ( ) d                              (5)
                                       i

denotes aggregate firm-embedded productivity in country n, which is the sum of the
productivity embedded in the firms that produce in country n.

In what follows, we use lowercase to denote the log of a variable, and use yn  ln [Yn / Ln ]
to denote the log of output per-worker. Using Equation (4), we can thus write

                                                 1
                                    yn = zn +       n .                                  (6)
                                                 -1

Equation (6) states that cross-country differences in output per-worker arise from differ-
ences in country-embedded productivity, zn , and differences in aggregate firm-embedded
productivity, n . Clearly, the same level of yn can be achieved with different combinations
of zn and n , so that these two terms cannot be separated using only aggregate data. Next,
we show how to use data on the cross-border operations of MNEs to separate n from zn .



                                             7
2.2    Decomposing cross-country differences in output per-worker

We now show how cross-country differences in zn and n can be computed using firm-
level data on market shares. From the demand functions implied by Equation (1), we can
write the revenue of MNE  from country i operating in country n, relative to the sum of
the revenues of all firms operating in n, as

                                       Pin ( ) Yin ( )       A ( )
                        Sin ( )                             = in   .                                   (7)
                                    i  in Pin ( ) Yin ( ) d    n


A MNE market share in a country depends on its productivity, Ain ( ), relative to the pro-
ductivity embedded in all firms operating in that country, n . Intuitively, MNEs should
have larger market shares in countries where aggregate firm-embedded productivity is
relatively low, since they face less competition in those countries.12 Importantly, country-
embedded productivity Zn does not affect the MNEs' market share Sin ( ), since it pro-
portionally affects all the firms producing in the same country.13

We build on this intuition to identify cross-country differences in n . Substituting Equa-
tion (3) in (7), the market share in logs is

                                   sin ( ) = ai ( ) - in ( ) - n .                                     (8)


Equation (8) shows that if technology transfer costs do not vary across foreign destina-
tions, in ( ) = i ( ), cross-country differences in market shares across affiliates of the
same MNE pin-down differences in n . In this case, one could regress firm-level mar-
ket shares on MNE- and destination-level dummies, and use the destination dummies to
recover cross-country differences in n . The MNE-level dummies would capture differ-
ences in ai ( ) - i ( ) across MNEs, while the cross-country variation in shares within
an MNE would identify the differences in n . After obtaining cross-country differences
in n , differences in zn can be computed as residuals from Equation (6). This two-way
fixed-effect approach constitutes the basis of our estimation strategy described in Section
  12 Note  that, in our model, the allocation of resources is not distorted across firms. If, as documented
by Bento and Restuccia (2017) and Fattal Jaef (2020), size-dependent distortions are more prevalent in less
developed countries -for example if larger firms are taxed more or have higher markups in developing
countries-, our procedure would underestimate the contribution of firm-embedded productivity to cross
country income differences.
  13 Section 5.2 and Appendix B show that our assumption that Z and X (  ) enter log-linearly into the
                                                                    n       in
production function provides a good approximation of the data.



                                                    8
3.2.

In the more general case where technology transfer costs vary across destinations, dif-
ferences in market shares across affiliates of the same MNE are not enough to identify
differences in aggregate firm-embedded productivity. As Equation (8) makes clear, this is
because the market share of an affiliate can be relatively low in country n if either firm-
embedded productivity is relatively large in country n, high n , or if the costs to transfer
technology are large, high in ( ). Section 3.2 shows how, if we observe market shares
forMNE from multiple source countries and into multiple destinations, we can identify
differences in n by imposing assumptions on the structure of in ( ) that are common in
the International Trade and Multinational Production literature.



2.3    Quantitative model

We now extend our framework to incorporate additional sectors and factors of produc-
tion. We assume that in each country there are J sectors indexed by j, and that a competi-
tive producer of final goods aggregates sectorial output according to

                                                                     j
                                                              j n
                                          Yn =               Yn          ,                                     (9)
                                                 j

        j                                                                    j                            j
where Yn denotes the final output from sector j and n  [0, 1] and  j n = 1. Sectorial
output is produced by aggregating intermediate goods,

                                                                                              j
                                                                                  j -1        j -1

                            
                       j                     j                   j                j
                     Yn =         j
                                            Qin ( ) Yin ( )                              d            ,       (10)
                             i    in


        j
where Yin ( ) is the output of intermediate-good producer firm  from country i in sector
    j
j. Qin ( ) denotes product quality of firm  from country i in sector j.

Intermediate goods in each sector are produced with a Cobb-Douglas technology that
uses labor, human capital, and physical capital,

                       j          j   j                      j               1-  j       j        j
                     Yin ( ) = Zn Xin ( ) Hn Lin ( )                                 Kin ( ) ,                (11)

                                 j                       j
where  j  [0, 1]. The variables Lin ( ) and Kin ( ) denote labor and capital employed by


                                                     9
firm  in country n and sector j, and Hn is human capital per-worker in country n.14

                                                                                   j                  j                       j               j -1
As in the previous section, we define Ain ( )  Qin ( ) × Xin ( )                                                                                      with

                                                     j                         j                              j
                                                   Ain ( ) = Ai ( ) × exp -in ( ) .                                                                              (12)


Aggregate output in each sector satisfies

                                                                                     1                    j               j
                                                    j                j    j         j -1            j 1-               j 
                                                   Yn = Zn n                                Hn Ln                     Kn          ,

               j                              j
where n  i   j Ain ( ) d is the aggregate firm-embedded productivity in sector
                    in
j and country n. Output per-worker in sector j can be written as

                                                                               j
                                                                          Yn               j ~j
                                                                           j
                                                                                         ~n
                                                                                       = Z  n ,                                                                  (13)
                                                                          Ln

                                                                 j
                                    1                                                          j
            j               j                            j      1-  j       j               j 
                                   1-  j            Kn
where     ~n
          Z                Zn               Hn       j                   , ~n               n ,           and  j                       1       1
                                                                                                                                      1-  j  j -1
                                                                                                                                                  .    In an abuse of
                                                    Yn
                                                                                                j                 j
notation, in what follows we will refer both to ~ n and n as firm-embedded productivity.
               j
             ~ n as country-embedded factors, as it includes physical and human capital,
We refer to Z
                                                       j
in addition to the country-embedded productivity Zn .

Aggregate output per worker can be written as

                                                                          Yn   ~ n~ n,
                                                                             = Z                                                                                 (14)
                                                                          Ln
                                           j  n  n -1
                             j n              j  j -1                                                 j            j
with ~n                   j ~n                           , n                    1     1
                                                                              1-  n  n -1 ,
                                                                                                                            ~n 
                                                                                                n   j n  j , n   j n  j and Z
                                             j
                    n                       n
¯n Hn     Kn       1-  n       j           1-  n
          Yn                j Zn                   .15

Applying logs in Equation (14), we can thus write

                                                                               ~n + 
                                                                          yn = z    ~n.                                                                          (15)
  14 Appendix  C shows that our approach and results do not change if we incorporate intermediate inputs
in production, and recalibrate the model's parameters accordingly.
                                                               j
                                                              n
                      j            1-  j           j         1-  n
  15 ¯n                    1-  j              j
            j n            1-  n              n                      is a country-specific constant.



                                                                                           10
We can compute the terms in Equation (15) following steps analogous to those described
in Section 2.2. In particular, the (log) market-share of MNE  operating in country n and
sector j is

                                          j           j          j            j
                                         sin ( ) = ai ( ) - in ( ) - n ,                                        (16)


                                                                          j
A MNE share in a sector depends on its productivity, ai ( ), relative to the productivity
                            j
of all firms in the sector, n . As explained in the previous section, we can use differences
in sectorial market shares across affiliates of the same MNE that are located in different
                                             j
countries to pin-down differences in n . These differences can be aggregated to obtain
 ~ n =  j nj  n  n -1 ~ j      ~ n is calculated, z
                      . Once 
              j  j -1 n
                                                  ~n can be computed as a residual from Equa-
tion (15).

Finally, our development-accounting exercise evaluates the contribution of firm-embedded
productivity to the cross-country variance of output per-worker. We follow the variance
decomposition in Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare (1997) and compute

                                                  ~n ) cov(yn , 
                                         cov(yn , z             ~n)
                                                      +             = 1.                                        (17)
                                           var (yn )     var (yn )


The next section explains how we implement this variance decomposition in our data.16



3      Data and empirical strategy

3.1      Data description

This section describes our data. We refer the reader to Appendix A for details.

Our firm-level data come from ORBIS, a worldwide dataset maintained by Bureau van
Dijk that includes comprehensive information on firm's revenue and employment. OR-
BIS includes information on both listed and unlisted firms collected from various country-
specific sources, such as national registries and annual reports. The main advantage of
ORBIS is the scope and accuracy of its ownership information: it details the full lists of
direct and indirect subsidiaries and shareholders of each company in the dataset, along
with a company's global ultimate owner and other companies in the same corporate fam-
    16 The                                                                                    ~n ) + Cov(yn , 
             decomposition in Equation (17) follows from Var (yn ) = Cov(yn , yn ) = Cov(yn , z               ~ n ).


                                                           11
ily. This information allows us to build links between affiliates of the same MNE, includ-
ing cases in which the affiliates and the parent are in different countries. We specify that a
parent should own at least 50 percent of an affiliate to identify an ownership link between
two firms.

The main variable used in our analysis is the revenue (turnover) of each firm. We use
data for the year 2016, which is the year with the largest coverage in ORBIS. We focus
on a subset of destination countries for which aggregate revenues by foreign-firms in
ORBIS account for at least 25 percent of the aggregate revenues by foreign-firm reported
by OECD/Eurostat.17 In addition, we exclude Ireland, Luxembourg, and Switzerland
from our sample as MNEs revenues in these countries are particularly sensitive to profit-
shifting strategies. In contrast, every country in the world is a potential source country
for the MNEs in ORBIS, so that our sample of source countries is much larger than our
sample of destination countries.18 Figure 1 shows our sample of destination countries
and reports, for each destination, the ratio of the foreign-firm revenues in ORBIS to the
foreign-firm revenues as reported by OECD/Eurostat.

The original unit of observation in ORBIS is a tax-identification number. Often, affili-
ates or plants, located in different addresses within the same country and belonging to
the same corporate group, are registered with different tax identification numbers. We
aggregate revenues of all firms in ORBIS that belong to the same corporate group and
that operate in the same country and 2-digit NAICS sector. Our unit of observation is
then a corporate group-country-sector triplet. For example, ORBIS shows multiple tax-
ids belonging to Renault in Germany in the Transportation and Equipment sector. We
aggregate the revenues of those affiliates to obtain the Renault's total revenues in this
sector in Germany. We then compute market shares by dividing the revenues of each
corporate group-country-sector by the aggregate revenues in each country-sector. Data
on aggregate revenues are from EU KLEMS and OECD, since ORBIS not always covers
the population of firms in each country-sector pair. Finally, we define a MNE as all the
tax id's that belong to the same corporate group. Our procedure compares affiliates of the
MNE Renault's in the Transportation and Equipment sector located in different countries,
and separately compares affiliates of Renault's in, e.g., the Retail sector across countries.

We obtain output per-worker, physical capital, and human capital directly from the Penn
  17 OECD Activity of Multinational Enterprises (AMNE) database and the Eurostat Foreign Affiliate Statis-

tics database.
   18 Our sample of source countries includes the United States, China, and Canada, among others. As

destinations, these countries have very low or inexistent coverage in ORBIS, and thus they are not included
in our sample of destination countries.


                                                    12
                           Figure 1: Data coverage: foreign-MNE revenues.

                     Romania
                     Lithuania
                         Korea
                           Italy
                       Croatia
                      Bulgaria
                      Belgium
                        France
                      Sweden
                      Slovakia
                             UK
                       Estonia
                      Portugal
                       Finland
                         Spain
                        Poland
                     Denmark
                      Slovenia
                       Greece
                   Czech Rep.
                   Netherlands
                        Austria
                      Hungary
                         Latvia
                     Germany
                         Japan
                       Mexico
                                   0        .2       .4            .6       .8       1




Notes: Ratio of total foreign-affiliate revenues in ORBIS to total foreign-affiliate revenues reported by
OECD/Eurostat, for each country in our sample.


World Tables (9.1). We measure output-per-worker in international dollars at the sector
level using data on output per-worker from EU KLEMS and the PPP conversion factor
from the Penn World Tables (9.1).



3.2    Empirical strategy

This section describes how we measure cross-country differences in firm-embedded pro-
ductivity using firm-level data on the activity of MNEs across countries. Our strategy
builds on Equation (16) and imposes structure on the technology transfer costs following
a long tradition in International Economics that approximates trade and multinational
production costs using observable variables.

We assume that technology transfer costs are given by

                                        j        j        j    j        j
                                       in ( ) =Oi + Dn + Bin +  in ( ) .                            (18)


The assumption states that technology transfer costs in each sector can be additively de-
                                                               j       j
composed into origin- and destination-specific components, Oi and Dn , a bilateral com-
         j                                                j
ponent, Bin , and a MNE-destination specific component,  in ( ). In addition, we assume

                                                          13
that the bilateral component is symmetric and a log-linear function of observable charac-
                                                               j    j          j
teristics, such as bilateral distance and sharing a language, Bin = d distin + l langin .

Substituting Equation (18) into (16), we obtain the estimating equation

                   j         j         j     j          j         j
                  sin ( ) = i ( ) + An + d distin + l langin +    in   ( ) .            (19)

       j                                     j
Here, i ( ) are MNE-sector fixed effects. An denotes a set of dummies that take the value
of 1 if the destination country is n and the sector is j. We estimate Equation (19) by Ordi-
nary Least Squared (OLS) using the sample of the foreign affiliates of MNEs in the ORBIS
data -MNEs in their home country are not included. The regression identifies the MNE-
                      j
sector fixed effect, i ( ), from the within-MNE average market share across destinations,
in each sector j, controlling for destination characteristics and the bilateral component of
                                                                    j
the technology transfer costs. Similarly, the destination effects An are identified from the
average market shares of the foreign affiliates that operate in each country n and sector j,
controlling for within-MNE characteristics and the bilateral component of the technology
                               j
transfer costs. The residual in ( ) is (the negative of) the MNE-destination-sector specific
component of the technology transfer costs.

The OLS estimates of the destination-sector-specific components of the market shares,
   j
An , are unbiased if the assignment of MNEs to destination countries is exogenous with
                           j
respect to the error term, in ( ). This is the case in the workhorse models of multinational
production in the tradition of Helpman et al. (2004), where selection is driven by firm
characteristics (e.g. productivity) and by destination-country characteristics (e.g. market
size), not by firm-destination characteristics.

For the reminder of this section, we assume that MNEs do not select into countries based
                                      j
on firm-destination characteristics,  in ( ). In Section 5.2, we show that our main results
are robust to reestimating Equation (19) using subsamples of MNEs that are more likely
to satisfy this exogeneity assumption.



3.3   Cross-country differences in MNE market shares

In what follows, we use the notation  xn  xn - xr to express the difference of a variable
in country n with respect to France, our reference country. Using data on sectorial expen-
                               j                           j                          j  j
diture shares in each country, n , our OLS estimates of An , and defining  xn   j n  xn



                                            14
as the aggregate across sectors, we compute the aggregate destination-country effects as

                                                    n  An .
                                                           j       j
                                          An                                                          (20)
                                                   j


The aggregate country effect, An , captures the (log of the) average MNE market share
in each destination relative to France, after controlling for the MNE-sector fixed effects
and the bilateral variables. Figure 2 reports exp(An ). On average, MNE market shares
are larger in less developed countries. Differences between developed and developing
countries are enormous: MNEs market shares are about three and a half times larger in
Greece and Portugal, and about twelve times larger in Estonia and Lithuania, compare to
their market shares in France. In contrast, MNEs have similar market shares in the UK,
Germany, and France.

Appendix Figure A1 reports standard errors for our estimates of An , and show that
these dummies are tightly estimated and exhibit substantial variation across countries.19
The figure also shows that we obtain very similar estimates if we use data on employment
shares or value-added shares as the dependent variables in our estimation.20



3.4    Interpreting differences in MNE market shares
                                         j                                                   j
We calculate the differences in n using our estimated country effects, An . In our
model, these effects correspond to

                                          j            j               j
                                      A n = -   n +  Dn ,                                             (21)

                                                               j
which conflates firm-embedded productivity n and the destination effects of the tech-
                         j
nology transfer costs  Dn . For our baseline results, the identification strategy follows
Waugh (2010), and assumes that costs have an origin-specific, but not destination-specific,
                j                                                                     j
component,  Dn = 0. In that case, the country dummies can be interpreted as An =
    j                                                                j            j
-n . But what if this identification assumption is not satisfied,  Dn = 0? If  Dn is high
  19 Appendix Table A1 reports the OLS coefficients on bilateral distance and common language,    j     j
                                                                                                 d and l ,
                                                                           j
for each sector. Our OLS estimates of the country-sector dummies An explain 0.27 of the total variance
    j                                                           j
of sin ( ) in equation (19), while the MNE-sector dummies i ( ) account for 0.45. The R-squared of the
regression is 0.72. Appendix B presents additional statistics on our two-way fixed effect estimator.
  20 In the model, revenue shares, employment shares, and value-added shares coincide, so that in the-

ory any of these shares can be used for our purposes. We use revenue shares for our baseline estimates
since ORBIS has a more complete coverage of revenues than of employment and value-added. But using
employment data alleviates concerns about profit-shifting strategies by MNEs.


                                                  15
            Figure 2: Market shares of foreign MNE affiliates, relative to France.




Note: The figure shows exp(An ), calculated using Equation (20) and the OLS estimates of Equation (19).
The x-axis reports the output per-worker of each country, relative to France, from Penn World Tables (9.1).


for low income countries (i.e. it is harder to transfer technology into less developed coun-
                        j                                                          j
tries), then cov(yn ,  Dn )  0. This implies that our baseline estimates of n based on
Equation (21) will understate the contribution of aggregate firm-embedded productivity
to the cross-country variance of output per-worker,

                                  j                      j       j                     j
               cov yn , -An = cov yn , n +  Dn  cov yn , n .                                          (22)


                                                                        j
Section 5 presents a robustness exercise that allows for  Dn > 0. These results are re-
markably similar to our baseline results.


3.4.1   Parameterization

Finally, as shown in Section 2.3, to evaluate the contribution of aggregate firm-embedded
productivity to cross-country income differences we need to aggregate our sectoral es-
timates and assign values to the model parameters. Taking logs on Equation (13), and




                                                    16
                                                                                j            j
using our baseline identification assumption so that An = -n , yields

                                                  j                 j       j
                                                 y n = -  j  An +  z
                                                                   ~n .


                                       -1
Here  j                j - 1   1 - j        is a composite elasticity and can be estimated from an OLS
                        jj
regression of          yn
                   on An . Unfortunately, these estimates would not be consistent unless
     j                    j
An is orthogonal to z   ~n . A concern would be that policies that encourage accumula-
                                                  j
tion of country-embedded factors, captured by z  ~n , would also improve firm-embedded
                 j
productivity, n . One way to deal with this concern is to control for factors included in
   j
z ~n that simultaneously affect the accumulation of firm-embedded productivity, such as
human capital and the capital-output ratio in country n. In particular, we estimate

                                            j         j   j     j       j           j
                                        yn = b0 +b1 An + b2 Cn + un ,                                             (23)

where Cn is a vector of controls that captures differences in human- and physical capital
across countries.

Table 1 reports these estimates. Columns (1), (3) and (5) respectively show the results
for the pooled sample of sectors, Manufacturing sectors, and Services sectors, estimated
under the restriction that b1 is the same in all sectors (see Appendix Table A2 for results
                   j
on estimating b1 for each sub-sector in Manufacturing and Services). The coefficients
on b1 are precisely estimated around -0.20 in the three samples. As shown in Columns
(2), (4), (6), we estimate very similar values when we control for the (log of the relative)
capital-output ratio and the (log of the relative) average years of schooling. Overall, we
cannot reject the null hypothesis that  = 0.2 in any of these samples. For a labor share
of 1 -  = 2/3, our estimate implies a value of  = 8.5, which is within the range of
estimates used to match the average markup in the United States (see e.g. Edmond et
                                                                                  j
al. 2018 or Baqaee and Farhi 2020). Using  = 0.2 and the restriction that  Dn = 0, we
get our baseline estimates of aggregate firm-embedded productivity as         ~ n =   An ,
where An is obtained from aggregating the OLS estimates in Equation (19) according to
Equation (20).21 We calculate z   ~n as a residual using data on income per worker.
   21 In   a one sector model, estimating Equation (23) without controlling for Cn would yield  =
      ( An , y n )
- cov
    var (An )
                  Using this expression to calculate 
                   .                                 ~ n = - An , the second term of the variance de-
                                                       n      cov(y ,
                                                              n      ~ ) n      n   cov(y ,A )
                                                                                        n  n     cov(A ,y )cov(y ,A )
                                                                                                    n   n
composition in Equation (17) would boil down to var(     yn )
                                                                = -  var(  yn )
                                                                                  =  var (An )var (yn )
                                                                                                          ,
which corresponds to the R-squared of a regression of yn on An , and which does not depend on the
model's parameters. Rather than focusing exclusively on this R-squared, we parameterize  to evaluate the
decomposition for each individual country in our sample.




                                                               17
                          Table 1: Estimating the composite elasticity .

                              All sectors           Manufacturing sectors          Service sectors
                             (1)        (2)            (3)          (4)             (5)        (6)
         j
        An                -0.194***   -0.199***     -0.189***    -0.203***       -0.193***   -0.194***
                           [0.0267]    [0.0261]      [0.0338]     [0.0372]        [0.0342]    [0.0342]
       [k n - yn ]                     0.381***                    0.496**                      0.195
                                        [0.115]                    [0.165]                     [0.122]
        hn                               0.244                      0.774                     -0.0915
                                        [0.385]                    [0.494]                     [0.301]

       Observations           445         445           158         158              161        161
       R-squared             0.334       0.393         0.397       0.513            0.420      0.447
Notes: The table reports the OLS estimates from Equation (23).  [k n - yn ] denotes the capital-output ratio
and  hn denotes human capital. Both are in logs, relative to France, and computed with data from Penn
World Tables (9.1). Sector fixed-effects are included and standard errors are clustered by country and sector
(in parentheses).


4     Quantitative results

This section combines the estimates from Equation (21) with our elasticity estimates to de-
compose differences in output per-worker across countries into country-embedded fac-
tors and aggregate firm-embedded productivity. Figure 3 plots the result of this decompo-
sition (see Appendix Table A5 for the exact numbers). The x-axis shows the log-difference
in output per-worker in each country relative to France, yn . In the y-axis, the red circles
show the difference in firm-embedded productivity in each country relative to France,
   ~ n , while the blue squares show the differences in country-embedded factors relative to
France, z    ~n .

For the average country, firm-embedded productivity is 0.20 log points lower than in
France. There is, however, wide variation across countries. For some of the large devel-
oped nations in our sample, such as Germany and Korea firm-embedded productivity is
the same as in France, whereas in Japan it is somewhat larger (0.09 log-difference). In
contrast, firm-embedded productivity is quite low in the Baltic Republics of Lithuania,
Latvia, and Estonia.

The relative importance of the differences in firm-embedded productivity and country-
embedded factors also varies considerably across countries. For example, Italy and Slove-
nia ­both EU members­ have similar levels of country-embedded factors. However, Italy
has more firm-embedded productivity, which generates significant differences in out-


                                                     18
put per-worker between these two countries. In contrast, firm-embedded productivity
is similar for Slovenia and Bulgaria, though output per-worker is much higher in Slove-
nia due to a large difference in country-embedded factors between these two countries.
For countries such as Spain and the Netherlands, with roughly the same level of output
per-worker, our decomposition indicates that while for Netherlands firm-embedded pro-
ductivity is 0.15 log-point lower than for Spain, that negative difference is compensated
by an advantage of equal magnitude in country-embedded factors.

Our measure of aggregate firm-embedded productivity is strongly correlated with out-
put per-worker. As we noted in the Introduction, while the development accounting
literature documents a positive correlation between TFP and output per-worker, it com-
putes TFP as a residual using output per-worker data. In contrast, we directly measure
one component of TFP (firm-embedded productivity) and show that this component is
strongly correlated with independent measures of output per-worker.22 Furthermore,
we compute the share of the cross-country variance in output per-worker accounted for
aggregate firm-embedded productivity and country-embedded factors, in the spirit of
Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare (1997). The contribution of aggregate firm-embedded pro-
ductivity corresponds to the slope of a bivariate OLS regression of     ~ n on yn , which is
reported in Figure 3. Differences in   ~ n account for roughly a third of the cross-country
variance in output per-worker; differences in country-embedded factors account for the
remaining two thirds.


Correlation with factors: Table 2 evaluates how our measures of firm-embedded pro-
ductivity and country-embedded factors correlate with measures of human and physical
capital. In particular, we regress output per-worker, firm-embedded productivity, and
country-embedded factors on a country's capital-output ratio and human capital.23 The
table shows that differences in firm-embedded productivity are uncorrelated with those
factors (Column 2). In contrast, differences in country-embedded factors are significantly
correlated with human capital and capital-output ratios (Column 3), a significant corre-
lation inherited by income per-worker (Column 1). These results are reassuring since, as
explained in Section 2.3, cross-country differences in factors should be captured by our
measure of country-embedded factors, and not by our measure of firm-embedded pro-
  22 Our findings are reminiscent of the results in Bloom and Van Reenen (2007), who document a strong
positive correlation between managerial practices and income per capita. Their measure of managerial
practices is calculated with survey data created from interviews with managers around the world.
  23 We obtain very similar results if we run the regressions in Table 2 at the aggregate level, although the

number of observations is reduced to 26.


                                                     19
 Figure 3: Dev. accounting: firm-embedded productivity vs country-embedded factors.




                         0.5
                                                                                                      DK
                                                                                                          AT
                                                                                                    SE
                                                                                                    NL BE
                                                                                                   FI
                                                                                        JP
                                                                                                       DEIT


                         0.0
                                                                                  KR                        FR
                                                                                              GB   ES
                                                                                                   ES IT
                                            MX           EELT         SI    HR                         DE
                                                                             PL               GB
                     n, zn
                                                                     SK                                  BE
                                                        LV                 CZGR                     NL AT
                                                                  PT RO      GR                    FI
                                                                                                    SE
                                                   HU             PT RO    CZPL
                                                                     SK           KR    JP           DK
                                       BG                             SI    HR
                                                   HU
                                                        LV
                         -0.5



                                                         EELT
                                       BG

                                            MX

                                                                                   n: 0.34 (0.10)
                                                                                   zn: 0.66 (0.10)
                         -1.0




                                -1.0        -0.8    -0.6                   -0.4        -0.2             0.0
                                                                 yn

Notes: Each circle (square) represents a country's firm-embedded productivity (country-embedded factors)
relative to France. The figure plots the decomposition in Equation (15), where yn is plotted in the x-axis
and z  ~n and   ~ n are plotted in the y-axis. The legend reports the slopes of a bivariate OLS regression of
  ~ n on yn .


ductivity.



4.1    Sector-level decompositions

We now decompose differences in output per-worker in Manufacturing and Services by
aggregating our sectoral estimates of the country effects into those two broad sectoral
categories.

Figure 4 reports the results. Even though firm-embedded productivity for the average
country (relative to France) is similar for Manufacturing and Services (-0.18 vs -0.20 log-
points), the cross-country differences are larger in Manufacturing. The cross-country dif-
ferences in output per-worker are also larger in Manufacturing than in Services, so the
contribution of firm-embedded productivity to cross-country income differences ends up
being roughly a third for both sectors. There is substantial variation across countries. For
example, Japan, Korea, and Germany have relative high levels of firm-embedded pro-
ductivity in Manufacturing, but their firm-embedded productivity in Services is similar
to that of other developed countries. Firm-embedded productivity is lower than country-
embedded factors, relative to France, in Services sectors for all countries, except for Ger-


                                                             20
                                 Table 2: Correlations with factors.
                                                     j         j         j
                                dep. var.         yn        ~n         z
                                                                       ~n
                                                  (1)       (2)        (3)
                                 [k n - yn ]     0.379**    -0.045   0.428***
                                                 [0.179]   [0.094]    [0.127]
                                 hn              0.772*     -0.019   0.792**
                                                 [0.424]   [0.274]    [0.350]

                                Obs.                27       27         27
                                R-squared         0.201    0.007      0.358

Notes:  [k n - yn ] denotes the capital-output ratio and hn denotes human capital. Both are in logs, relative
to France, and computed with data from Penn World Tables (9.1). Robust standard errors in parentheses.


many, Mexico, and Hungary. Manufacturing presents much more heterogeneity, with
less developed countries having higher firm-embedded productivity than more devel-
oped countries, and vice-versa.

We can further decompose differences in output per-worker within each sub-sector in
Manufacturing and each sub-sector in Services. Appendix Figures A2 and A3 show these
results. The figures show a very strong correlation between our sectoral measures of firm-
embedded productivity and output per-worker at the sector level.

Finally, we evaluate if the observed differences in aggregate firm-embedded productiv-
ity arise from differences in the sectoral composition of output across countries. With
this in mind, we compute a measure of aggregate firm-embedded productivity that ag-
gregates sectoral differences using the output shares of our reference country (France),
             j ~j
    w 
   ~n     j r    n . Figure 5 shows that this measure and our baseline measure are very
close to each other, indicating that cross-country differences in aggregate firm-embedded
productivity are not driven by cross-country differences in sectoral output shares. Within-
sector differences in firm-embedded productivity across countries overwhelmingly create
the observed aggregate differences.



4.2    Firm-embedded productivity and comparative advantage

An extensive literature in International Trade studies the sources of comparative advan-
tage by relating the sectorial concentration of a country's exports to factor endowments,



                                                     21
                                  Figure 4: Dev. accounting: Manufacturing and Services

                            Manufacturing                                                                                          Services
       0.5




                                                                                                    0.5
                                                                             DK
                                                                                                                                                                                    BE

                                                                        JP                                                                                               NL
                                                                            BE
                                                                     SEAT NL                                                                               DK
                                                                                                                                                                 SE AT
                                                                        DE KR                                                             LT
                                                               GR IT                                                                                  FI      ITPL
                                                                    FI                                                                                        IT
       0.0




                                                                                                    0.0
                                                                                                                                     SI          DE
                                              LT
                                              MX                     ES FR
                                                                    GB
                                                                                                                                 HR SK CZ GR GB
                                                                                                                                EE                     FR
                                                                            KR                                                                 ES
                                                                                                                                                JP
                                                                     ES
                                                                    GB                                                                       GBES
                                          PL SI                          DE NL                                              LV         KR
                                                                                                                                      RO         DE PL
                                                                    FI
   n, zn




                                                                                                n, zn
                                                                             BE                                              MX PT                                                  BE
                                                                        AT                                                            RO
                                                                                                                                       KR                AT
                                  PT    RO CZ                     IT SE                                                          PT       GR          SE
                                       HU                                                                                                    FI DK          NL
                                           SK                  GR        JP                                                         SK CZ
                                                                                                                     BG
                                                                                                                  HU BG      MX      SI
                 BG                                                                                               HU        LV   HR
                      LV   HR             CZ                                                                                    EE
                      EE               HU                                    DK                                                      LT
                                        RO SI
       -0.5




                                                                                                    -0.5
                           HR
                      EE                PL MXLT
                      LV          PT




                 BG                                                  n: 0.34 (0.09)                                                                                      n: 0.32 (0.09)
                                                                     zn: 0.66 (0.09)                                                                                     zn: 0.68 (0.09)
       -1.0




                                                                                                    -1.0
              -1.2         -0.8                    -0.4             0.0            0.4                     -0.8    -0.6       -0.4             -0.2             0.0           0.2        0.4
                                                   yn                                                                                          yn


Notes: Each circle (square) represents a country's firm-embedded productivity (country-embedded factors).
                                                                                j
The figures plot the decomposition in Equation (15) at the sectoral level. yn is plotted in the x-axis and
  j         j
z~n and   ~ n are plotted in the y-axis for j =Manufacturing (left panel) and j =services (right panel).




     Figure 5: Differences in firm-embedded productivity within and between sectors.
                                       0.5




                                                                                                                             JP
                                                                                                                                                 DE
                                                                                                                                                 DEIT
                                                                                                                                                   IT
                                       0.0




                                                                                                                      KR                                   FR
                                                                                                                             JP      GB
                                                                                                                                           ES
                                                                                                                                           ES
                                                                  MX                                                  KR
                                                                                                        PL
                                  n, zn




                                                                                                        PL                                       BE
                                                                                                                                                 BE
                                                                  MX                                                                        NL
                                                                                                                                            NL AT AT
                                                                                               PT RO
                                                                                                  RO    GR                                 FI
                                                                                                                                            SE
                                                                                                                                            SE
                                                                                  HU           PT     CZGR                                 FI
                                                                                  HU              SK CZ
                                                                                                  SK   HR                                     DK
                                                                                                                                              DK
                                                          BG                                       SI HR
                                                                                       LV
                                       -0.5




                                                                                       LV
                                                                                        EELT
                                                                                        EELT




                                                                                                                          n: 0.34 (0.10)
                                                                                                                          zn: 0.36 (0.09)
                                       -1.0




                                              -1.0                -0.8             -0.6                    -0.4             -0.2                      0.0
                                                                                               yn

Notes: The figure plots the decomposition in equation (15), where yn is plotted in the x-axis and         ~w
                                                                                                           n 
    j ~j                  j      j
 j r n and       ~n   j n      ~ n are plotted in the y-axis. The legend reports the slopes of a bivariate OLS
regression of  ~ n (rest. ~nw ) on  y . Each circle (square) represents a country.
                                       n




                                                                                         22
technologies, financial conditions, or institutions.24 In this section, we evaluate how sec-
torial differences in firm-embedded productivity and in country-embedded factors shape
the sectorial concentration of the foreign output of a country's MNEs. The notion that
MNEs can use their idiosyncratic productivity around the world while country embed-
ded factors are immobile suggests that only the former should affect the activities of
MNEs when producing abroad.

With this in mind, we correlate sectoral differences in firm-embedded productivity in
a country with the sectoral concentration of the foreign output of the MNEs from that
country (referred to as 'outward MNE sales'). We measure this sectoral concentration
using a Revealed Comparative Advantage (RCA) index for outward MNE sales. With this
                j       j
in mind, let Rn,row ( Rr,row ) denote the total revenues of MNEs from country n (reference
country, r) in the rest of the world.25 We define the RCA index for outward MNE sales as
                                                                     
                                                j            j
                                    j         Rn,row /  j Rn,row
                               rcan  ln        j             j
                                                                     .                         (24)
                                              Rr,row /  j   Rr,row


         j        j                                                                             j
Like   ~ n , rcan is defined in logs and takes France as the reference country. Thus, rcan >
0 when the share of sector j in outward MNE sales is larger for MNEs from country n than
                                                j
for MNEs from France. Note that, while         ~n is measured with data on market shares of
                                    j
foreign MNEs in country n, rcan is measured with data on sales of country n's MNEs in
foreign countries, so that the two measures do not need to be correlated.

Figure 6 compares the relative differences in firm-embedded productivity in manufactur-
ing vs. services,     man -  
                     ~n        serv , to the differences in relative comparative advantage in
                              ~n
manufacturing and services for outward MNE sales, rcaman       n   - rcaserv
                                                                         n . There is a strong
positive relation between differences in firm-embedded productivity and differences in
the RCA index for outward MNE sales across countries. For example, Japan and Finland
have a particularly large stock of firm-embedded productivity in Manufacturing, and the
outward sales of the MNEs from these countries are concentrated in the Manufacturing
sector. In contrast, Latvia and Lithuania have relatively more firm-know how in Services,
and the sales of the MNEs from these countries in the rest of the world are also concen-
  24 A  non-exhaustive list of recent papers includes Bernhofen and Brown (2004), Romalis (2004),
Levchenko (2007), Nunn (2007), Costinot et al. (2012), Levchenko and Zhang (2016), and Hanson et al.
(2015).
  25 Using                                                                              j
              the notation from Section 2 these revenues correspond to Rn,row                    
                 j      j
n =n      
            j  Pnn ( ) nn ( )
                      Y        d  .
             nn




                                                    23
          Figure 6: Sectorial firm-embedded productivity and outward MNE sales.




                                  1.0
                                                                                                   FI
                                                                                 BE
                                                                                SE            HU
                                                                               AT    IT                                     JP




                                            0.0
                                                                                FR PL GB

                          rcamanuf,n-rcaserv,n
                                                                                                    DE
                                                              DK                           CZ
                                                                SI
                                                                     GR        SK
                               -1.0

                                                                          HR        PT

                                                                                      ES
                      -2.0




                                                                LT         RO

                                                         LV


                                                                                                         4.59 (1.59), R2: 0.29
                                  -3.0




                                                  -0.2                     0.0                           0.2                 0.4
                                                                                     manuf,n-serv,n

Notes: The x-axis reports the difference in our measure of firm-embedded productivity in manufacturing
                                                                              j
vs. services, relative to France. The y-axis reports the difference in the rcan index defined in Equation (24),
between j = Manufacturing and j = Services.


trated in the Service sector.

We observe similar patterns across disaggregated 2-digit sectors. Table 3 shows the results
                                                                       j
of regressing our sectorial measure of comparative advantage, rcan , on our measures
                                                                               j         j
of sectorial firm-embedded productivity and country embedded factors,         ~n and z  ~n .
Columns (1), (4) and (7) show a strong correlation between a country's sectorial firm-
embedded know how and its comparative advantage.26 In contrast, Columns (2), (5)
and (8) show no correlation between sectorial country-embedded factors and a country's
comparative advantage. Columns (3), (6), and (9) reports similar results when country-
embedded factors and firm-embedded productivity are simultaneously included in the
regression.

These results highlight that firm-embedded productivity is transferable across countries
and a source of advantage for MNEs operating abroad.27 Country embedded factors,
which are immobile across countries, do not appear to shape the sectorial concentration
of a country's MNEs.
  26 This result is in line with the findings in Alviarez (2019),  who using sectoral-level data shows a positive
correlation between the bilateral sales of affiliates in a sector and the RCA index of sectoral TFP in the source
country of the MNE.
  27 In the same spirit, Arkolakis et al. (2018) show that more outward MNE activity is correlated with a

comparative advantage in innovation activities.



                                                                                         24
          Table 3: Sectorial firm-embedded productivity and comparative advantage.
                j
 dep. var. rcan                  All sectors                            Manufacturing sectors                                Service sectors
                       (1)             (2)         (3)                  (4)           (5)                       (6)    (7)         (8)         (9)
  j
 ~n                  2.63***                      3.23***               4.14**                              5.48***    3.07**               2.84**
                     [0.663]                      [0.836]              [1.326]                              [1.075]   [0.906]              [0.812]
      j
 z
 ~n                                 0.17           0.83                           1.51                       2.49**               -0.76     -0.19 |
                                   [0.469]        [0.501]                        [0.927]                    [0.823]              [0.527]   [0.645]

 Observations          313             313         313                  121           121                    121       132        132       132
 R-squared            0.072           0.001       0.094                0.138         0.056                  0.274     0.063      0.023     0.064

Notes: Each j corresponds to a NAICS 2-digit sector. 'All sectors' include sectors those in Manufacturing,
Services, and others. Standard errors are clustered by country and sector (in parentheses).


4.3       Contribution of domestic and foreign firms

This section further decomposes the sources of the cross-country differences in firm-
embedded productivity by considering the origin of the firms in each country. In par-
ticular, differences in firm-embedded productivity may arise both from cross-country dif-
ferences in the productivity embedded in all domestic firms, and from differences in the
productivity embedded in all foreign affiliates operating in each country.

We write the market share of domestic firms in country n and in sector j as

                                                                                            j
                                          j                    j                       nn
                                         Snn              j
                                                              Snn ( )d           =              j
                                                                                                        ,                                  (25)
                                                      nn                                 n

            j           j
where nn   j Ann ( ) d is the productivity embedded in domestic firms in country
                  nn
n. Similarly, the market share of foreign firms in country n is given by

                                                                                                    j
                                                                                          Fn
                                                   
                                         j                             j
                                       S Fn                   j
                                                                      Sin ( )d       =                  j
                                                                                                            ,                              (26)
                                                   i =n in                                  n

            j                     j
where  Fn  i =n         in
                             j   Ann ( ) d denotes the productivity embedded in foreign firms
                                                                           j
operating in country n. From the definition of n , and using lowercase to denote logs, we
can write the first-order approximation

                                              j       j           j              j              j
                                         n = Srr nn + 1 - Srr Fn ,                                                                         (27)



                                                                      25
         j
where Srr refers to the the market share of domestic firms in the reference country r (and
sector j).

Finally, aggregating across sectors we obtain

                           ~ n = n
                           
                                 j j
                                   Srr 
                                         j
                                       ~ nn +  n 1 - Srr 
                                               j      j  ~j ,                                      (28)
                                                          Fn
                                       j                   j

                                           ~ nn                ~ Fn


             j         j           j              j
where ~ nn   j nn and ~   j  .
                       Fn   Fn

Equation (28) shows the contributions of domestic firms (           ~ nn ) and foreign firms (    ~ Fn )
to the observed differences in aggregate firm-embedded productivity (               ~ n ). To measure
                                                         j                                           j
these contributions, we first use domestic shares Snn from the data, our estimates of               ~n ,
                                      j
and Equation (25) to compute        ~ nn . Similarly, we use the revenue share of foreign firms
                j                                         j                                       ~j .
in country n, S Fn , together with the estimates of     ~n  , and Equation (26), to compute         Fn
                                                                 j
We then aggregate across sectors using sectoral shares n and the reference-country sec-
                                                    j
toral revenue share for their domestic firms, Srr .

Figure 7 shows the two terms in the right-hand side of Equation (28). The average coun-
try has a 0.21 log-point difference relative to France regarding domestic firm-embedded
productivity, while the gap for foreign firms is only 0.04. Differences in aggregate firm-
embedded productivity for domestic firms account for 88 percent of the cross-country
differences in aggregate firm-embedded productivity. Differences in the productivity em-
bedded in the foreign affiliates of MNEs are very small across countries, with some devel-
oping countries having better foreign MNE affiliates than developed countries. Countries
such as Latvia, Estonia, and Slovakia have less productivity embedded in domestic firms
than most of the more developed countries in our sample. However, they host foreign
firms that are as productive as the ones located in Finland, the Netherlands, or Austria.
Finally, this decomposition attributes, for instance, all the difference in aggregate firm-
embedded productivity between France and Poland, observed in Figure 3, to domestic
firms.



4.4    Firm-embedded productivity and scale effects

A recurring theme in the International Trade and Growth/Development literatures is that
aggregate scale or variety effects may be important for TFP (see e.g. Krugman 1980, Jones


                                                      26
       Figure 7: Aggregate firm-embedded productivity: domestic vs foreign firms.




                       0.2
                                                                                                            JP

                                                                                                                      IT
                                                                                                                   DE




                       0.0
                                                                                            PL      ES GB        FRDE IT
                                                     SK     HU      CZ          NLRO AT   BE
                                                                              PTSE
                                                                             FI
                                                LV                  DK        GR
                                     EE                      BHR
                                                            SI G                                    ES GB
                    nn, Fn                LT                                                                JP


                                                                                          BEPL
                    -0.2
                                                                              GR     AT
                                                                                SERO
                                                                             FI
                                                                              PTNL

                                                                    DK
                                                               HR
                                                             BG
                                                            SI      CZ

                                                            HU
                       -0.4




                                          LT    LV SK

                                     EE


                                                                                             nn: 0.88 (0.03)
                                                                                             Fn: 0.12 (0.03)
                       -0.6




                              -0.6                   -0.4                         -0.2                      0.0
                                                                         n

Notes: Brown circles and green squares, respectively, report ~ nn and ~ Fn defined in Equation (28).


1995, and Hsieh and Klenow 2009). In this section we decompose cross-country differ-
ences in aggregate firm-embedded productivity that arise from differences in the average
productivity embedded in each firm, from differences in the number of firms across coun-
tries. In particular, we can write the differences in firm-embedded productivity as

                                               ~ n = mn + ¯n ,                                                             (29)
                                                                 Scale       Average



where mn denotes the log-difference in the aggregate number of firms across sectors,
and    ¯ n     ~ n - mn is the log-difference in the average firm-embedded productivity
relative to France.

Computing the scale term in Equation (29) is not straightforward, since comparable data
on the number of firms across countries are not readily available.28 This problem is com-
pounded by the fact that, in our framework, a firm corresponds to all the tax-identification
numbers belonging to the same ultimate owner. In contrast, in most existing datasets,
establishments and firms are not recorded by their ultimate owner. Notice that this chal-
lenge cannot be overcome by counting the firms in our dataset, since ORBIS does not
cover the population of firms in each country and the coverage differs across countries.
  28 The definition of what constitutes a 'firm' differs across country-sources. For example, the minimum

number of employees for an establishment or firm to be counted in surveys varies across countries.



                                                                    27
With this in mind, we assume that there is a log-linear relation between the scale effect
and the population in a country,

                                           mn =  ×  popn ,                                               (30)

where we continue to use lowercase to denote logs, and where popn is the log of the
population population in country n. This relation is a standard feature of many models
of scale economies, such as Krugman (1980). Replacing Equation (30) into (29), we fit the
regression given by

                                        ~ n = b ×  popn +  n .

Under the assumption that the average firm-embedded productivity        ¯ n is orthogonal
to the population of the country, the error term can be interpreted as  n =      ¯ n . If the
average firm-embedded productivity in a country increases with population, the residual
 n would understate the differences in average firm-embedded productivity across coun-
tries, since it would capture only the part of average firm-embedded productivity that is
orthogonal to population.

Figure 8 shows a very strong correlation between our measure of average firm-embedded
productivity  ¯ n and output per-worker, where output per-worker is also residualized by
population.29 The slope is flatter than the slope in Figure 3, though it is more precisely
estimated. The cross-country variation in firm-embedded productivity that is not driven
by the country's scale accounts for 16 percent of the cross-country variance in income
per-worker, almost half of the variation accounted for our aggregate measure of firm-
embedded productivity     ~n.



5     Robustness

This section presents several robustness exercises. First, we show how to estimate firm-
embedded productivity under alternative assumptions on the technology transfer costs.
Second, we evaluate potential selection concerns and the log-linearity assumption in our
production function. Finally, we repeat our analysis using alternative samples, sectoral
disaggregations, and gravity controls.
  29 The slope of this relation thus corresponds to the slope of a regression of  y on  ~ n that also controls
                                                                                   n
for  popn .


                                                     28
              Figure 8: Dev. accounting: average firm-embedded productivity.




                       0.2
                                                                                                                    FI
                                                                                                  IT   SI         BE AT
                                                                                  KR
                                                                                             DE                  SE
                                                                                              LV


                       0.0
                                                                             JP                  HREE
                                                                                                  FR
                                                                                  PT        SK  ES                     DK
                                                                                          GR
                                                                                         GB
                                                                                         CZ                 NL
                                                                         HU RO
                                                         BG               PL
                      n

                                                                                             LT
                       -0.2



                                     MX




                                                                                                      n: 0.16 (0.03)
                       -0.4




                              -1.0        -0.8       -0.6         -0.4            -0.2        0.0           0.2            0.4
                                                                          yn

Notes: Each circle represents a country. The y-axis plots the residual of a regression of firm-embedded
productivity,  ~ n , on the log of population. The x-axis plots the residual of a regression of the log of
income per capita, yn , on the log of population.


5.1    Alternative assumptions on the technology transfer costs
                                           j
Our baseline estimates for n were derived under the assumption that technology trans-
                                                                                     j
fer costs could have an origin-specific, but not a destination-specific component,  Dn = 0,
as specified in Equation (21). As explained in Section 3.2, if this assumption does not
hold, and if it is harder to transfer technology to less developed countries, our baseline
estimates would understate the contribution of firm-embedded productivity to the cross-
country variance of output per-worker.
                                                 j                       j
We now show how to estimate n when  Dn = 0. We use data on market shares of both
affiliates and parent firms of MNEs, and assume that costs have a destination-specific, but
                                   j
no origin-specific, component, On = 0, as in Eaton and Kortum (2002). In particular, we
estimate

                  j                  j               j        j              j                    j                   j
                 sin ( ) = i ( ) + An + Pn + d distin + l langin +                                                    in   ( ) .   (31)

         j
Here, An is a set of dummies that take the value of 1 if the destination country is n and the
                                                 j
firm is an affiliate, i = n, in sector j, while Pn is a set of dummies that take the value of 1 if
the destination country is n and the firm is a parent, i = n, in sector j. In this specification,



                                                                   29
                j                                                       j
the dummies An are still given by Equation (21), while the dummies Pn are

                                    j            j       j
                                 Pn = - n - On .                                       (32)

      j             j
If On = 0, Pn can be interpreted as the inverse of the firm-embedded productivity
in country n relative to France. If the assumption is not satisfied and the origin-specific
                                                                                   j
component of the transfer cost is higher for low income countries, cov(y j n , On )  0,
estimates based on Equation (32) would overstate the contribution of firm-embedded pro-
ductivity to the cross-country variance of output per-worker,

                            j                        j   j                  j
             cov yn , -Pn = cov yn , n - On  cov yn , n .                              (33)

While our baseline estimates yield a lower bound to the contribution of differences in
firm-embedded productivity to cross-country differences in income, this alternative spec-
ification yields an upper bound to that contribution.

Figure 9 compares our baseline estimates with those based on Equations (32) and (31) and
                        j
the restriction that On = 0. The two alternative identification assumptions on transfer
costs yield similar estimates for aggregate firm-embedded productivity, relative to France,
for each country. Appendix Figure (A4) shows that the OLS estimates from Equation (31)
are less precise than our baseline estimates, as the number of MNE foreign affiliates in
our data far exceeds the number of MNE parent firms. For the average country, this
alternative estimate of n is -0.19 log-points, relative to France, while our baseline es-
timate is -0.20. One of the largest differences is observed for Mexico where aggregate
firm-embedded productivity, relative to France, is estimated in -0.42 when we assume
         j                         j
that On = 0 and in -0.11 for  Dn = 0.



5.2   Selection: MNE-destination specific technology transfer costs

Section 3.2 noted that our OLS estimates of the country effects are biased if MNE-destination
specific transfer costs drive the assignment of MNEs to countries -that is, if selection is
based on match-specific effects-. If the relatively unproductive MNEs enter unattractive
                                                                                     j
locations only when their MNE-destination specific component of the transfer cost  in ( )
                             j
is low, then the average of  in ( ) across the MNEs that choose to enter each destination
                                                                               j
would vary across n and thus it would be captured by the country effects An .

To assess the severity of this potential bias, we follow the literature on two-way matching

                                            30
             Figure 9: Alternative assumptions on the technology transfer costs.




                         0.5
                                                                                                  DE
                                                                                          GB
                                                                              KR    JP              IT
                                                                                    JP            DEIT


                         0.0
                                                                              KR                NL     FR
                                                                                          GB   ES
                                                                RO      GR                     ES
                                            MX                          PL                      SE BE
                                                                                                NL ATAT
                                                              PT RO                            FI
                                                                                                SE
                         n

                                                                 SK    CZGR
                                                                         PL                    FI DK
                                                   HU         PT
                                                   HU LV         SK     HR                        DK
                                       BG                         SI
                                                       EE               HR
                                       BG   MX        LV          SI
                         -0.5



                                                       EELT
                                                         LT




                                                                Dn=0: 0.34 (0.10) (baseline)
                                                                On=0: 0.50 (0.11)
                         -1.0




                                -1.0        -0.8    -0.6               -0.4        -0.2            0.0
                                                               yn

Notes: Each circle (square) represents a country. The figure plots the decomposition in Equation (15), where
yn is plotted in the x-axis and   ~ n is plotted in the y-axis. The legends report the slopes of a bivariate OLS
                                                             j                       j
regression of   ~ n on yn under the assumption that  Dn        = 0 (baseline) and On = 0. Standard errors are
in parenthesis.


(see Abowd et al., 1999) and analyze the residuals from estimating our baseline specifica-
tion in Equation (19) by OLS. If the assignment of MNEs to countries is driven by MNE-
destination specific transfer costs, we should expect these costs to be on average lower
       j
-low  in ( )- for low-productivity MNEs in unattractive markets. In contrast, highly pro-
                                                                             j
ductive MNEs are more likely to enter these markets irrespective of their  in ( ). If this
is the case, our specification should underestimate market shares for low-productivity
                                                                         j
MNEs in unattractive markets, as it does not take into account that the  in ( )'s can sys-
tematically vary with firm productivity among the MNEs that choose to enter any given
market.

We evaluate this implication in Figure 11a, which plots the mean standardized residuals,
             j       j
 j          s ( )-s
                  ^ ( )
^ in ( ) = in s in , against deciles of estimates of the MNE-sector fixed effects,  j ( ),
and deciles of market popularity. Our measure of market popularity is calculated using
data from OECD-Eurostat on the number of foreign MNEs operating in a country-sector
pair. Indeed, we tend to see positive residuals for the less productive MNEs (decile 1
of the MNE-sector fixed effect) in less popular markets (decile 1 of market popularity).
In contrast, we overestimate the market shares of the most productive MNEs (decile 10
of the MNE-sector fixed effect) in these markets. The residuals are very close to zero in
the remaining bins of the figure, indicating that technology transfer costs do not vary

                                                        31
                                     Figure 10: OLS Residuals.




      (a) By MNE-sector and market popularity.        (b) By MNE-sector and country-embedded fac-
                                                      tors.
Notes: Deciles are calculated within sectors. Market popularity refers to the number of foreign MNEs in a
                                                                                            j
                                                                                           ~n
country-sector pair, from OECD-Eurostat. Country-embedded factor refers to estimates of Z     .


systematically across MNEs and locations in those bins.

A related concern with our baseline estimation is related to complementarities between
firm-embedded productivity and country-embedded factors. That is, our model assumes
a production function that is log-linear in firm-embedded productivity and the coun-
try embedded factors. This separability is inherited by the aggregate production func-
tion, which is log-linear in Z~ n and aggregate firm-embedded productivity     ~ n . But if,
for instance, high productivity MNEs do relatively better in countries with high country-
embedded productivity, the assumption would not longer hold, and our procedure would
underestimate market shares for high productivity MNEs in markets with high Z      ~ n.

We evaluate this implication in Figure 11b, which plots the mean standardized residuals,
              j        j
 j           sin ( )-s^in ( )
^ in ( ) =          s  against deciles of estimates of the MNE-sector fixed effects,  j ( ),
                              ,
                                                            j
                                                           ~n
and deciles of estimates of the country-embedded factors Z    . We see positive residuals for
the less productive MNEs (decile 1 of the MNE-sector fixed effect) in countries with lower
  j
 ~n
Z   (decile 1 of country-embedded factors). We actually overestimate the market shares of
the most productive MNEs (decile 10 of the MNE-sector fixed effect) in these countries.
The residuals are very close to zero in the remaining bins of the figure, indicating that the
log-linearity assumption is not systematically violated in those bins. Appendix B presents
additional test that support our linearity assumption.

With these concerns in mind, we proceed to re-estimate Equation (19) using alternative


                                                   32
         Table 4: Contribution of firm-embedded productivity, restricted samples.
                                                                               cov(yn ,  ~n )
                                                                                 var (yn )



                    Baseline                                                  0.34 (0.10)

                    I. Keeping MNEs with MNE-sector FE belonging to:
                       2nd to 9th Decile                                      0.32 (0.10)
                       3rd to 8th Decile                                      0.31 (0.11)
                       4th to 7th Decile                                      0.31 (0.11)
                       5th to 6th Decile                                      0.37 (0.12)

                    II. Keeping MNEs operating in:
                        at least 3 countries                                  0.32 (0.10)
                        at least 5 countries                                  0.28 (0.08)
                        at least 10 countries                                 0.32 (0.08)



Notes: Slopes of a bivariate OLS regression of ~ n on yn . MNE-sector fixed effect, for each sector, estimated
using Equation 19 by OLS. Standard errors are in parenthesis.


subsamples, restricted to exclude the MNEs at the extremes of the productivity distribu-
tion. Concretely, we restrict the sample to subsets of MNEs that lie within the 2nd to 9th,
3rd to 8th, 4th to 7th deciles, or 5th and 6th deciles, of the MNE-sector fixed effect distribu-
tion within a sector. Alternatively, we also apply our estimation procedure to subsamples
of MNEs that operate in at least 3, 5, or 10 countries. These are large MNEs that are un-
likely to select into destination markets due to the MNE-destination specific component
of the technology transfer costs. Table 4 shows that the contribution of firm-embedded
productivity to the cross-country variance in output per-worker is very similar to our
baseline in all these subsamples.



5.3    Additional robustness exercises

This section briefly describes additional robustness exercises, which are collected in Table
5. First, we define sectors at the 4-digit NAICS (336 sectors), rather than the 2-digit NAICS
classification. Second, we exclude the Health, Education, and Real Estate sectors from our
sample, as the government has a large participation on theses sectors in some countries
in our sample. Third, we repeat our analysis for firms that appear in ORBIS in every
year between 2010 and 2016, as these are arguably the years when the ORBIS data are of


                                                     33
       Table 5: Contribution of firm-embedded productivity, additional robustness.
                                                                                            cov(yn ,  ~n )
                                                                                              var (yn )

     Baseline                                                                              0.34 (0.10)

     Aggregation at 4-digit NAICS industries                                               0.38 (0.11)
     Excluding Real Estate, Health, and Education                                          0.32 (0.10)
     Excluding MNEs that do not appear in ORBIS every year between 2010-2016               0.39 (0.09)
     Controlling for differences in GDP per-worker between source and host country         0.34 (0.10)
     Excluding gravity variables                                                           0.29 (0.11)

Notes: Slopes of a bivariate OLS regression of ~ n on yn . Standard errors are in parenthesis.


the highest quality (see Appendix Table A4 for results by year). Fourth, we include the
difference between the income per-capita of the home and the host country among our
gravity controls. Finally, we repeat our analysis without any gravity control. The results
of our decomposition for all these alternative specifications are remarkably close to our
baseline result.



6    Conclusion

This paper sheds light on the determinants of TFP by decomposing cross-country dif-
ferences in output per-worker into differences in firm-embedded productivity and dif-
ferences in country-embedded factors. Our key insight is that, if MNEs can use their
idiosyncratic productivity around the world but they must use the factors from the coun-
tries where they produce, then differences in the market shares of the same MNE across
countries can be used to measure cross-country differences in firm-embedded productiv-
ity. We implement this idea in an accounting framework that includes MNEs and measure
firm-embedded productivity using firm-level revenue data from ORBIS.

Our results indicate that cross-country differences in firm-embedded productivity are
large, accounting for roughly a third of the observed differences in output per-worker
across the countries in our sample. Our robustness results further suggest that a plausi-
ble range for this contribution goes from one-fifth to a half of the observed variance in
output per-worker.

Our decomposition suggests that policies that help to close the gap in firm-embedded
productivity across countries can go a long way in reducing cross-country income dif-


                                                    34
ferences. For example, governments can design policies such as tax incentives for R&D,
patent boxes, and research grants to stimulate firm innovation and firm embedded-productivity
(Bloom et al. 2019). A caveat with our analysis is that, due to data availability, our sample
of developing countries is limited to those in Eastern Europe and Mexico. Our proce-
dure and decomposition, however, can be easily applied to other developing and poorer
countries as new affiliate-parent matched data become available.



References
Abowd, John M, Francis Kramarz, and David N Margolis, "High Wage Workers and
 High Wage Firms," Econometrica, March 1999, 67 (2), 251­333.

Acemoglu, Daron, Francisco A. Gallego, and James A. Robinson, "Institutions, Human
 Capital, and Development," Annual Review of Economics, 2014, 6 (1), 875­912.

Alviarez, Vanessa, "Multinational production and comparative advantage," Journal of
  International Economics, 2019, 119 (C), 1­54.

Andrews, M. J., L. Gill, T. Schank, and R. Upward, "High wage workers and low wage
 firms: negative assortative matching or limited mobility bias?," Journal of the Royal Sta-
 tistical Society: Series A (Statistics in Society), 2008.

Arkolakis, Costas, Natalia Ramondo, Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, and Stephen Yeaple,
  "Innovation and Production in the Global Economy," American Economic Review, Au-
  gust 2018, 108 (8), 2128­2173.

Atkeson, Andrew and Patrick J. Kehoe, "Modeling and Measuring Organization Capi-
  tal," Journal of Political Economy, October 2005, 113 (5), 1026­1053.

Baqaee, David R. and Emmanuel Farhi, "Productivity and Misallocation in General
  Equilibrium," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2020, 135 (1), 105­163.

Bento, Pedro and Diego Restuccia, "Misallocation, Establishment Size, and Productiv-
  ity," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, July 2017, 9 (3), 267­303.

Bernhofen, Daniel M. and John C. Brown, "A Direct Test of the Theory of Comparative
  Advantage: The Case of Japan," Journal of Political Economy, February 2004, 112 (1),
  48­67.



                                            35
Bilir, L. Kamran and Eduardo Morales, "Innovation in the Global Firm," Journal of Polit-
  ical Economy, 2020, 128 (4), 1566­1625.

Bloom, Nicholas and John Van Reenen, "Measuring and explaining management prac-
  tices across firms and countries," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007, 122 (4), 1351­1408.

  , , and Heidi Williams, "A Toolkit of Policies to Promote Innovation," Journal of Eco-
  nomic Perspectives, August 2019, 33 (3), 163­84.

Bonhomme, Stephane, Thibaut Lamadon, and Elena Manresa, "A Distributional Frame-
  work for Matched Employer Employee Data," Econometrica, 2019, 87 (3), p. 699­739.

Burstein, Ariel T. and Alexander Monge-Naranjo, "Foreign Know-How, Firm Control,
  and the Income of Developing Countries," Quarterly Journal of Economics, February
  2009, 124 (1), 149­195.

Caselli, Francesco, "Accounting for Cross-Country Income Differences," in Philippe
  Aghion and Steven Durlauf, eds., Handbook of Economic Growth, Vol. 1 of Handbook of
  Economic Growth, Elsevier, July 2005, chapter 9, pp. 679­741.

  , Technology Differences over Space and Time, Princeton University Press, 2016.

Costinot, Arnaud, Dave Donaldson, and Ivana Komunjer, "What Goods Do Countries
 Trade? A Quantitative Exploration of Ricardo's Ideas," Review of Economic Studies, 2012,
 79, 581­608.

Cravino, Javier and Andrei A. Levchenko, "Multinational Firms and International Busi-
  ness Cycle Transmission," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2017, 132 (2), 921­962.

Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum, "Technology, Geography, and Trade," Economet-
  rica, September 2002, 70 (5), 1741­1779.

Edmond, Chris, Virgiliu Midrigan, and Daniel Yi Xu, "How Costly Are Markups?,"
  March 2018. NBER Working Paper No. 24800.

Hall, Robert E. and Charles I. Jones, "Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More
 Output perWorker Than Others?," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1999, 114 (1), 83­116.

Hanson, Gordon, Nelson Lind, and Marc-Andreas Muendler, "The Dynamics of Com-
 parative Advantage," NBER Working Paper, 2015, 21753.




                                             36
Head, Keith and Thierry Mayer, "Gravity Equations: Workhorse,Toolkit, and Cook-
 book," in Elhanan Helpman Gopinath, Gita and Kenneth Rogoff, eds., Handbook of Inter-
 national Economics, Vol. 4 of Handbook of International Economics, Elsevier, 2014, chapter 3,
 pp. 131­195.

Helpman, Elhanan, "A Simple Theory of International Trade with Multinational Corpo-
 rations," Journal of Political Economy, June 1984, 92 (3), 451­71.

  , Marc J. Melitz, and Stephen R. Yeaple, "Export versus FDI with Heterogeneous
  Firms," American Economic Review, March 2004, 94 (1), 300­316.

Hendricks, Lutz and Todd Schoellman, "Human Capital and Development Accounting:
 New Evidence from Wage Gains at Migration," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2018,
 133 (2), 665­700.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter J. Klenow, "Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China
 and India," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 2009, 124 (4), 1403­1448.

Irarrazabal, Alfonso, Andreas Moxnes, and Luca David Opromolla, "The Margins of
  Multinational Production and the Role of Intrafirm Trade," Journal of Political Economy,
  February 2013, 121 (1), 74­126.

Jaef, Roberto Fattal, "Entry Barriers, Idiosyncratic Distortions, and the Firm-Size Distri-
  bution," 2020. Working paper.

Jones, Charles I., "R&D-Based Models of Economic Growth," Journal of Political Economy,
  1995, 103, 759­784.

Klenow, Peter and Andres Rodriguez-Clare, "The Neoclassical Revival in Growth Eco-
  nomics: Has It Gone Too Far?," in "NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997, Volume 12"
  NBER Chapters, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, 03-2018 1997, pp. 73­114.

Klette, Tor Jakob and Samuel Kortum, "Innovating Firms and Aggregate Innovation,"
  Journal of Political Economy, October 2004, 112 (5), 986­1018.

Kline, P., R. Saggio, and M. Solvsten, "Leave-out estimation of variance components,"
  Econometrica, 2020.

Krugman, Paul, "Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern of Trade,"
  American Economic Review, December 1980, 70 (5), 950­59.



                                             37
Levchenko, Andrei A., "Institutional Quality and International Trade," Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies, 2007, 74 (3), 791­819.

   and Jing Zhang, "The Evolution of Comparative Advantage: Measurement and Wel-
  fare Implications," Journal of Monetary Economics, April 2016, 78, 48­66.

Markusen, James R., "Multinationals, multi-plant economies, and the gains from trade,"
 Journal of International Economics, May 1984, 16 (3-4), 205­226.

McGrattan, Ellen R. and Edward C. Prescott, "Openness, technology capital, and devel-
 opment," Journal of Economic Theory, November 2009, 144 (6), 2454­2476.

Nunn, Nathan, "Relationship-Specificity, Incomplete Contracts, and the Pattern of
 Trade," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007, 122 (2), 569­600.

Parente, Stephen and Edward Prescott, Barriers to Riches, The MIT Press, 2000.

Prescott, Edward C and Michael Visscher, "Organization Capital," Journal of Political
  Economy, June 1980, 88 (3), 446­461.

Ramondo, Natalia and Andres Rodriguez-Clare, "Trade, Multinational Production, and
  the Gains from Openness," Journal of Political Economy, 2013, 121 (2), 273 ­ 322.

Romalis, John, "Factor Proportions and the Structure of Commodity Trade," American
 Economic Review, March 2004, 94 (1), 67­97.

Waugh, Michael E., "International Trade and Income Differences," American Economic
 Review, December 2010, 100 (5), 2093­2124.




                                          38
ONLINE APPENDIX
                          Table A1: Estimates of gravity coefficients.

                                                            Distance        Common Language
                                                           Coef.  S.E.      Coef.    S.E.

      Other goods
           Agriculture and Mining                          -0.702   0.215   -0.078       0.327
           Electricity                                     -0.754   0.138   0.069        0.481
           Construction                                    -0.491   0.222   0.740        0.277
      Manufacturing
           Food and Beverage                               -0.214   0.165   0.597        0.090
           Textiles, Apparel and Wood                      -0.285   0.125   -0.144       0.277
           Chemicals, Petroleum and Plastic                -0.191   0.075   0.161        0.085
           Basic Metals                                    -0.202   0.097   0.261        0.089
           Electrical Equipment and Machinery              -0.030   0.074   0.272        0.112
           Transport Equipment and Other Manufacturing     -0.278   0.114   0.004        0.211
      Services
           Wholesale Trade and Retail Trade                -0.278   0.064   0.212        0.103
           Transportation and Storage                      -0.123   0.088   0.233        0.201
           Information                                     -0.340   0.116   0.559        0.114
           Financial and Insurance Services                -0.423   0.101   1.013        0.178
           Support Services                                -0.276   0.058   0.335        0.149
           Accommodation and Recreation                    -0.075   0.147   0.245        0.218
      Other Sectors
           Education                                       0.081    0.511   0.678        0.592
           Health                                          0.099    0.569   0.240        0.511
           Real Estate                                     -0.296   0.129   0.279        0.176


                                                       j                             j
Notes: This table reports OLS coefficients on distance, d , and common language, l , from estimating
Equation (19).




                                                 1
                             Table A2: Estimates of sectoral elasticities  j .

                                                                     no controls    +k n /yn + hn
                                                                     Coef.   S.E    Coef.    S.E

                  Other goods
                       Agriculture and Mining                        -0.08   0.04   -0.09   0.04
                       Construction                                  -0.21   0.04   -0.21   0.04
                       Electricity                                   -0.12   0.02   -0.13   0.02
                  Manufacturing
                       Food and Beverage                             -0.18   0.03   -0.19   0.03
                       Textiles, Apparel and Wood                    -0.26   0.05   -0.29   0.05
                       Chemicals, Petroleum and Plastic              -0.22   0.04   -0.23   0.04
                       Basic Metals                                  -0.12   0.02   -0.12   0.03
                       Electrical Equipment and Machinery            -0.21   0.03   -0.21   0.03
                       Transport Equipment and Other Manufacturing   -0.31   0.03   -0.32   0.03
                  Services
                       Wholesale Trade and Retail Trade              -0.18   0.05   -0.20   0.04
                       Transportation and Storage                    -0.06   0.05   -0.07   0.05
                       Information                                   -0.28   0.05   -0.29   0.05
                       Financial and Insurance Services              0.05    0.03   0.04    0.02
                       Support Services                              -0.15   0.03   -0.15   0.02
                       Accommodation and Recreation                  -0.20   0.05   -0.22   0.04
                  Other Sectors
                       Real Estate                                   -0.18   0.04   -0.19   0.04
                       Health                                        -0.16   0.04   -0.15   0.04
                       Education                                     -0.04   0.05   -0.05   0.06



Notes: OLS estimates from Equation (23) by 2-digit sector. Standard errors in parentheses.




                                                          2
            Table A3: Number of observations, R-squared, and mean squared errors.

                                                                                                                       N         R2      MSE

 Baseline                                                                                                            49,811     0.70       1.43

 I. Other outcome variables
    Employment                                                                                                       41,697     0.76       1.31
    Value Added                                                                                                      27,271     0.75       1.30

 II. Alternative assumption on technology transfer costs                                                             70,353     0.72       1.46

 III. Keeping MNEs with firm-sector FE belonging to:
    2nd to 9th Decile                                                                                                38,652     0.74       1.06
    3rd to 8th Decile                                                                                                27,275     0.81       0.80
    4th to 7th Decile                                                                                                16,218     0.89       0.55
    5th to 6th Decile                                                                                                 6,120     0.97       0.28

 IV. Keeping MNEs operating in:
    at least 3 countries                                                                                             38,709     0.66       1.43
    at least 5 countries                                                                                             26,298     0.62       1.42
    at least 10 countries                                                                                            11,682     0.58       1.34

 V. Other Robustness:
   Aggregation at 4-digit NAICS industries                                                                           59,088     0.63       1.54
   Excluding Real Estate, Health, and Education                                                                      47,584     0.70       1.43
   Excluding MNEs that do not appear in ORBIS every year between 2010-2016                                           32,396     0.72       1.34
   Controlling for differences in GDP per-worker between source and host country                                     48,955     0.70       1.43
   Excluding gravity variables                                                                                       50,649     0.70       1.44

Notes: Number of observations, R2 , and mean squared errors for the regression presented in the paper. I. refers to alternative firm's
outcome variables. II. refers to our alternative specification in Equation (31), which includes data from parent firms. III. refers to
keeping firms in the specified deciles of the distribution of the MNE-sector fixed effects. IV. refers to keeping firms that have affiliates
in at least as many countries as reflected by the threshold. V. corresponds to the additional roburstness in Section 5.3. Standard errors
are in parenthesis.




                                                                     3
        Table A4: Contribution of aggregate firm-embedded productivity, by year.

                             All firms         Countries (#)   Constant Sample      Countries (#)
                             cov(yn ,  ~n )                        cov(yn ,  ~n )
                               var (yn )                             var (yn )


               2006           0.28 (0.15)           15
               2007           0.35 (0.10)           24             0.20 (0.11)           15
               2008           0.32 (0.09)           25             0.24 (0.08)           24
               2009           0.34(0.08)            25             0.26 (0.08)           24
               2010           0.36 (0.10)           25             0.31 (0.09)           24
               2011           0.35 (0.10)           25             0.29 (0.09)           24
               2012           0.38 (0.11)           25             0.31 (0.10)           24
               2013           0.28 (0.11)           27             0.33 (0.09)           24
               2014           0.32 (0.10)           27             0.34 (0.09)           24
               2015           0.33 (0.10)           27             0.37 (0.09)           24
               2016           0.34 (0.10)           27             0.39 (0.09)           24
               2017           0.34 (0.10)           27             0.41 (0.09)           24

Notes: Slopes of a bivariate OLS regression of  ~ n on yn . A country is required to have estimates of firm-
embedded productivity in at least 10 sectors to construct the aggregate firm-embedded productivity n .
Each sector is required to have observations of three or more foreign affiliates. The last two columns use
only firms (BVDIDs) that are available in ORBIS in every year from 2010 to 2016.


                                Figure A1: Estimated country effects.
                   4




                                       sales       employment      value added
                   3
                   2
                   1
                   0
                   -1
                   -2
                        JP

                         E
                              IT
                             KR
                             FR

                                     B
                                    ES

                                           X
                                          PL
                                          BE
                                                  AT

                                                    L
                                                    O
                                                          FI
                                                         SE
                                                         PT

                                                           R
                                                           Z
                                                          U
                                                           K
                                                         SK

                                                                                R
                                                                               BG

                                                                                     SI
                                                                                    LV
                                                                                    LT
                                                                                          EE
                                                  N




                                                         C
                        D




                                   G


                                         M




                                                         D
                                                         G


                                                         H



                                                                               H
                                                  R




Note: Red dots are OLS estimates of An from Equation (19) using data on revenue shares. Blue and
Green dots are OLS estimates of An using employment and value added shares, respectively. Bars reflect
95-percent confidence intervals, clustered at the country level.


                                                         4
        Table A5: Output per-worker and firm-embedded productivity by country.

                                                                   manu f
                        Country        ISO    yn          ~n
                                                                  ~n
                                                                            ~n
                                                                             serv


                        Austria        AT     -0.02       -0.20    -0.20     -0.18
                        Belgium        BE     -0.03       -0.16    -0.15     -0.16
                        Bulgaria       BG     -0.93       -0.35    -0.35     -0.31
                        Czech Rep.     CZ     -0.46       -0.27    -0.20     -0.27
                        Germany        DE     -0.05        0.06     0.13      0.00
                        Denmark        DK     -0.07       -0.32    -0.41     -0.27
                        Estonia        EE     -0.61       -0.49    -0.53     -0.40
                        Spain          ES     -0.09       -0.06    -0.01     -0.04
                        Finland        FI     -0.10       -0.22    -0.13     -0.25
                        France (ref)   FR      0.00        0.00     0.00      0.00
                        UK             GB     -0.16       -0.02     0.00     -0.05
                        Greece         GR     -0.43       -0.24    -0.28     -0.21
                        Croatia        HR     -0.45       -0.34    -0.38     -0.34
                        Hungary        HU     -0.67       -0.29    -0.24     -0.32
                        Italy          IT     -0.03        0.04     0.08      0.04
                        Japan          JP     -0.21        0.09     0.31     -0.05
                        Korea          KR     -0.29        0.02     0.15     -0.10
                        Lithuania      LT     -0.58       -0.48    -0.52     -0.41
                        Latvia         LV     -0.62       -0.42    -0.55     -0.37
                        Mexico         MX     -0.85       -0.11    -0.02     -0.15
                        Netherlands    NL     -0.08       -0.21    -0.11     -0.24
                        Poland         PL     -0.43       -0.13    -0.11     -0.13
                        Portugal       PT     -0.54       -0.24    -0.20     -0.22
                        Romania        RO     -0.50       -0.22    -0.20     -0.17
                        Sweden         SE     -0.09       -0.22    -0.22     -0.21
                        Slovenia       SI     -0.49       -0.37    -0.43     -0.32
                        Slovakia       SK     -0.50       -0.33    -0.29     -0.28


Notes: Numbers underling Figures 3 and 4. Column 3 of the Table shows the country's output per worker
relative to France, yn , and Column 4 shows the country's aggregate firm-embedded productivity, ~ , and
Columns 5 and 6 show the country's firm-embedded productivity for the Manufacturing and the Service
sector, respectively.




                                                      5
                                              Figure A2: Dev. accounting: Manufacturing sectors.

                                  Food and Beverage                                                                                    Textiles, Apparel and Wood
       1.0




                                                                                                                    1.0
       0.5




                                                                                                                    0.5
                                                                                                      NL                                                                                                                      AT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               NL
                                                                   DK              GR                                                                                                                      DK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BESE
                                                                   SE    RO BE                                                                                                                                    IT       FI
                                                       LT     FI                                                                                                                                                DE      GB
                                                                    AT                                                                                                                                          KR         FI
                                         SI                                ES                                                                         MX                                  SI
        0.0




                                                                                                                     0.0
                                  EE                   DE          KR GBFRIT
                                                                           ES
                                                                                                                                                           RO             PT     PL                   ES        FR      GB
                                                                                                      NL
     n, zn




                                                                                                                  n, zn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                KR
                             LV               CZ PL                KR GB     BE                                                                                                      CZ
                                                                                                                                                                                          LT
                                                                                                                                                                                           SK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  IT     SE
                                                  PT                AT   RO                                                                                                                           ES               BE    NL
                BG           SK          HR       PT                                                                                                  HU                   LV
                                                                                                                                                                          EE                                                AT
                                                 PL    DE          SE        GR                                                                                 GR                     SK
                        HU
                                         HR
                                              CZ              FI
                                                                                                                                  BG                       HR              LV      CZ LT
                                                       LT                                                                                                                 EE                               DK
   -0.5




                                                                                                                -0.5
                                                                   DK                                                                                                                 SI
                        HU   SK                                                                                                                                                  PL
                             LV                                                                                                                            HR GR          PT
                                         SI
                BG                EE                                                                                                                  HU
                                                                                                                                                           RO
       -1.0




                                                                                                                    -1.0
                                                                                                                                  BG                  MX
                                                                                   n: 0.36 (0.10)                                                                                                          n: 0.13 (0.07)
                                                                                   zn: 0.64 (0.10)                                                                                                         zn: 0.87 (0.07)
       -1.5




                                                                                                                    -1.5
               -1.0                       -0.5                          0.0                           0.5                  -1.5                   -1.0                         -0.5                        0.0                           0.5
                                                       yn                                                                                                                      yn


                     Chemicals, Petroleum and Plastic                                                                                                       Basic Metals
       1.0




                                                                                                                    1.0
                                                                                                 DK                                                                                                                                 GR
       0.5




                                                                                                                    0.5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          AT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           JP
                                                                   LT                      NL                                                                                         DK                                 NL
                                                                                          BE                                                                       LT                                          BE
                                                                          SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                         SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                        MX                          KR
                                                                   JP
                                                                   FI                                                                                                     SI                   SKFI        DE
                                                            IT AT DEKR                                                                                                                                        ES
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ITES
                                                                                                                                                                                                            IT
        0.0




                                                                                                                     0.0




                                                                                                                                                      EE                                              GB
                                                               GR    ES FR
                                                                        GB                                                                                       HR                                   FR
                                                                                                                                                                                                      GB   DE
     n, zn




                                                                                                                  n, zn




                                       MX
                                        PL SI            RO           KR                  BE                                                                                          PL
                                                         RO GR DE                          NL                                                    LV               CZ
                                                                                                                                                              BG RO
                                                                                                                                                             PT                                          SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                        MX        BE
                             CZ          PT    HU                  FI
                                                                 ATJP                                                                                                                                                    NLJP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          AT
                        BG              SK     HU           IT         SE                        DK                                                        HU     RO
                                                                                                                                                                  CZ                           SKFI
                              HR        SK                                                                                                                    BG
                                                                                                                                                             PT                                                                     GR
                EE LV                    PT SI                                                                                                                   HR
   -0.5




                                                                                                                -0.5




                                                                                                                                                                     SI
                                        PL                         LT
                             CZ        MX                                                                                                        LV
                EE LV BG                                                                                                                                                              DK
                                                                                                                                                      EE
                                                                                                                                                                   LT
       -1.0




                                                                                                                    -1.0




                                                                                   n: 0.27 (0.09)                                                                                                          n: 0.54 (0.13)
                                                                                   zn: 0.73 (0.09)                                                                                                         zn: 0.46 (0.13)
       -1.5




                                                                                                                    -1.5




                -1.0                       -0.5                         0.0                           0.5                  -1.0                             -0.5                                  0.0                                    0.5
                                                       yn                                                                                                                      yn


                Electrical Equipment and Machinery                                                              Transport Equipment and Other Manufacturing
       1.0




                                                                                                                    1.0
       0.5




                                                                                                                    0.5




                                                                                     JP
                                                                                DK        KR                                                                                                                     DK
                                                                                DE          NL
                                               MX                             IT BEAT                                                                                                                                       SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       JP                  DE
                                                  LT    GR              GB         FI
                                                                             ES                                                                                                                                          KR
        0.0




                                                                                                                     0.0




                                           PL                              SE FR FI         NL                                                                                                             BE IT
                                                                                                                                                                                                               GB AT                 FR    DE
                                                  CZ
     n, zn




                                                                                                                  n, zn




                                                                           SEES    AT                                                                                                   MX                       ES
                                              HU
                                               LVPT    HR                                 KR
                                              SK RO                              BE                                                                                  PL                                          ES KR
                                                    SI                          DE                                                                           RO      LT               NL FI
                                                                                                                                                                                      SK
                                                                                                                                                                                          HU
                                                                                                                                                                                          CZ                   GB
                                                                                                                                                                                                              IT  AT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SE
                                         EE         SI HR               GB IT DK                                                                                                SI        CZ
                                                                                                                                                                                          HU               BE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   JP
                             BG                                                  JP                                                         LV                                        NL FI
                                                                                                                                                                                      SK
   -0.5




                                                                                                                -0.5




                                                 RO                                                                                                        PT                   SI
                                         EE      PT                                                                                              EE                                       MX
                                               LV CZ
                                              SK        GR                                                                                                 PT        LT
                                              HU                                                                                  BG   HR        EE                                                              DK
                                                  LT                                                                                   HR                    RO      PL
                             BG                                                                                                   BG
                                           PL
                                                                                                                                            LV
       -1.0




                                                                                                                    -1.0




                                               MX

                                                                                   n: 0.40 (0.12)                                                                                                          n: 0.47 (0.08)
                                                                                   zn: 0.60 (0.12)                                                                                                         zn: 0.53 (0.08)
       -1.5




                                                                                                                    -1.5




              -1.5                -1.0                 -0.5                    0.0                    0.5                  -1.5                            -1.0                                -0.5                             0.0
                                                       yn                                                                                                                      yn


Notes: Each circle (square) represents a country. The figures plot the decomposition in Equation (15) at
                     j                                j       j
the sectoral level. yn is plotted in the x-axis and z
                                                    ~n and   ~n are plotted in the y-axis for j = two-digit
manufacturing sectors.




                                                                                                            6
                                                         Figure A3: Dev. accounting: Service sectors.

                     Wholesale Trade and Retail Trade                                                                                         Transportation and Storage
       1.0




                                                                                                                          1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GR
       0.5




                                                                                                                          0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                NL
                                                                                                     BE
                                                                                                                                                                                                     LT
                                                                                                      IT                                                                                           DK     BE AT
                                                                                   NL                                                                                                                                 IT
                                                                                 SE
                                                                                AT                                                                                                                SE       ES
                                                                LT FI               PLMX                                                                                                SKSI PT
                                                         EE           DK                              IT                                                                                    FI   GB
                                                                                                                                                                                                DE KR                 IT
                                                                                                                                                                                       JP
        0.0




                                                                                                                           0.0
                                                           GBSI       JP        FR     MX                                                                                                       FR KR
                                                                  KR ES
                                                                    DE              PL                                                                                                   PL                ES
     n, zn




                                                                                                                        n, zn
                                                                  KRDE
                                                                     ES                                                                                                     EE
                                                                                                                                                                           LV MXRO       PL      GB
                                                                                                                                                                                                DE
                                   RO        LV           CZ
                                                         PT           JP                                                                                                     CZ
                                                   SK
                                                   GR
                                                  HR      CZ
                                                         PT           DK
                                                                     FI          SENL
                                                                                AT                   BE                                                            HU         MX
                                                                                                                                                                             CZ
                                                                                                                                                                                RO
                                                                                                                                                                                       JP   FI
                                                                                                                                                                                             PT   SE      BE AT                  GR
                        HU        BG               SK
                                                   GR        SI                                                                                                 BG HU      LV
                                                                                                                                                                            EE                     DK
                                                           GB LT                                                                                      HR        BG                      SKSI         LT      NL
                                  BG         LV                                                                                                       HR
                                                         EE
   -0.5




                                                                                                                      -0.5
                        HU         RO
       -1.0




                                                                                                                          -1.0
                                                                                      n: 0.23 (0.08)                                                                                                 n: 0.16 (0.08)
                                                                                      zn: 0.77 (0.08)                                                                                                zn: 0.84 (0.08)
       -1.5




                                                                                                                          -1.5
              -1.0                      -0.5                               0.0                             0.5                    -1.0                      -0.5                             0.0                           0.5
                                                             yn                                                                                                                 yn


                                        Information                                                                                      Financial and Insurance Services
       1.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MX
                                                                                                                          1.0

                                                                                                                                                                                 CZ                              NL
                                                                                                                                                                       HR               SE            BE
       0.5




                                                                                                                                                                                  PT
                                                                                                                                                                  LV SKRO
                                                                                                                          0.5


                                                                                                                                                                                        DK
                                                                                                                                                                                       ES
                                                                                                                                                                  FI BG                      IT
                                                                                                NL                                                         EE      JP   GR
                                                                                                             BE                                                                        GB
                                                                                                                                         LT
                                                                                                RO                                                         PL         AT
                                                                                            SE DE                                                           KR
        0.0




                                                  LT                            GB AT          JP IT
                                                                                                  IT FR                                       HUSI                         DE
                                                                                                                            0.0
     n, zn




                                                                                                                         n, zn




                                                                                CZ  ES
                                                                                 PL ES          RO                                                                FR       DE          GB    IT
                 LV                     KR
                                         SI             SK     PT DK FI
                                                                   GRFI         GB AT
                                                                                CZ          SE DE            BE                                                                                                  NL
                                                               PT DK                                                                                                  AT                              BE
                        HR        BG                    SK                                                                                                  KR                         ES
                                                                                                                                                                                        DK
                EE       HU       BG                                                            NL                                                         PL               GR
                         HU              SI
                                        KR                                                                                                                                              SE
   -0.5




                        HR                        LT                                                                                                               JP             PT
                EE                                                                                                                            HUSI                FI BGRO                                        MX
                                                                                                                      -0.5




                                                                                                                                                           EE
                 LV                                                                                                                                               LV SK          CZ
                                                                                                                                         LT                          HR
       -1.0




                                                                                                                          -1.0




                                                                                      n: 0.30 (0.07)                                                                                                 n: 0.31 (0.13)
                                                                                      zn: 0.70 (0.07)                                                                                                zn: 0.69 (0.13)
       -1.5




                                                                                                                          -1.5




               -0.8           -0.6                      -0.4                   -0.2              0.0                              -0.5                          0.0                          0.5                           1.0
                                                           yn                                                                                                                   yn


                                  Support Services                                                                                       Accommodation and Recreation
       1.0




                                                                                                                          1.0
       0.5




                                                                                                                          0.5




                                                                              EE     AT         BE
                                                                                                                                                                                                             BE
                                                                                DK RO PL
                                                                                                IT                                                                                      SI
                                                                              HRNL                                                                                                                          AT
                                                                                 SE                                                                                                                            IT
                                                                          FI                                                                                                   DK         NL                ES
                                                              LT        GR       JP                                                                                               HR FI ROGR                ESIT
        0.0




                                                                                                                           0.0




                                                             LV          SK         FR          IT                                                               KR            CZ SEGB PT DE FR
                                                                                                                                                                                   JP
                                                                    SI CZ       DE                                                                                                                          AT
     n, zn




                                                                                                                        n, zn




                                                                                DE                                                                                               SK
                                                                        KR GB                                                                                                 PL          ROGR
                                                                                                                                                                                         PT                  BE
                                                                        ES GB    JP             BE                                                          LT             MX       GB FI NL
                                                                        KR       SE   PL                                                 BG           HU    LV             MX PL SKJP
                                                   HU                            NL RO                                                                                         CZ SE
                                                                                                                                                                                  HR
                                                    PT                 CZSK          AT                                                          EE         LT
                                                                                                                                                            LV
                             MX                                     SI GR FI HR DK                                                               EE                            DK     SI
   -0.5




                                                                                                                      -0.5




                                        BG
                                        BG         HU                                                                                                 HU         KR
                                                             LV               EE
                                                              LT
                                                                                                                                         BG
                             MX
       -1.0




                                                                                                                          -1.0




                                                                                      n: 0.27 (0.08)                                                                                                 n: 0.29 (0.09)
                                                                                      zn: 0.73 (0.08)                                                                                                zn: 0.71 (0.09)
       -1.5




                                                                                                                          -1.5




              -1.5            -1.0                           -0.5                     0.0                  0.5                    -1.0                      -0.5                             0.0                           0.5
                                                             yn                                                                                                                 yn


Notes: Each circle (square) represents a country. The figures plot the decomposition in Equation (15) at the
                 j                                j       j
sectoral level. yn is plotted in the x-axis and z
                                                ~n and   ~n are plotted in the y-axis for j = two-digit service
sectors.




                                                                                                                  7
  Figure A4: Country effects: Alternative specification of the technology transfer costs




                   4
                   3
                   2
                   1
                   0
                   -1
                   -2
                        JP

                          E
                               IT
                              KR
                              FR

                                     B
                                    ES

                                         X
                                        PL
                                         BE
                                              AT

                                                L
                                               O
                                                     FI
                                                    SE
                                                    PT

                                                      R
                                                      Z
                                                      U
                                                      K
                                                    SK

                                                                 R
                                                                BG

                                                                      SI
                                                                     LV
                                                                     LT
                                                                           EE
                                              N




                                                    C
                        D




                                    G


                                        M




                                                    D
                                                    G


                                                    H



                                                               H
                                              R



Note: Red dots are our baseline OLS estimates of An . Blue dots are the OLS estimates of Pn from
Equation (31). Bars reflect 95-percent confidence intervals, clustered at the country level.


A     Data Appendix

Firm level data: In this section we describe the construction of our sample using ORBIS.
We start by dropping those firms with revenues below 100,000 USD. We also drop firms
that only report information from consolidated accounts, as well as firms with "limited
financials" information (LF) only. From the remaining sample, we exclude firms operat-
ing in "Public Administration", "Extraterritorial Organizations", and "Activity of House-
holds" sectors. The time span of our dataset is 2006-2017, but our baseline analysis uses
information for 2016 since it is the latest year with the largest number of firms in ORBIS
historical.
A multinational company is defined as a company exerting above 50 percent of the con-
trol rights on affiliates located in more than one country. Crucially for our analysis, a
multinational company is defined within a given sector. Thus, a company owning af-
filiates in multiple countries, but each operating in a different sector, will ultimately be
excluded from our sample. In order to define a company as a multinational, we use the
NAICS sector classification at three different levels of disaggregation, NAICS2 (18 indus-
tries), NAICS3 (99 industries) and NAICS4 (336 industries). Information on revenues,
employment, and value-added are aggregated for all tax identification numbers in OR-
BIS belonging to the same corporate group and operating in the same country and sec-
tor. Therefore, in our analysis an affiliate is defined as a corporate group-country-sector
triplet in which the country of location differs from the country where the headquarter
is located, whereas a parent is defined as a triplet located at the headquarter's country.
Table A6 shows the number of affiliates and the number of parent firms in each NAICS2


                                                    8
                   Table A6: Number of affiliates and parents, by NAICS2.

                                                           Foreign Affiliates           Parents
                                                         Sales   Emp.         VA   Sales Emp.      VA
 Other goods
      Agriculture and Mining                              407      354      246      43      37    30
      Construction                                      1,041      843      583     125     113    92
      Electricity                                         557      344      273      73      65    57
 Manufacturing
      Food and Beverages                                1,061      964      794     118     116     99
      Textiles, Apparel and Wood                          965      886      699     127     126    109
      Chemicals, Petroleum and Plastic                  3,104    2,861    2,375     307     301    260
      Basic Metals                                      1,550    1,401    1,178     160     158    124
      Electrical Equipment and Machinery                3,019    2,828    2,195     327     321    270
      Transport Equipment and Other Manufacturing       1,445    1,309    1,082     139     136    105
 Services
      Wholesale Trade and Retail Trade                 18,513   16,434   11,429    1,245   1,184   868
      Transportation and Storage                        2,265    2,004    1,417      237     231   192
      Information                                       1,499    1,298      882      115     111    86
      Financial and Insurance Services                  1,402    1,104      555      147     138    80
      Support Services                                 10,329    9,015    5,817      959     894   702
      Accommodation and Recreation                      1,218    1,098      774      105      99    75
 Other Sectors
      Real Estate                                       1,969    1,132      910     192     145    112
      Health                                              204      187      151      21      21     19
      Education                                            96       84       49       5       4      4

Notes: A foreign affiliate is a majority-owned firm by a company with operations in multiple countries
within a given sector. Sectors roughly correspond to the 2-digit NAICS classification.


sectors in our sample, including affiliates in "Other Goods" as well as in other sectors.
Each column of Table A6 shows the number of affiliates and parents according to the
availability of information on firm's revenues, employment and value-added.
Table A7 and Table A8 report the number of affiliates and the number of parents in each
country in our sample, according to the available information from sales, employment
and value added. The numbers are shown for manufacturing, services, and for all sectors.
Aggregate firm-embedded productivity at the country level is constructed by calculating
the weighted average of the sector level firm-know how, using country-sector level ex-
penditure shares as weights. If a country has less than three foreign MNEs affiliates in
a particular sector, we exclude the country from that sector, and reweigh the remaining
sectors accordingly to compute the aggregate    ~ n of that country. Table A9 reports the
                                                                       j
country-sector pairs for which we cannot compute an estimate of n for our baseline
regression.


                                                  9
                 Table A7: Number of foreign affiliates, by country and sector.

       Country                 Sales                 Employment                Value Added
                        All   Mfg. Services       All Mfg. Services         All Mfg. Services
       Austria        1,510     293     1,141   1,219     271       895     956     242       661
       Belgium        2,743     536     1,973   2,555     526     1,866   1,863     434     1,304
       Bulgaria         737     119       536     711     119       522     596     108       437
       Czech Rep.     2,507     656     1,602   2,389     652     1,555   1,492     499       866
       Germany        3,680   1,046     2,378   3,620   1,040     2,337   2,795     921     1,673
       Denmark          819     151       581     703     151       502     635     138       454
       Estonia          659      99       502     612      94       476       -       -         -
       Spain          4,099     819     2,933   3,909     817     2,825   3,995     809     2,855
       Finland        1,417     258     1,045   1,143     219       848     655     139       471
       France         4,659   1,075     3,267   3,638     950     2,528   3,469     969     2,337
       UK             5,072   1,259     3,402   4,690   1,231     3,144   2,744     881     1,689
       Greece           512      74       398     502      74       393       -       -         -
       Croatia          829     102       634     776      99       609       -       -         -
       Hungary        1,272     306       827   1,172     302       774     568     196       310
       Italy          4,545   1,176     2,997   4,279   1,166     2,883   3,654   1,098     2,359
       Japan            192      48       141     180      47       130      12       4         8
       Korea            899     291       592     694     256       426     384     171       208
       Lithuania        445      69       324     439      69       318       -       -         -
       Latvia           679      60       543     658      60       533      28       2        24
       Mexico           137      51        72      52      24        20       -       -         -
       Netherlands    1,130     260       805   1,003     249       710       -       -         -
       Poland         3,399     833     2,238     992     293       617   1,871     541     1,189
       Portugal       1,759     278     1,304   1,651     275     1,249   1,712     275     1,268
       Romania        2,040     424     1,365   1,934     416     1,329   1,266     348       788
       Sweden         2,694     419     2,064   2,526     411     1,967   1,378     205     1,091
       Slovenia         612     108       460     567     106       427     345      64       261
       Slovakia       1,603     334     1,102   1,537     332     1,070     996     279       621

Notes: A foreign affiliate is defined as a corporate group-country-sector triplet in which the country of
location differs from the country where the headquarter is located.




                                                   10
                     Table A8: Number of parents, by country and sector.

          Country               Sales                   Employment               Value Added
                         All   Mfg. Services      All    Mfg. Services     All    Mfg. Services
          Austria        246      55        149   226      54       135   212       53       125
          Belgium        218      67        125   204      66       118   185       62       104
          Bulgaria         2       -          2     2       -         2     2        -         2
          Czech Rep.      54       5         45    53       5        45    44        4        37
          Germany        629     192        379   627     192       378   508      174       288
          Denmark        156      42        101   143      42        92   136       40        87
          Estonia         50       5         36    45       5        33      -       -         -
          Spain          248      54        156   246      54       156   243       53       154
          Finland        161      45         99   145      44        89   119       34        74
          France         715     170        446   639     163       398   647      167       401
          UK             459      91        328   425      89       304   308       68       220
          Greece          18       3         12    18       3        12      -       -         -
          Croatia          8       3          4     8       3         4      -       -         -
          Hungary         34       2         28    33       2        27    23        1        20
          Italy          387     118        241   376     118       234   361      116       223
          Japan          418     180        225   418     180       225   208      137        65
          Korea           32      13         18    29      12        17    23        9        14
          Lithuania       18       1         15    18       1        15      -       -         -
          Latvia          10       2          5    10       2         5      2       -         -
          Mexico           8       5          1     6       4         1      -       -         -
          Netherlands    109      10         87    92       9        76      -       -         -
          Poland          40       7         29    30       6        20    21        1        17
          Portugal        36       7         20    36       7        20    35        7        19
          Romania          2       -          2     2       -         2     2        -         2
          Sweden         365      99        237   348      95       232   188       39       138
          Slovenia        13       -         11    13       -        11    10        -         8
          Slovakia        10       2          7     9       2         6     8        2         5

Notes: A parent is defined as a corporate group-country-sector triplet located in the source country of the
MNE.




                                                    11
                 Table A9: Countries with less than 3 affiliates, by NAICS2.

    Sector                                                Country
    Other goods
         Agriculture and Mining                           KR, MX
         Construction                                     JP
         Electricity                                      KR, MX
    Manufacturing
         Food and Beverages                               JP, MX
         Textiles, Apparel and Wood                       JP
         Transport Equipment and Other Manufacturing      GR
    Services
         Information                                      MX
    Others
         Real Estate                                      JP
         Health                                           DK, EE, GR, JP, LV, SI
         Education                                        AT, CZ, DK, HU, KR, NL, PT, RO, SI, SK

Notes: A foreign affiliate is a majority-owned firm by a company with operations in multiple countries
within a given sector. Sectors roughly correspond to the 2-digit NAICS classification.


Aggregate data:
In addition to the ORBIS data, to construct sales, employment, and value-added shares
we use information from KLEMS and OECD on gross output, gross value-added, and
the number of employees at the country-sector level, in million of current dollars and
thousands of employees, respectively. The KLEMS dataset corresponds to the statistical
national accounts from their latest release in 2019. The OECD statistics come from the
Dataset for Structural Analysis (STAN) and we convert the sectoral ISIC revision 4 to the
sectoral classification used in KLEMS. To maximize the number of countries-sectors in
our sample, we combine some ISIC sectors into the following categories: Agriculture and
Mining; Textiles, Apparel and Woods; Chemicals, Petroleum and Plastic; Electrical Equip-
ment and Machinery; Transport Equipment and Other Manufacturing; and Accommoda-
tion and Recreation.
We use the real GDP at chained PPPs in 2016 US dollars over total employment to mea-
sure output per-worker in each country from Penn World Tables (PWT, 9.1). To construct
measures of output per-worker at the sectoral level we use gross value added per-worker
from the KLEMS-OECD dataset that we convert to international dollars using the PPP
conversion factor for GDP, measured in units of local currency per international dollars.
We obtain the GDP PPP conversion factor and the share of employees compensation in
value added from PWT (9.1).
Finally, we obtain information for the activity of foreign affiliates for each country-sector
pair in our sample from the OECD Activity of Multinational Enterprises (AMNE) dataset
and the Eurostat Foreign Affiliates Statistics (FATS), for which we harmonize the sectoral

                                                 12
classification into the 18 sectors used in our dataset.



B      Additional statistics: two-way fixed-effect estimation

To identify the country-sector fixed effects in Equation (19), the MNEs in our sample
need to connect the countries in our sample. We perform our estimation on the largest
connected set. In our case, the largest connected set (LCS) is comprised of all 26 countries
in our sample, whether using sales or employment, NAICS2 or NAICS4 sector classifi-
cation.1 Nonetheless, it is possible that countries are poorly connected, even within the
LCS, if only few MNEs link them together. When only a handful of corporate groups
connect countries in the sample the variance of the fixed-effects will be over-estimated
and spurious negative correlations can appear between country and MNE fixed-effects
(Andrews et al. 2008). The literature has illustrated three ways in which connectivity can
be improved. The first method consists in performing the estimation on the "leave-one-
out" set, which is defined as the set of countries that remain connected even after any
individual corporation is removed from the sample (Kline et al. 2020). We note that all
countries in our sample stay connected regardless of which MNE is dropped from the set.
The second method, proposed by Andrews et al. (2008), consists in restricting the sample
to countries hosting corporations that also operate elsewhere. Since we only work with
MNEs, this restriction is always satisfied in our sample. The third method comes from
Bonhomme et al. (2019), who group firms using k-means clustering based on the distri-
bution of affiliates' market shares in each country. This method enhances connectivity by
reducing the number of country fixed-effect that must be estimated, but is not useful for
our purposes of estimating firm-embedded productivity in each country-sector.
Log-linearity assumption: In Section 5.2 we showed that the standardized residuals are
mostly flat across the MNE-sector fixed effects and country-embedded factors decile-bins.
We also showed that our results are robust to excluding deciles at the top and bottom of
the MNE fixed effect distribution. A different approach to assessing the additive sepa-
rability assumption comes from Bonhomme et al. (2019), where each pairing of corpo-
ration and country-group is allowed to have a differential effect. This new specification
replaces the additive country and MNE-sector fixed effects with an interaction between
country-group and MNE-sector fixed effect. If country-firm "match effects" are relevant
in determining the assignment of corporations to countries, then there is a potential for
bias given that the error term could be correlated with the country fixed-effects. Table
A10 shows the share of the variance explained by the country fixed-effects. Our results
indicate that an additive model provides a very good approximation to our data; allow-
ing interactions between corporations and country-group yields a small increase in R2 .
Also notice that the individual contributions of MNE and country effects to overall affil-
    1 Bydefinition all MNEs contribute in connecting the countries where they keep operations, overcoming
the usual problem of "limited mobility bias" that plagues most two-way fixed effect exercises in the labor
literature. In that literature, identification is achieved by workers who switch employers over their careers
Abowd et al. (1999).


                                                     13
                                                                       j
                            Table A10: Contribution to Var sin ( ) .

                 Variance Decomp.        Baseline      k-means (linear)          Interaction
                            j
                        Ak                 0.27             0.26
                        j ( )              0.45             0.45
                         R2                0.72             0.70                    0.76

Notes: In the second and third columns, k corresponds to the group fixed-effect (K = 5).


iates' shares variance remain almost unchanged in the additive model using individual
countries (baseline) or country groups.



C     Extension: Intermediate inputs

This section shows how to extend our framework to allow for intermediate inputs in pro-
duction. We again focus on the one sector case to facilitate the exposition. We assume that
the final good can be used as an input, and that the production function for intermediate
goods is
                                                                           
                Yin ( ) = Zin Xin ( ) [ Hn Lin ( )]1- [Kin ( )]               Min ( )1- .

Here the parameter  is the value-added share and Min ( ) are the intermediate inputs
used by producer  in country n. The aggregate production function is

                                           1   1    1 1
                                                           [ Hn Ln ]1- [Kn ] .
                                                      -1
                               Yn =  Zn n      




We can write cross-country differences in the log of value added per-worker as

                                                   1     1
                                        yn =         z
                                                     ~n +  ~n.                                 (C.1)
                                                         

We show next how to obtain the contribution of aggregate firm-embedded productivity to
cross country differences in value added per-worker,  n . Note that in this economy, the
                                                     1 ~

revenue, employment, and the value-added shares coincide and are given by Equation
(16). We can thus use Equation (19) and the procedure described in Section 3.2 to estimate
An , which under our baseline assumption on technology-transfer costs corresponds to
An =-n .
The last step is to reestimate   [1 - ] [ - 1] in a way that is consistent with Equation




                                                     14
(C.1). With intermediate inputs equation (23) is
                                          inp
                                         b1
                             yn = b0 +      An + b2 Cn + un ,
                                          
                                                                    inp
                                                                    b1
so that the coefficients in Table 1 should be interpreted as b1 =         . The contribution of
                                                                                     inp
                                                                                    b1
firm-embedded productivity to cross-country income differences is     n =
                                                                    1 ~
                                                                                            An =
b1 An , which coincides with the estimate used in our baseline analysis.




                                                15
