                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             FIRM INPUT CHOICE UNDER TRADE POLICY UNCERTAINTY

                                       Kyle Handley
                                       Nuno Limão
                                     Rodney D. Ludema
                                          Zhi Yu

                                     Working Paper 27910
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27910


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2020




We received helpful comments and questions from Ben Faber, Deborah Swenson, Daniel Xu,
Eunhee Lee, Fernando Parro, George Alessandria, Jim Tybout, Jonathan Eaton, Meredith
Crowley, Robert Staiger, Samuel Kortum, Shafaat Khan and various seminar and conference
participants at Kobe, Stanford, Penn State, the AEA Meetings, Washington Area International
Trade Symposium, International Trade Dynamics Workshop and NBER International Trade
Policy and Institutions. Zhi Yu acknowledges support from the Public Computing Cloud Platform
at Renmin University of China. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Kyle Handley, Nuno Limão, Rodney D. Ludema, and Zhi Yu. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Firm Input Choice Under Trade Policy Uncertainty
Kyle Handley, Nuno Limão, Rodney D. Ludema, and Zhi Yu
NBER Working Paper No. 27910
October 2020
JEL No. F02,F1,F12,F13,F14,F61,O19,O24

                                           ABSTRACT

We examine the role of trade policy uncertainty in shaping the import decisions of firms. If the
adoption of a new input requires a sunk cost investment, then the prospect of price increases in
that input, e.g. due to trade barriers, reduces the adoption of that input (a substitution effect) and
possibly other inputs (complementarity via lower profits). Thus trade policy uncertainty can
affect a firm's entire input mix. We provide a new model of input price uncertainty that captures
both effects and derive its empirical implications. We test these using an important episode that
lowered input price uncertainty: China's accession to the WTO and the associated commitment to
bind its import tariffs. We estimate large increases in imported inputs by firms from accession;
the reduced uncertainty from commitment generates substitution effects larger than the reductions
in applied tariffs in 2000-2006 and has significant profit effects.


Kyle Handley                                      Rodney D. Ludema
Ross School of Business                           Georgetown University
University of Michigan                            ludemar@georgetown.edu
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109                               Zhi Yu
and NBER                                          Renmin University of China
handleyk@umich.edu                                yuzhi@rmbs.ruc.edu.cn

Nuno Limão
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
3105 Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
limao@econ.umd.edu
1       Introduction
We examine the role of policy uncertainty in shaping the input decisions of ...rms. If new
inputs require a sunk cost investment, then ...rm decisions to adopt them depend on how
uncertain their prices are. One such source of uncertainty is future policy, e.g. taxes on
domestic or imported inputs, that a¤ects the level and mix of inputs the ...rm adopts. We
develop a theoretical model of this phenomenon and test its key implications using ...rm data
on input usage and shocks to import taxes arising from China'     s WTO accession.
    We build on and contribute to ongoing research on various important issues. First, there
is extensive research on global sourcing and the determinants of increased intermediate trade,
but it has ignored the role of policy uncertainty. Intermediate inputs account for the bulk
of world trade (Johnson and Noguera, 2012), and vertical specialization across countries is
a prominent feature of the world economy (Hummels et al., 2001). Trade liberalization, in
particular, has been shown to be a major contributor to the growth in vertical specializ-
ation (Hanson et al., 2005; Johnson and Noguera, 2017) with important implications for
productivity and welfare (Amiti, and Konings, 2007; Goldberg et al., 2010; Halpern et al.,
2015).
    Second, we contribute to the research on trade policy uncertainty (TPU) by moving
its focus from exporting to global sourcing decisions. There is increasing evidence that
reductions in TPU increase trade (Crowley et al., 2018; Feng et al., 2017; Handley, 2014;
Handley and Limão, 2015; Pierce and Schott, 2016). In these papers, because of sunk costs,
the response of export decisions to a foreign tari¤ reduction depends on ...rms'beliefs about
whether the policy change is permanent or reversible, and trade agreements play a role in
shaping such beliefs.1 As Antràs, et al. (2017) note, sourcing is a more complex problem
than exporting in that it involves a portfolio of inputs with potential interactions between
them.
    We also contribute to the analysis of the role of international trade agreements. Existing
theories emphasize the role of agreements in addressing terms-of-trade externalities (Bagwell
and Staiger, 1999; Grossman and Helpman, 1995), or allowing governments to commit vis-
a-vis domestic actors (e.g. Maggi and Rodriguez-Clare, 1998) or reducing TPU (Limão and
Maggi, 2015). There is increasing evidence for the terms-of-trade role of agreements (Broda,
Limão, Weinstein, 2008; Bagwell and Staiger, 2011) but less so on own commitment e¤ects.
Research on the e¤ect of TPU provides support for the idea that a country'        s exporters
bene...t from agreements that tie the foreign governments hands. We provide theory and
    1
    Handley and Limão (2017) show this has important price and welfare e¤ects and extend this logic to
entry and technology-upgrading decisions but not to global sourcing decisions. Uncertainty can also a¤ect
exports via inventory e¤ects (Alessandria et al., 2019).
evidence that agreements provide a valuable commitment device to the importing country:
by tying its own hands it spurs investment in the adoption of imported inputs. This suggests
an important cost of ongoing trade tensions that erode the credibility of the WTO. It also
points to a potential rationale for agreements on input trade.2
     Our empirical application contributes to the large literature examining the impressive
growth in Chinese ...rm exports, imports and productivity after its 2001 WTO entry. This
work includes the e¤ects of reductions in Chinese applied tari¤s (Amiti et. al. 2018; Brandt,
et. al., 2017; Feng et al., 2016; Yu, 2015) and reductions in U.S. TPU that Chinese exporters
faced in the U.S. (Feng et al., 2017; Handley and Limão, 2017; Pierce and Schott, 2016). Both
of these channels are potentially important for Chinese export outcomes.3 Our contribution
here is to go beyond the applied reductions in Chinese tari¤s and also estimate and quantify
the impact of its commitments not to reverse its liberalization on intermediate usage and
adoption.
     Finally, by identifying how policy uncertainty a¤ects speci...c ...rm investments we also
contribute to research showing that economic uncertainty leads ...rms to delay investments
(Bloom et al., 2007) and that policy uncertainty (measured by news indices) helps predict
aggregate output declines (cf. Baker et al., 2016).
     In our model ...rms invest to adopt a range of intermediates used to produce a di¤er-
entiated product under uncertainty in input prices driven by policy, e.g. taxes. Similarly
to recent ...rm-based frameworks, greater input variety reduces the ...rms'marginal cost but
each variety requires a cost to adopt (c.f. Halpern et al., 2015; Antràs, et al., 2017; Blaum et
al., 2018). Unlike such frameworks, we model adoption costs as sunk, which implies the ...rm
sourcing decision is a dynamic one and introduces a role for policy uncertainty.4 We focus
on shocks to relative prices between imported and domestic inputs arising from TPU, e.g.
changes in the probability of tari¤ increases. The reduction in TPU in an input leads to an
increase in its imports: a substitution e¤ect. Moreover, this reduction in TPU also increases
the usage of other inputs: due to a pro...t e¤ect, which gives rise to input complementarity
in our setting.
     We use transactions-level trade data from 2000-2006 to examine how China'      s WTO tari¤
commitments a¤ected its ...rm'    s imports of intermediates. After its economic reform and
opening in the late 1970s, China applied to re-enter the GATT in 1986 and then its successor,
   2
     Such agreements may need to be deeper than the traditional ones focused on ...nal goods as Antras and
Staiger (2012) show in a setting where imports of customized inputs generates bargaining externalities.
   3
     Amiti, et. al. (2018) ...nd that both lower Chinese input tari¤s and US TPU contributed to the reduction
in their export prices to the US.
   4
     Gervais (2018) models and tests an alternative channel whereby more risk averse managers source from
lower price volatility input suppliers.



                                                     2
the WTO, which it acceded in 2001. As we show in Figure 1 the average statutory import
tari¤ was over 40% when it applied and around 10% by 2006. Most research on the WTO
impact focuses on the tari¤ reductions after 2000, but this is only about one third of the
import liberalization that occurs since 1992 (Lardy, 2002). The process since 1992 was driven
by the "Socialist Market Economy"reforms and arguably as a condition for WTO accession
(cf. Tang and Wei, 2009). A similar pattern holds for intermediate products, as we see since
1992. The outcome of this accession process was uncertain until 2001; and if China had not
joined then it could have reversed some of the earlier liberalization.5 This potential reversal
hung over Chinese importers, just as the U.S. annual threat of removal of China'        s MFN
status hung over its exporters.
    If WTO accession increased the cost of reversing China'    s tari¤ reforms then our model
predicts it should have increased imported input adoption. We ...rst provide descriptive
evidence that (i) 2/3 of that import growth is from new HS6 products, (ii) the fraction of
importing ...rms increases, and (iii) there are sunk costs at the HS6 level. We then test the
model predictions by constructing the required measure of tari¤ risk for imported inputs in
each HS6, which is the di¤erence between the historical mean tari¤ dating back to 1992 and
its respective current rate.
    The regression analysis, which controls for applied tari¤ changes and various ...xed e¤ects,
shows that this tari¤ risk depressed Chinese ...rms' imported intermediates prior to WTO
entry, and that this e¤ect is sharply reduced after WTO entry, consistent with increased
commitment. These results are robust to alternative ...rm samples, risk measures, sources of
TPU and explanations such as history dependence.
    We ...nd evidence consistent with several additional aspects of the model. First, the
applied tari¤ trade elasticity increases substantially after WTO entry, suggesting that im-
porters perceived them to be more permanent. Second, we identify both substitution and
complementarity e¤ects. Third, the estimates vary with initial ...rm productivity. Finally,
post-accession, ...rms were more likely to adopt products that were previously subject to
higher risk.
    There are important quantitative implications from these estimates. The probability of
reversal falls substantially-- it is predicted to be less than 13 percent after accession. We
estimate that WTO accession increased average ...rm imported inputs about 92 lp between
2000-2006. Over three quarters of this accession e¤ect is due to improved commitment via
both substitution and complementarity e¤ects; the latter worked through an increase in
   5
   Several events contributed to this uncertainty including the death of Deng Xiaoping in 1997 (who pro-
moted the "Socialist Market" reforms), the 1996 Taiwan Strait Crisis, the 1999 U.S. bombing of the Chinese
embassy in Serbia and the 2001 midair collision of a U.S. spy plane and Chinese ...ghter jet.



                                                    3
average operating pro...ts of 3 lp.
   We provide the theory in section 2; the data and empirical strategy in section 3; the estim-
ates, robustness and preliminary quanti...cation in 4; and conclude in section 5. Derivation
and estimation details are in the appendices.


2       Model
We consider a dynamic model of heterogeneous ...rms producing a di¤erentiated ...nal product
from a primary factor (labor) and a continuum of intermediate inputs. Any ...rm present in
the market in period t survives into t +1 with probability , which is the only discount factor
for future pro...ts. Firms enter and exit the market at a constant rate, such that their mass
is constant.
    In each period, the ...rm observes the prevailing input prices and makes three joint de-
cisions: (a) how many varieties of each intermediate input to adopt; (b) how much to spend
on each input, including labor; (c) the price of the ...nal good. To keep the last two decisions
simple, we assume functional forms such that expenditure shares and markups over marginal
cost are constant.
    Inputs are indexed by i 2 [0; 1] and each i is available in a continuum of varieties on R+ .
For each ...rm f and input i, we partition varieties into three disjoint intervals depending on
whether they require a sunk cost of adoption and are exposed to price risk. These intervals
are shown in Figure 2. The ...rst, [0; ni ], consists of safe varieties: those with no sunk
cost and a ...xed price normalized to one. The second, ni ; ni + if , consists of exposed
varieties: those with no sunk cost but a time-varying relative price, t        i , which follows a
Markov process. The third, ni + if ; 1 , consists of risky varieties: those with sunk cost
K > 0 and the same time-varying relative price as exposed varieties. The last interval is
our primary focus, as the combination of sunk cost and price risk distort the ...rm'    s choice of
which (if any) varieties from this type to adopt.6 The parameter if governs the prevalence
of this distortion, which we allow to be both ...rm- and input-speci...c. If if = 0, all variable
price varieties are risky, whereas if if is large, risk becomes irrelevant.
    In light of our empirical application to a setting of trade policy uncertainty, we label
[0; ni ] as domestic varieties and (ni ; 1) as imported varieties, of which ni + if ; 1 are
risky. We interpret t   i the tari¤-inclusive relative price of imported varieties. Our objective
is to capture large permanent regime shifts in a tractable way. We follow Handley and Limão
    6
      There is a fourth possible con...guration of sunk costs and price uncertainty, namely, those varieties with
a ...xed price and K > 0. We rule this case out, as it contributes very little to our analysis of imports under
policy uncertainty.



                                                       4
(2017) and model a three-state Markov process with an initial state tari¤ vector l and a
constant probability that this policy changes the following period to a new vector s drawn
with probability $s . We assume the following for tractability. First, there are only three
states with tari¤s ranked as follows h > l > g . Second, the extreme cases are absorbing
(so there is only uncertainty in the initial intermediate state).
    To simplify the presentation we ...rst develop our results assuming $g = 0 so there are
e¤ectively only two relevant cases and is the probability that the government increases
protection. We then show that the results extend to allowing for a more favorable state,
$g > 0, and is more easily interpreted as a measure of policy uncertainty. The equivalence
between these two approaches is explained by the "bad news principle" (Bernanke, 1983):
when ...rms can wait and see before making investments then only the expected severity of
bad news matters.


2.1    Preferences, Technology and Current Pro...ts
A ...rm is characterized by a productivity parameter 'f drawn from a common distribution
and a set of parameters if drawn for each input independently from a common distribution
G( ), both with non-negative support. For now we assume G( ) is absolutely continuous
but relax this subsequently. The parameters are drawn on entry and remain constant for
the life of the ...rm. In what follows, we consider the problem facing a generic ...rm and thus
drop the ...rm subscript for notational convenience.
     The ...rm faces a constant elasticity demand for its output given by,

                                             q = Ep                                        (1)

where p is the endogenous consumer price, E > 0 is an exogenous demand shifter and > 1
the constant demand elasticity. This demand could be derived from a CES utility function,
in which case E would contain the aggregate price index. Holding E constant, therefore,
is equivalent to assuming that the ...nal goods market is large relative to the mass of ...rms
under consideration.
    Production is Cobb-Douglas in labor and intermediate inputs, according to,
                                                           Z   1
                          ln y = ln ' + (1      ) ln l +           ln (xi ) di             (2)
                                                           0


where l is labor input and xi is the quantity of intermediate input i, and < 1 is the cost
share of intermediates. Each input is composed of a continuum of varieties aggregated with



                                                5
constant elasticity of substitution        > 1:
                                                Z     ni                                    1
                                                                       1
                                      xi =                 xi ( )          d                                                            (3)
                                                  0


where ni is the measure of varieties (extensive margin) chosen.
   If the current relative price of imported varieties of input i is                                           i,   then a ...rm would have
                                       1
a current cost index for input i of zi1 , where
                                           (
                                                                           1
                                               ni + (ni             ni )   i                 if ni > ni
                          zi (ni ; i ) =                                                                                                (4)
                                                             ni                              if ni ni

Since the unit cost index is decreasing in zi the ...rm can lower it by expanding the extensive
margin. Therefore at the very least the ...rm adopts all varieties that carry no sunk adoption
cost, and hence we can con...ne our attention to ni ni + i .
   Aggregating over all inputs and normalizing w = 1, the log unit cost of the ...nal good is,
                                                                           Z           1
                               ln c = ln ~       ln ' +                                    ln (zi ) di                                  (5)
                                                                1                  0


where ~          (1       ) 1.
   The pro...t-maximizing price of the ...nal good is p
                                                      ^=                                        (   1)
                                                                                                         c. Thus, the one-period log
operating pro...t of a ...rm can be written as,
                                                                                                    Z    1
                                                                               (             1)
                     ln [ (z )] = ln A + (            1) ln ' +                                              ln (zi ) di                (6)
                                                                                            1       0


where A E       (     1) 1 (~ )1 .
   The partial derivative of the pro...t function with respect to zi is

                                                                (       1) 1
                                     zi (z )   = (z )                        >0                                                         (7)
                                                                       1 zi

We show in the appendix that (z ) is strictly concave if ( 11) < 1. This is satis...ed if
the elasticity of substitution between two varieties of the same input is greater than that
between two di¤erent ...nal goods, i.e., > , which we assume henceforth. Furthermore,
di¤erentiation of (7) yields zi zj (z ) > 0 for all i 6= j , and thus (z ) is supermodular.7
   7
     By itself, Cobb-Douglas technology would imply that inputs are neither gross complements nor gross
substitutes. Thus the supermodularity property, which gives rise to input complementarity in our model, is
driven by a pro...t e¤ect alone. This is reected in its dependence on the ...nal demand elasticity.



                                                            6
2.2     Input Choice under Certainty
Before considering the problem with uncertainty, we solve the benchmark with certainty,
i.e., = 0, or equivalently, l      h
                            i = i = i for all i. The ...rm chooses each ni to maximize the
expected present value of pro...ts net of adoption costs,
                                                                Z       1
                                             (z )
                              V (z ) =                  K                   [ni       (ni +   i )] di                      (8)
                                         1                          0

with ni ni + i .
   The ...rst-order condition compares the marginal operating pro...t from increasing zi with
the marginal cost of adding an imported variety with sunk cost K ,

                                                     zi (z )                      1
                                                                        K     i                                            (9)
                                                (1          )

with strict equality for an interior solution, i.e., ni > ni + i .8
   Solving (9) for the optimal extensive margin of imports, ni                                          ni     ni , gives ni =
max f ~ i ; i g, where
                                          ~i            i                                                                 (10)
                               ( 1)
and i      ni i 1 and      ( 1)(1 )K
                                       . If the measure of exposed varieties i is su¢ ciently
high, then the ...rm does not pay to adopt risky ones as well. Otherwise it does and in that
case the extensive margin of imports is increasing in operating pro...t, decreasing in own
input tari¤ and on sunk cost.
    Using this we solve for import expenditure for each input. Given CES at the variety
level, the share of imports in total spending on input i is,

                                                                  ni
                                                     si =                                                                 (11)
                                                                i + ni


Domestic plus import expenditure on i is (     1) , which follows from the Cobb-Douglas
input technology (see appendix). Thus import spending is,

                                                                                ni
                                         mi =          (        1)                   ;                                    (12)
                                                                              i + ni

which increases with operating pro...t and declines with own tari¤, via                                 i.   Using the optimal
ni , this expression becomes,
   8
    We abstract from sunk costs to start producing or importing. They are not necessary or su¢ cient to
generate the impact of product speci...c risk on imports that we subsequently ...nd. However, such costs could
be incorporated in the theory.



                                                                7
                                                                  (        ~i
                                                                                     if ~ i             i
                                   mi =          (           1)                                                                               (13)
                                                                           i
                                                                                     if ~ i <           i
                                                                          i+    i

                                                                                                                             1
   To determine operating pro...t, we substitute (10) into (4) yielding, zi =                                                i    max (   ;    i   + )
and use this in (6) to obtain
                                                 Z       1                                                   Z    1
                      1            (        1)                        1
 ln   =     ln A'          +                                 ln       i         + G (~ i ) ln ( ) +                   ln (   i   + ) dG di ;
                                           1         0                                                           ~i
                                                                                              (14)
              h           R               i 1
                    ( 1) 1
where          1       1    0
                              G (~ i ) di     > 1 is a multiplier, reecting the fact that the exo-
genous pro...t shifters in brackets induce changes in imported input intensity, which further
a¤ect pro...ts. This multiplier is an increasing function of the average probability of sunk-cost
variety adoption across all inputs, G (~ i ), which itself depends on ; hence (14) is an implicit
pro...t function.
    We obtain comparative statics for operating pro...t by totally di¤erentiating (14) (holding
A and ...xed) and using Leibniz'        s integral rule to obtain,
                                                                                          Z     1
                                                                           (         1)
                    d ln       =           (     1) d ln ' +                                        i   (d ln ni ) di
                                                                                    1       0
                                                    Z 1
                                       (       1)        (1                i ) (d ln      i ) di                                              (15)
                                                             0

            R1 i
where i       ~i i+
                     dG < 1 and +i measures the domestic spending share for inputs where
                                   i  i
risky varieties are not adopted ( i > ~ i ). Thus, operating pro...t is increasing in productivity
and the aggregate number of available domestic varieties and decreasing in the aggregate
tari¤. The tari¤ elasticity on the second line captures how they lower pro...t proportionally to
their share of intermediate inputs in total cost (1       i ), the elasticity of pro...t with respect

to cost      1, and the multiplier e¤ect .


2.3       Input Choice under Uncertainty
We now introduce uncertainty. The vector of relative import prices for all i is l in the initial
period and there is a constant probability of it increasing to h       l
                                                                         in the following period
and remaining there inde...nitely. Uncertainty is therefore characterized by how likely the
current regime is to change, common across all inputs, and if so by how much in each i;
to distinguish between these we refer to h    l
                                          i = i as policy risk (e.g. tari¤ risk).




                                                                      8
                                                                                        l
       The present discounted value of a ...rm starting at                                  is de...ned recursively by,

                                                                                                                           h
                            l                   l                                              l               z n;
                    z n;        =        z n;         + (1                  )       z n;               +                              (16)
                                                                                                                1

where (1        ) and     are the joint probabilities that the ...rm survives and then faces the
low-tari¤ and high-tari¤ states, respectively, in the next period. Note that if the ...rm adopts
n varieties under l then it optimally continues to use them under h . After tari¤s increase
the ...rm does not gain from decreasing n because any adoption costs were already sunk, and
it would not wish to increase n because of the supermodularity of .
    To simplify notation, let z s = z (n; s ) for s = l; h. After solving (16), total pro...ts can
be written as,                                              Z 1
                          l h         (z l )      l h
                      V (z ; z ) =             U z ;z   K       (ni     i ) di                (17)
                                   (1        )               0

                                                         1+u[ (z h )= (z l )]
where we de...ne an uncertainty factor, U z l ; z h           (1+u)
                                                                              < 1, and u (1 )
                                                                                              -- the
expected duration in the high state. So U scales down discounted pro...ts at current input
prices due to the probability they will increase, alternatively: it is the ratio of discounted
pro...ts under uncertainty relative to certainty. The ...rm wishes to maximize (16) subject to
ni       i.
    Again the ...rst-order condition compares the marginal operating pro...t from expanding
the extensive margin with the marginal cost of adding an imported variety, yielding:

                                          l         l 1                h          h 1
                                          zi        i     +u           zi         i
                                                                                                   K                                  (18)
                                                    (1 + u) (1              )

with strict equality for ni > ni . Solving (18) for the optimal extensive margin of imports
gives, ni u = max f ~ u
                      i ; i g, where


                                    ~u
                                     i    (1         i)        (z l )U          i
                                                                                        h
                                                                                        i
                                                                                               l
                                                                                               i
                                                                                                           l
                                                                                                           i                          (19)

               1
and i 2 0; 2     . In the limit case where = 0 or l = h we have i = 0 and U = 1 so
this reduces to the condition under certainty in (10).9 Similarly to the certainty condition if
 i is su¢ ciently high, then the ...rm does not pay to adopt risky ones as well. Otherwise, it
adopts risky varieties and their number increases in operating pro...t and decreases with the
current tari¤, as was the case under certainty. Under uncertainty three additional elements
                                                                            1=2
   9                        1   1         u     4    (z h )(
                                                     )         h
                                                               i
                                                                   l
                                                                   i                                           h       l
       In particular,
                   i    =   2   2    1   1+u        l 2
                                                           , which is zero when                                i   =   i   or u = 0 and can
                                      [ (zl )U +( h
                                                  i i )]

be no larger than 1/2, which occurs when the square root term is zero.



                                                                   9
a¤ect imported varieties in the interior case. First, pro...ts are reduced by U , which re  ects
the probability of moving to the high-tari¤ state. Second, the gap h   i
                                                                            l
                                                                            i enters negatively,
even though the high tari¤ does not currently apply. Third, the elements of the expression
are weighted by i , which re   ects the uncertainty speci...c to input i. This weight is equal
to zero under certainty and up to one half otherwise.
    These three additional elements suggest that the ...rm is more conservative about expand-
ing its extensive margin under uncertainty than if it faces a certain l , which we establish in
the following lemma.
    Lemma 1: The optimal extensive margin of imported varieties, ni , is (weakly) lower
under uncertainty than under certainty for all i, as is the probability of the ...rm adopting
risky imports, G(~ i ), and the operating pro...t in the low-tari¤ state, (z l ).
    Proof in Appendix.
   We build on this lemma to prove the result for import values below. So it is useful to
provide some intuition. Since the cost of expanding the extensive margin is sunk, the ...rm
chooses that margin in the low-tari¤ state taking into account it will keep it in an eventual
high cost state as well. Thus, it will generally choose an extensive margin under uncertainty
that di¤ers from its optimal choice under certainty: ni u is lower than ni under l and higher
than ni under h .
   The distortion of the extensive margin under uncertainty has implications for the ...rm' s
import expenditure in the low-tari¤ state as well. Import expenditure on input i is given by,

                                                                              ni u
                                mi u =        (        1) (z l )                   u
                                                                                                                (20)
                                                                            i + ni


   Using the optimal ni u , this expression becomes,
                                    8
                                    <    ~u                        (z l )
                                          i
                                                                                                 if ~ u
                                                                                                      i     i
                    u
                 mi =     (    1)                 (1   i)      (z l )U       i   (   h
                                                                                     i
                                                                                         l
                                                                                         i   )                  (21)
                                    :                             (z l )                         if ~ u
                                                                                                      i <
                                                         i
                                                       l+
                                                           i
                                                                                                            i
                                                       i

   The e¤ect of uncertainty on import value follows from Lemma 1 above.
   Proposition 1: For each input i, each ...rm's import expenditure is (weakly) lower under
uncertainty than under certainty.
   Proof in Appendix.
    For inputs where risky varieties are not adopted the import spending function in (20)
is the same as (13), except that the value of operating pro...ts is generally lower under
uncertainty. When risky inputs are adopted, ~ u i    i , imports are also lower due to both




                                                       10
the substitution and pro...t e¤ect.10


2.4     Three State Extension
Thus far we assumed that after a policy change the only possible state is the one with higher
tari¤s, h. We now argue that the possibility of a more favorable state does not a¤ect our
results and provides an option value of waiting interpretation. The equivalence between these
two approaches is explained by the "bad news principle"(Bernanke, 1983): when ...rms can
wait and see before making investments then only the expected severity of bad news matters.
Thus, the e¤ect of trade policy uncertainty on input decisions is not driven by the expected
value of future per se but only by the expected value of the less favorable state.
    We demonstrate this principle applies to our multi-dimensional decision problem in
Appendix A.6. Speci...cally, we show the ...rst order condition is still given by (18) but
u0 = u (1 $) < u where 1 $ is the probability of the worst state h conditional on a
policy change. Here we make two observations. First, this extension does not a¤ect the
estimation, only the interpretation of the variable we construct, which becomes a measure
of tail risk. Second, this extension allows us to identify two distinct impacts of changes in :
a long-run mean e¤ect and a pure risk e¤ect. We are interested in the combined impact of
changes in the uncertainty parameter, , and the tail risk measure we compute is su¢ cient
to capture it.11


2.5     Approximation
In this section, we take a step towards estimation. We re-introduce f subscripts to clarify
the level of variation of alternative variables. As the draws of if are unobservable (to the
econometrician), we characterize the expected value of ln (mu         i ) over the distribution G( ).
Moreover, as this expression is non-linear, it is useful to work with a ...rst-order Taylor
approximation of E ln (mu    i ) around a speci...c point ( 0 ; n0 ; '0 ) for all f , i and tari¤ state,
where E denotes the expectation over the distribution of . This allows us to estimate the
approximate e¤ects of deviations from this point in all three dimensions. The approximation
of E ln (mu i ) (derived in the appendix) is,
  10
     The distorted adoption of risky inputs is partially o¤set by higher intensive margin in the low tari¤ state
and lower otherwise.
  11
     As Handley and Limão (2015) show if a given initial policy l is at its long-run mean then any increases
in imply a mean-preserving spread of that policy, i.e. a pure risk e¤ect. If l is below that long-run mean
then higher increases it, otherwise it decreases it.




                                                      11
                                                                                                     l                                                             h
                u                                                                                    i                                          u                  i
         E ln mif                 +     f   +     i        (       1) (          +
                                                                            0 ) ln
                                                                             0                                   + (1           ~0 )
                                                                                                                                s            0     ln              l
                                                                                                     0                                         1+u                 i
                                                                            Z 1                          l
                                                                                                         i
                                  (     1)       0 (1          0 ) (1 + 0 )      ln                               di
                                                                                      0                  0
                                                                                                                            Z       1              h
                                                                                                                  u                                i
                                  (     1) [      0   (1       0 ) (1    +       0)   E (s0 )]                                          ln         l
                                                                                                                                                           di            (22)
                                                                                                                 1+u            0                  i


where s  ~0 is the import share of a ...rm that adopts risky imports (i.e., ni u > ) and 0
  0 G(~ 0 )= ~ 0 .
     The ...rst three terms are a constant m , a ...rm e¤ect m   f , and an input e¤ect
                                                                                        m 12
                                                                                        i .    The
                                                                                             l
remaining terms on the top line capture the substitution e¤ects of the current tari¤ i and
tari¤ risk, ln h       l
                   i = i , which enter negatively. The second and third line capture the pro...t
e¤ects of the average tari¤ and average tari¤ risk, respectively. They too enter negatively.13
This is because the tari¤ on each input negatively a¤ects pro...ts, thus indirectly lowering
imported input use across all inputs. This e¤ect depends on the pro...t elasticity with respect
to average tari¤s, (          1) 0 (1    0 ), as in equation (15).

     All of the tari¤ and TPU e¤ects in (22) depend on 0 , which is proportional to the
probability that the ...rm adopts sunk-cost varieties, G(~ 0 ). Consider what would happen
if the ...rm were so unproductive as to have G(~ 0 ) = 0 (this would occur if '0 were so low
that ~ 0 = 0          0 < 0). In that case, the only imported varieties would be riskless (i.e., no
sunk cost). As such varieties would be imported regardless of tari¤s, the extensive margin
of each input would be invariant to tari¤s and to tari¤ risk. The value of imports of such
varieties will continue to be a¤ected by tari¤s (via the intensive margin) but not by tari¤
risk.14 Thus, for the case of a low productivity ...rm for which G(~ 0 ) = 0, equation (22)
becomes,
                                                                                                                            l
                                         u                                                                                  i
                                  E ln mif                     +     f   +        i   (          1)          0   ln
                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                             Z                             !         !
                                                                                                     1                 l
                                                                                                                       j
                                                               (        1) (1         0)                 ln                     dj       :                               (23)
                                                                                                 0                     0

    12                    m       m         m                                         (     1)   R1               ni                                                    '
         Speci...cally,       +   f +       i   = E ln m0 + (1 +             0) 0          1      0
                                                                                                         ln       n0       di + (1 +          0)       (        1) ln   '0
                     ni
(   0+      0 ) ln.  n0
    13
     It is not obvious, but (1    0 ) (1 + 0 )   E (s0 ) 0. This follows from E (s0 ) = 1    0   G (1 s~0 ) ,
which implies ( (1 + 0 ) 1) (1        0 ) + G (1 s
                                                 ~0 ) 0, as       1.
  14
     While the tari¤ and TPU elasticities are zero for su¢ ciently low productivity, they need not be mono-
tonically increasing in '0 for G(~ 0 ) > 0. While ~ 0 increases with productivity, the derivative of 0 with
respect to ~ 0 depends on the shape of G.


                                                                                 12
    In this case, imports are a¤ected by current tari¤s but not TPU and in fact imports are
the same for this ...rm as under certainty. This is because TPU only distorts choices of risky
varieties and the low productivity ...rm does not adopt any.
    In addition to the value of imports at the ...rm level, we wish to estimate the impacts of
tari¤ risk on current operating pro...ts; which has the following approximation:
                                                                                    Z       1
                       l
            E ln (z )              +   f   +       i    (        1)   0   (1   0)               ln l
                                                                                                   i di          (24)
                                                                                    0
                                                                                    Z       1         h
                                                                           u                          i
                               (       1) [    0   (1   0)       E (s0 )]                       ln    l
                                                                                                          di :
                                                                          1+u           0             i


The elasticities of average tari¤s and tari¤ risk are smaller than in (22) due to absence of
1 + 0 > 1.15


3      Estimation Approach and Data
We describe the econometric speci...cations implied by the model for ...rm-speci...c input im-
port values. We then describe the data and provide descriptive statistics.


3.1     Approach
We use variation in applied tari¤s, l        i , and risk,
                                                           h   l
                                                           i = i , across inputs for each ...rm. We
allow these variables to have di¤erent elasticities before and after WTO accession to capture
any change in the probability of tari¤ increases and test if the resulting e¤ects are consistent
with the model. We describe the steps and identi...cation assumptions necessary to obtain our
baseline estimation equations that focus on the own tari¤ or substitution e¤ects and control
for pro...t e¤ects by using ...rm-time ...xed e¤ects. Subsequently, we provide the conditions to
identify the pro...t e¤ects.
    The relative price of the imported intermediate in the initial period in the theory is l        i,
which we assume varies only due to trade barriers. In the data, the true relative price, l         it ,
varies over time even in the low tari¤ state and has determinants beyond tari¤s. Therefore
we rely on a parsimonious empirical model where its key determinant is the applied import
tari¤ factor in category i at time t denoted by it 1 and control for other determinants as
follows
                                     ln l  it = ln it + at + eit ;                               (25)
  15
      This is because average tari¤s and average tari¤ risk a¤ect imports in two ways, as can be seen in (20):
...rst by a¤ecting (z l )U , which a¤ects the extensive margin, and second by a¤ecting (z l ), which a¤ects the
intensive margin. Equation (24) involves only the second of these e¤ects.


                                                            13
where the time e¤ect, at , controls for aggregate shocks, e.g. to exchange rates, and eit is
i.i.d. random noise.
     The relevant threat barrier driving ...rm decisions depends on their belief of the protection
level to which the Chinese government may revert. We do not observe this belief directly
but both we and those ...rms do observe historical tari¤s, h   i . So we model true ...rm beliefs,
ln h                                                    h
     it , as a weighted average of the observable ln i and an average tari¤ equivalent ln ,
common across products and unobservable to us. Thus we have

                                          h              h
                                     ln   it   = h ln    i   + (1       h) ln + eh
                                                                                 it ;                                      (26)

where the weight h 2 [0; 1] is reected in the estimation coe¢ cients and eh
                                                                          it is an idiosyncratic
                                            h      l 16
shock with mean zero and orthogonal to i and it .
   Allowing the applied tari¤s to vary over time in the approximation (22) and using the
empirical models in (25) and (26), we derive the speci...cation for import values as

                                                                           h
                                                                           i
                                ln mif t =      t ln    it +    ht ln           + af;t;I + eif t :                         (27)
                                                                           it


The current ad valorem tari¤ factor it and the threat tari¤ h    i are observed. The error term
eif t includes idiosyncratic ...rm-product-time shocks (including errors from approximation and
the empirical models of relative price and beliefs). Initially we do not include the aggregate
policy e¤ects on a ...rm explicitly but fully account for them using a set of ...rm-time e¤ects,
af t . In order to identify those aggregate e¤ects we subsequently include only ...rm and time
e¤ects, af and at , respectively.17
      The coe¢ cients on applied tari¤s, t are predicted to be negative. Moreover, both these
and ht are potentially time-varying through t . If TPU is present, i.e. t > 0, and importers
place weight on our measure of the threat tari¤ h > 0, then the theory predicts that ht < 0.
      We model WTO accession using an indicator variable for the post-period, i.e. 1wto (t >
2001), to test whether there is an uncertainty shock          = wto       pre 6= 0. This approach
yields the baseline speci...cation
                                                                                                 h
                                                                                                 i
       ln mif t =    ;pre   +         1wto ln      it   +      h;pre   +         h   1wto ln          + af;t;I + eif t :   (28)
                                                                                                 it


As noted above, in the pre-WTO period                        h;pre   < 0 when          pre   > 0 and h > 0; and applied
  16
     Broda et al (2008) show the tari¤s measured by h    i are increasing in Chinese import market power so an
alternative interpretation is that ...rms believed that the government is more likely to exploit import market
power if a WTO accession does not materialize.
  17
     We control for potential variation in domestic varieties, captured in i approximation terms, via industry
e¤ects aI at di¤erent levels of aggregation I , described in the estimation and robustness.

                                                               14
tari¤s have a negative e¤ect, ;pre < 0. The theory predicts that if there is a reduction
in uncertainty then       h =     h;wto    h;pre > 0 when h > 0. The theory also predicts an
increase in the responsiveness to applied tari¤s estimated by         = ;wto        ;pre < 0 for
beliefs with h < 1, i.e. if ...rms place some weight on threats other than the historical mean
 h
 i (shown below).
    The structural interpretation is

                                                                    ut
                                ht    =     (       1) (1    ~0 )
                                                             s      0    h                                  (29)
                                                                  1 + ut
                                                                    1 h
                                 ;t   =         (    1) ( 0 + 0 ) +                ht     :                 (30)
                                                                       h

Using these interpretations we calculate the percentage change in TPU upon accession

                                       u               upre
                                                =                   =       ht = hpre :                     (31)
                                      1+u            1 + upre

Note that if h < 1 then ;t also changes over time with uncertainty, speci...cally,                             =
 1 h        18
  h     ht .   So we can infer the belief parameter h, using

                                                             h
                                                h=                      :                                   (32)
                                                         h


We can test if it is within the relevant range h 2 [0; 1], whether it is similar across alternative
speci...cations and how relevant alternative threat measures are for beliefs.


3.2     Data
We combine Chinese trade data from 2000-2006 with product speci...c tari¤s from before and
after WTO accession.

3.2.1     Firm Imports

We use Chinese transaction-level trade data for the years 2000 to 2006, which is collected
by China' s General Administration of Customs. The data records information on each
transaction including the Chinese ...rm' s name, code, contact information, ownership; the
product code (at 8-digit); the country of the counterpart (source of import or destination of
export); year and month; value; and trade type (ordinary or processing). We use imports
                                                                                    h
  18
    To see why note that if h = 1 then conditional on the risk measure it      i
                                                                                 , the applied tari¤ elasticity is
constant and given by (        1) ( 0 + 0 ): its value under certainty. If h < 1 this elasticity is attenuated by
the fraction of the uncertainty e¤ect that is not controlled, 1 h h ht .


                                                        15
and concord the product codes to be in the 1996 version of the Harmonized System 6-
digit product classi...cation (known as HS6) using the o¢ cial UN concordances. We identify
intermediate products using the UN'   s Broad Economic Categories.
    We focus on ordinary imports and exclude processing trade. Ordinary imports refer to
non-processing imports and are subject to Chinese import tari¤s and thus are a closer ...t
to our model and policy data. Processing trade imports on the other hand receive tari¤
exemptions and may be a¤ected by other policies and incentives that we can'    t control for
and may be correlated with the policy uncertainty we measure, hence we exclude those
imports.19
    Our analysis focuses on ...rm import values, which is the best available variable that
directly maps to the theory. However, we also explore the mechanism of the model by using
indicators for whether a ...rm adopted a speci...c HS6 and examining how it changes.

3.2.2    Tari¤s

The tari¤ data are from the World Bank' s WITS (World Integrated Trade Solution) database.
We use Chinese MFN statutory tari¤s from 1992 (the starting year of Chinese tari¤s in
WITS) to 2006 (the ending year of our trade data).20 We use the historical tari¤s before
2000 to construct Chinese tari¤ risk measures, which will be proportional to the log di¤erence
between current tari¤s and a potential worst case scenario captured by the mean tari¤ from
1992-1999. As with the trade data, we concord the product codes to 1996 revision of the HS
classi...cation.


3.3     Descriptive Evidence
3.3.1    Policy

We measure the tari¤ risk faced by Chinese ...rms using ln h
                                                           i = it . In the baseline we use the
simple log average of the tari¤ factor between 1992-1999 in i for ln hi and the applied tari¤
in t for it . In the pre-WTO years tari¤ risk has a mean of 0.07 for intermediate products
  19
      The two most important types of processing trade are: (1) processing with imports (PWI) and (2)
processing with assembly (PWA). PWI is when Chinese ...rms import intermediate inputs from foreign ...rms,
use them to produce ...nal products, and then sell the ...nal products to foreign ...rms (typically di¤erent from
the foreign ...rms that export intermediate inputs to them); both the import and export prices are set based
on the negotiations between transaction parties. PWA is when Chinese ...rms get intermediate inputs directly
from foreign ...rms for free, assemble them to produce ...nal products, and then return them back to the same
foreign ...rms for sale; foreign ...rms pay Chinese ...rms a certain processing fee.
   20
      We use the data in WITS sourced from the UN TRAINS database as our primary tari¤ measure, but
these data are missing 1995 and 2002. The 2002 tari¤ schedules are in the WTO Integrated Database (IDB),
but no schedules are available for 1995.



                                                       16
and a standard deviation of 0.05, so it exhibits considerable variation (see Table 1). There is
also considerable variation within the typical sector (de...ned by the UN' s aggregation of HS6
codes into 21 sections, as shown in Table A3). This will allow us to control for unobservable
heterogeneity across sectors. The applied tari¤ factor, ln it , is around 0.12 for intermediates
in our ...rm sample before accession and 0.075 after. The coe¢ cient of variation is between
0.4 and 0.5 across periods and variation is present in several sectors as seen in Table A2.21

3.3.2    Aggregate and Intermediate Imports

The growth in Chinese imports is substantial from 2000 to 2006 and intermediate goods are
an important component of it.
    Chinese imports increased from 225 billion USD in 2000 to 788 billion USD in 2006.
Ordinary imports (OI) increased from 133 to 469 billion, mostly after accession as we see in
Figure 3. While the share of OI is roughly constant, around 60%, its composition shifted
towards intermediates-- the focus of our theory. Figure 3 shows the intermediate share of OI
increased from an average of 66% in 2000-2001 to 70% in 2005-2006. This also implied an
increase in the OI intermediates share of total imports. In contrast, the share of processing
trade remained around 40%.
    There are also changes in the composition of importing ...rms away from state-owned
enterprises and trade intermediaries (Table A1).22 These may re       ect an increase in the
incentive to import by private manufacturing ...rms consistent with the model. However,
they also re  ect the continued opening of trade rights to non-SOEs and small-to-medium
sized manufacturing ...rms. We will show the baseline results are robust to excluding SOEs
and using subsets of ...rms that already imported pre-accession so the e¤ects are not driven
by changes in trade rights.

3.3.3    Firm Import Adoption and Persistence

A substantial fraction of the aggregate intermediate growth is driven by new input adoption.
To provide a lower bound we can de...ne a continuing input, i 2 c, between t and T as an HS6
product the ...rm imports in both periods and decompose its intermediate import expenditure
  21
     After the WTO accession our risk measure increases because the measured threat is assumed to be
unchanged but the applied tari¤ falls.
  22
     We identify trade intermediaries from their Chinese names using a method similar to that used in Ahn,
Khandelwal and Wei (2010). If a ...rm name contains Chinese characters equivalent to "export"  , "import",
"trade" , etc., then it is classi...ed as a trade intermediary.




                                                   17
midpoint growth between these and all other products.

                                 m                      mi2 =c            mi2c
                                   = (1          sc )          + sc            ;                  (33)
                                 m                      mi2
                                                          =c              mi2c
                                                 New HS6            Continuing HS6


where the denominators re   ect averages over the periods, e.g. m = (mt + mT ) =2, and thus
allow computing growth if there is entry or exit.
    Doing so for 2000-2005 and further decomposing it into continuing ...rms and others we
obtain

                  1:01 = (          [0:28 0:75]             + 0:72 0:77) 0:6 + [1:37] 0:4         (34)
                               New HS6: continuing ...rms                        New HS6: other
                         =           0:67           + 0:33;
                              New HS6 Growth: all


The aggregate midpoint growth of 101 percent re     ects the values in table A1 between 2000-
2005. The term in () in the ...rst line is the import growth of continuing ...rms: 21 percent
new HS6 and 55 for continuing HS6. All of the 137 percent growth by other ...rms captures
new adoption (at some point between 2001-2005). Weighting the 21 and 137 percent by
the ...rms'respective shares yields 67 percent, so at least two thirds of aggregate growth is
accounted for by new HS6-...rm pairs. This is a lower bound since varieties in the model are
de...ned more ...nely so they also contribute to part of the 55 percent growth in continuer
...rms's existing HS6 (e.g. imports from new countries and/or ...rms in an HS6).
     Table A4 summarizes information on the probability of importing, the distribution of
imported HS6 by ...rms and their change over time. In 2000 about 11% of all manufactur-
ing ...rms imported at least one intermediate HS6. About 14% of these imported a single
intermediate HS6, which suggests that sunk (or ...xed) costs are variety or at the very least
product speci...c, otherwise if they covered all imports then ...rms would adopt all available
HS6 (relevant for its production) after incurring it. Our estimation approach relies on the
remaining fraction of ...rms, those with more than one HS6 in order to explore variation in
risk across HS6 within ...rms. The number of importing ...rms nearly doubles by 2005 and the
fraction of importers of intermediates in manufacturing rises to 13%. There is growth in all
bins with the largest at the bottom of the distribution, 10 or fewer, which further supports
the role of new adoption.23
     In Table A5 we provide additional summary statistics aggregating the years into pre or
post periods and contrasting the full sample with continuing ...rms. The table contains in-
formation for the full sample and the manufacturing subsample and we discuss the latter
 23
      The product distribution of importers in 2006 is similar to 2005.



                                                            18
for comparability with the rest of this section. In the pre-period the mean number of in-
termediate HS6 per importing manufacturing ...rm was 13-- much higher than the median
of 4 (panel I). The coe¢ cient of variation of 1.8 shows considerable heterogeneity in input
usage across ...rms-- as the model would predict.24 The mean of adopted HS6 is similar in the
pre and post-period in panel I since there is more adoption growth at the lower end of the
distribution in this sample that includes both continuing and other ...rms (as seen in Table
A4). The composition e¤ect is driven by new ...rms, which tend to adopt fewer varieties.25 In
panel II we see that for continuing importers in 2000-2005 the mean, median and maximum
grow. The mean growth in HS6 used in 2000-2005 for continuers is 8.6 lp.
    The small fraction of importing ...rms con...rms the existence of some adoption costs. If
these were simply ...xed costs then there would be no input hysteresis and so any input used
at t would depend only on current ...rm and input conditions. Alternatively, and as the
model assumes, if costs are sunk then prior input usage should predict current usage even
after controlling for all ...rm and input current conditions. To test if there is evidence for
such sunk costs we run the following linear probability model

                                         sunk
                       1(mif t > 0) =           1(mif t   1   > 0) + af t + ai;t + eif t ;           (35)

where af t + ai;t represent ...rm and product e¤ects interacted with time. In Table A6 we see
 sunk
      is around 0.15 and signi...cant at the 1 percent level with minor variations depending
on the sample (all and manufacturing ...rm subsample) and set of ...xed e¤ects (sector or HS6
or their interactions with time). This further supports the existence of some ...rm-variety
sunk costs.


4      Estimation
We ...rst provide the baseline regression results for import values and robustness. We follow
with evidence on the mechanism of the model that explores ...rm heterogeneity and adoption.
We conclude with a quanti...cation using the econometric estimates to assess the relative
importance of applied tari¤s versus commitment on imported inputs due to accession.
  24
     This heterogeneity can also be due to time-invariant sectoral variation, which we control for in the
regressions. We will also see there is variation in adoption even within ...rms in the same industry and
consistently with the model it varies by initial productivity.
  25
     We can verify this by computing the average number of varieties for continuing importers in 2000-2005
relative to the overall sample, which is higher by 1.4 times in 2000 and 1.54 in 2005.




                                                     19
4.1     Baseline: Imported Intermediate Values
We now provide regression evidence for the role of TPU in ...rm-level imports. We focus on
ordinary import values of intermediates, which are best suited to test the model. In the
robustness section we provide estimates for alternative samples.
    The estimates in Table 2 apply the baseline model in (28) to ...rm-level import values.
In columns 1 and 2, we include only the applied tari¤ and post-WTO accession interaction;
we control for sector and alternative ...rm ...xed e¤ects. The tari¤ elasticity is negative as
expected and it increases in magnitude in the post-WTO period. In columns 3 and 4 we
add tari¤ risk and see that it reduces the value of imported intermediates pre-WTO, a key
prediction of the model and this is partially reversed post-WTO, as shown in the positive
and signi...cant di¤erential e¤ects. Magnitudes are nearly the same for both sets of ...xed
e¤ects: ...rm (column 1 and 3) and ...rm-time (2 and 4), where the latter controls for the
pro...t e¤ect on the composite bundle of all the ...rm inputs.26
    While we did not restrict the parameters of the estimation, we obtain estimates of two
structural parameters in the relevant range. Speci...cally, in column 4 we obtain the pro-
portionate change in u= (1 + u) of 0:51; and h = 0:49, so importers believed the historical
average captured half the threat.


4.2     Robustness
We check the robustness of the baseline with respect to alternative ...rm and product samples
and risk measures. We also test if alternative hypotheses regarding other sources of TPU
and history dependence a¤ect the results.

4.2.1    Firm sample

The ...rm information in the trade transactions data does not allow us to perfectly distinguish
between importers that are manufacturing ...rms, the closest to our model, and importers
that are primarily engaged in wholesale or retail activity. To test if our results are robust to
this issue, we restricted our trade transactions sample to those that can be matched to ...rms
in the Chinese manufacturing census. Table 3 reports the baseline for all intermediate goods
trade in column 1. This can be compared to column 3, the manufacturing ...rm subsample.
We continue to ...nd a negative uncertainty e¤ect in the pre-WTO period that is partially
reversed following accession. The tari¤ elasticity also increases after accession, as in our
baseline. The sign and signi...cance patterns are the same in the manufacturing subsample
  26
    The model predicts a positive pro...t e¤ect on variety adoption, which could otherwise bias our coe¢ cients
on applied tari¤s and uncertainty. We estimate it below.


                                                      20
and the di¤erences in coe¢ cient magnitudes relative to the baseline are not large enough to
generate quantitatively di¤erent conclusions; the implied uncertainty reduction is 0:51 in
both.

4.2.2   Composition and trading rights e¤ects

One possible explanation for the change in tari¤ elasticity post-WTO is composition of ...rm
imports and/or new rules that allowed more ...rms to import. In the model we assume the
input elasticity is common across all i, but if newly adopted inputs, or entering ...rms, had
systematically higher elasticity then it would be re ected in higher post-WTO estimates. To
test this we re-estimate using a panel that includes only ...rm-HS6 cells with positive imports
in at least one year in the pre and post-WTO period. Doing so yields very similar coe¢ cients
as seen by comparing the estimates in column 2 of Table 3 to those in column 1. The fact
that the result holds even if we restrict the sample to ...rm-HS6 that already imported in
the pre-WTO period also indicates that the baseline estimates are not driven by new ...rms
acquiring trade rights post-WTO accession.

4.2.3   State ownership

Next we check if there is heterogeneity in our results depend on whether a ...rm is a State
Owned Enterprise (SOE). In Table 4 we re-estimate the baseline for the SOE subsample
(column 2), which account for about one quarter of observations in the baseline, and the
non-SOE (column 4). The qualitative results are present in both samples and they re     ect
similar proportionate changes in u.

4.2.4   Correlated shocks and alternative sources of TPU

We have focused on TPU related to imported inputs, but existing theories and evidence for
TPU point to investments by ...rms to increase their exports. We consider two variations of
these existing export theories and ask if they can explain our ...ndings of increased imports.
We ...rst consider the "home export TPU"mechanism: more secure access to foreign markets
leads home ...rms to expand, and therefore adopt more inputs including imported ones.
If the input adoption is common across all HS6 then they are captured by the ...rm-time
e¤ects and do not a¤ect our results; the same will be true if they are uncorrelated with
changes in foreign market TPU. However, our results could be a¤ected if there is a positive
correlation between import and export shocks at the product level, e.g. if ...rm export and




                                              21
import bundles are concentrated in similar HS6.27 If this were the driving force for our
...ndings then they should hold for exporting ...rms but not for ...rms that never export. We
test this by dividing the sample into "Never Exporters"       , "Always Exporters"  , and "New
Exporters" and running our baseline speci...cation on these sub-samples in Table 5. For all
three samples, we ...nd negative uncertainty e¤ects in the pre-WTO period that are partially
and signi...cantly reversed following accession. The implied change in u and h are identical.28
So, this alternative source of TPU does not drive our import results.
     The second variation is the "foreign export TPU"mechanism: more secure access to the
home market leads foreign ...rms to increase varieties to it and be directly re     ected as the
higher home ...rm imports. A distinguishing feature of this export mechanism is that the
foreign ...rm decision depends on the aggregate demand in the home market, whereas our
import mechanism implies that even if a variety is available some home ...rms will adopt and
others will not. If we had transaction-level data on all foreign ...rms exporting to China then
we could fully control for this export mechanism. However, this data does not exist and so
we consider alternative econometric approaches that try to maintain the available foreign
variety bundles as constant as possible before and after accession so any import adoption
re  ects variation of importing ...rm behavior.
     Here we de...ne country-varieties as exporter-HS6 pairs. We exclude imports of new
country-varieties by using only imports from ci pairs that were continuously exported to
China in all periods. Doing so leaves the baseline coe¢ cients largely unchanged as shown in
Table 6 column 2 relative to column 1. We can apply a stricter criteria that excludes any ci
unless they are continuously sold to a speci...c production sector. This allows for the possib-
ility that each of the over 400 production sectors classi...ed in China source di¤erent varieties
within any given ci. Doing so reduces the sample in column 4 to about one third of the
relevant manufacturing sample in column 3 but does not change the estimated coe¢ cients.
In a subsequent section we control for all foreign export-TPU by including HS6-time e¤ects
and exploring ...rm productivity heterogeneity to identify the remaining import TPU e¤ects.

4.2.5     Alternative risk measure

We examine how our results depend on the measurement of the threat tari¤ in Table 7. As
an alternative to using the historical mean tari¤ by product for 1992-1999 (column 1), we
  27
      For example, WTO accession reduced TPU in the US and thus increased China'           s exports to that market.
If the Chinese uncertainty measure across products is correlated with the one in the U.S. then our results
may overstate the impact of the import mechanism.
   28
      Speci...cally, u is -0.45 for always and -0.42 for never; h is 0.45 and 0.36 respectively. The absolute value
of the elasticities are smaller for never exporters. This may be due to di¤erent composition of inputs or
lower productivity. We examine variation regarding the latter in the mechanism section.


                                                        22
use the historical maximum tari¤ (column 2), which is typically close to the 1992 value.
The results are qualitatively similar but the magnitudes are slightly di¤erent: smaller for
the maximum threat tari¤. This di¤erence in magnitude is partly because the mean and
standard deviation for the alternative variable are roughly twice of their respective values
for the baseline measure. The e¤ects in column 2 remain smaller even after adjusting for
standard deviation shocks, which might suggest the historical maximum was less salient than
the average measure incorporating liberalization in the late 1990s. We can verify this directly
by noting that in column 2 the implied probability of reversal to the maximum is h = 0:26,
about half the value of the probability of reversal to the mean measure in the baseline.29

4.2.6    History dependence

Our main focus is on the change in the e¤ects of tari¤s after the WTO accession, which does
not re   ect any unobserved e¤ects of a product that are constant over time. To interpret and
quantify the pre-WTO e¤ects as well we test robustness to alternative hypotheses. One such
hypothesis is that ...rms face sunk costs but no uncertainty; if that were the case then tari¤s
set at T a¤ect the input technology ...rms adopt in that period and as long as the technology
does not depreciate or is replaced. This is plausible for shorter periods but unlikely in our
setting. For example, the historical maximum re    ects tari¤s around 1992 so the technology
would have had to survive until 2000-2001 to explain what we ...nd in Table 7. Many of
the ...rms in our sample were not created until much later. The baseline results re     ect the
mean tari¤s between 1992-1999 and thus the explanation seems a priori more plausible.
Under this alternative, the relevant historical average should only re   ect periods while the
...rm was alive, so the 1992-1999 average should have smaller explanatory power for ...rms
created in the later periods. To test this we restrict the sample of manufacturing ...rms
to those created after 1997 and re-run the speci...cation in Table 3 column 3 (available on
request). This restriction reduces the sample by more than half but leaves the coe¢ cients
largely unchanged in terms of magnitudes and standard errors. This identical response from
younger ...rms indicates they place similar weight on tari¤s they did not actually face and
supports our uncertainty interpretation of the measure.


4.3     Mechanism Evidence
We now provide evidence on the mechanisms of the model, speci...cally on intermediates vs.
consumption goods, productivity heterogeneity, complementarity and adoption e¤ects.
  29
    Thus importers placed a lower probability on a reversal to the 1992 tari¤s, which reect the regime prior
to the "Socialist Market Economy" reforms as indicated in Figure 1.



                                                    23
4.3.1    Intermediates vs. Consumption Goods

Thus far we focused on the subset of HS6 that match the UN BEC intermediate classi...cation.
If we ...nd the same quantitative e¤ect for ...nal consumption goods then it is harder to
distinguish our mechanism from others, such as the export TPU. A simple way to test this is
provided in Table 8 where we run the baseline on the sample of ...nal consumption goods. For
the sample including all ...rms (column 2) we ...nd e¤ects that are qualitatively similar to those
for intermediates (replicated in column 1) but with considerably smaller elasticities. This
may re   ect the "export TPU"channel previously documented by other authors. Importantly,
for the subsample that is most relevant for the theory-- the manufacturing ...rms-- we ...nd no
statistically signi...cant evidence for the uncertainty channel in consumption goods (column
4). This provides additional evidence that the baseline results for inputs capture a mechanism
distinct from the standard export TPU in the literature.30

4.3.2    Productivity Heterogeneity

We now examine how the import elasticities depend on initial ...rm productivity.
    Our baseline approach used an approximation around a given ...rm productivity and
product characteristics so ...rm heterogeneity was controlled via ...rm ...xed e¤ects. According
to the theory, the risk elasticity of imports is proportional to (1 s~) . If a ...rm is su¢ ciently
unproductive so as not to adopt any risky imported inputs, this elasticity is zero. Thus, its
import equation in (23) re    ects no uncertainty impact. When a ...rm is su¢ ciently productive
to adopt some intermediates then its risk elasticity relative to a more productive ...rm is
ambiguous and depends on the properties of the exposed variety distribution G. Given this
we ask if there is any signi...cant di¤erence in the uncertainty coe¢ cients between high and
low productivity. If there is then we explore it and ask if it is robust to controlling for the
foreign export-TPU mechanism.
    We use the matched manufacturing data to compute productivity for each ...rm present
in the pre-WTO period. Productivity is measured as real output per worker to maximize the
number of observations. Firms are classi...ed as high productivity if in the pre-WTO period
they are above their industry'    s median and low otherwise. Column 1 of Table 9 con...rms
the baseline predictions hold for high productivity ...rms. This is also the case when we run
the baseline for this subsample of low productivity in column 2. In column 3 we pool these
  30
    Interestingly, we ...nd some uncertainty e¤ects for capital goods in both samples (available on request).
Their magnitudes are closer to the intermediates but the estimates are much less precise. There are two
possible reasons. First, the intermediate classi...cation is subject to error, for example it may be too narrow
and misclassify some HS6 as capital goods. Second, the basic insight of the model can be adapted for capital
goods that must be periodically replaced.



                                                      24
subsamples and report the estimated coe¢ cients for low on the left and the di¤erential for
high relative to low on the right. We ...nd that the accession had a larger impact for high
productivity ...rms re ected in the di¤erential coe¢ cients for risk and applied tari¤s in the
post period.
    Column 4 o¤ers further robustness of the results relative to foreign export TPU. Here
we ...nd that the magnitude and signi...cance of high productivity di¤erentials are robust to
including HS6-time e¤ects (so we can only identify the di¤erential between high and low).
This robustness indicates that the di¤erentials are driven by input TPU and not by foreign
export TPU, since the HS6-time e¤ects control for any change in the availability of foreign
input varieties in China.

4.3.3     Pro...t and Input Complementarity E¤ects

Thus far we focused on own substitution e¤ects: larger imports of an input i if it has lower
relative price and risk. We now examine if there are complementarities across inputs, i.e. if
reductions in the cost or risk in inputs j 6= i increase imports of i.
    To do so we augment the baseline estimation equation in (28) as follows


                                                                                        h
                                                                                        i
        ln mif t =       ;pre +          1wto ln       it +     h;pre +   h   1wto ln        + af;t;I + eif t (36)
                                                                                        it
                                     Z                             Z
                                                                          h
                     +        1wto       ln   it   +    h     1wto ln     i = it   :
                                     f                             f


The two new terms are in the second line. To apply the approximation in (22) we need
                                                                      R
to compute a simple log average over relevant inputs, denoted by f ln h          l
                                                                             j = j for risk and
de...ned as the average over the j inputs used by the CIC-4 industry F to which f belongs.
This avoids the endogeneity of computing averages over only the adopted set of each ...rm.
This measure and the applied tari¤ analog have no product variation and so are ...rm speci...c,
which implies that we can'  t identify their baseline e¤ect separately from the ...rm e¤ect, af ,
but we can still identify the di¤erential post-WTO e¤ect if we restrict the ...rm e¤ect to be
...xed over time, as we now will.
     The sign predictions are the same as those for the respective substitution e¤ects if
falls:     h > 0 (if h > 0) and          < 0 (if h < 1).31 In Table 10 we implement this
  31
   Similarly, we can obtain structural predictions from (22) and the empirical models in (25) and (26). For
example,
                                                                               ut
                         h =    (   1) [ 0 (1    0 ) (1 + 0 ) E (s0 )] h
                                                                            1 + ut




                                                         25
for the manufacturing sample. The ...rst column replicates the baseline only including the
substitution e¤ects for comparison. The second column adds new variables. The substitution
e¤ects are unchanged and we ...nd evidence for the complementarity impacts: the reduction
in uncertainty in other inputs increased imports of i,        h > 0. Moreover, the magnitude of
the elasticity of i'
                   s tari¤s with respect to other inputs increased. The results are robust to
a subsample of ...rms that import before and after the accession (column 3).
    The last two columns split the sample into high and low productivity and as predicted
we ...nd larger pro...t e¤ects for high, partially because the pro...t multiplier, , increases with
productivity.

4.3.4     Probability of Adoption

The baseline model assumes there are always some riskless imported varieties in a category
i, and thus there are positive imports within each i with probability one. While this is likely
to hold at a high enough level of aggregation, at the HS6 level we do observe zeros. One
interpretation is that the desired import level is so low that it falls below the recorded level,
or is done through third parties. Alternatively, these may be true zeros and we have to
augment the model as described below. Variation at this level may capture large di¤erences
in incentives to adopt because of TPU and thus may be informative about the mechanism of
the model but testing this empirically also requires care to ensure the zeros are not simply
because an HS6 is outside the potential adoption set for ...rms in a given sector.
     As a preliminary step, we ask whether the prevalence of zeros seems important a priori
in the data. At an aggregate level almost all imports in this period occur in HS6 products
China imported before and after accession (about 99% in 2005-2000) and they account for
all of the growth. This aggregate masks churning at the ...rm level, but about three quarters
of imports and import growth by continuing ...rms also occurs in HS6 products they already
imported before WTO accession, as noted in the descriptive evidence section.32 Even these
...rm aggregates mask potentially interesting heterogeneity across ...rms. In particular, they
re   ect an import weighted average of continuing ...rm-HS6 observations that should be more
representative of the larger ...rms that have already adopted most potential inputs, as the
model would predict. The evidence suggests this is the case and that smaller ...rms have a
lower share of trade in continuing HS6 products.33 Thus it may be instructive to examine
  32
       Speci...cally, we construct a panel of continuing importing ...rms between 2000-2005; these account for
60% of total intermediate imports (averaged between those two years); we compute the imports in continuing
...rm-HS-6 pairs and ...nd that it accounts for almost three quarters of their total imports and also a similar
share of their import growth between 2000-2005.
    33
       Speci...cally, we compute the average continuing share, i2cont (mif;post + mif;pre ) = i (mif;post + mif;pre ),
which has a simple average across ...rms of 0.39, considerably smaller than the import weighted average



                                                        26
HS6 adoption to study the mechanism of the model.
     Our theoretical model of Section 2 did not allow for zero imports of an input, because
the ...rm always imports at least if (the measure of the riskless foreign varieties), which
is positive with probability 1. To allow for zero imports, therefore, we must require the
distribution of to have a mass point at zero: G(0) > 0. The probability of observing a
...rm with positive imports in this subset is,
                                                                   (
                                   u                                   1 if ~ u
                                                                              if > 0
                              Pr nif > 0j            if   =0 =                u
                                                                                     ;                    (37)
                                                                       0 if ~ if 0
where the latent variable ~ u
                            if is given by (19). We showed that it is increasing in the ...rm'
                                                                                             s
expected pro...ts and decreasing in the own current tari¤ and TPU. In the appendix, we
approximate it around ~ if = 0-- the point of adoption indi¤erence under certainty-- and it
yields,

                                                                                          h
                                                                                  u       i
                      ~u
                       if
                               n
                                   +   n
                                       f   +     n
                                                 i        (    1) ln     l
                                                                         i   +       ln   l
                                                                                                          (38)
                                                                                 1+u      i
                                                                                   n
where the pro...t e¤ect is subsumed in the ...rm ...xed e¤ect,                     f.


New input adoption

     If we observed the subset of risky products for each ...rm then we could specify a probab-
ility model over f i in any given year using indicators 1 (mif t > 0). We would have similar
sign predictions to those derived in (28), e.g. higher probability of adoption post accession
                                   y
for i with higher initial risk,    h > 0. However, without directly observing that subset we
require an alternative approach; we focus on the adoption of new inputs described below.
     According to the model if a ...rm f does not use an input i even though it is used by
others then this is a risky variety for f . Using this insight the following adoption variable
over the set of products a ...rm did not import pre-WTO includes only risky varieties.
                                       (
                                               1 if mif;post > mif;pre = 0
                    adopt_postif =                                         and i 2 If 2F
                                               0 if mif;post = mif;pre = 0

   We use the subset of inputs i 2 If 2F , which are the potential products relevant for the
production sector, F , that ...rm f belongs to.34 In order to avoid timing issues and maximize
of 0.72. Similarly, the simple mean of the share of growth by continuous ...rm-products is lower than the
weighted average.
  34
     Speci...cally, we construct the subset of all i ever imported by any ...rm in F in the sample period, i.e.
i 2 If 2F if maxt;f 0 2F f1 (mif 0 t > 0) = 1g.



                                                              27
the sample size in terms of ...rms we de...ne the import variables over any pre and any post
period and thus there is no time dimension in this variable.
    The relevant set of potential inputs di¤ers across sector. The fraction of new adoptions
in the sample is seemingly low, 1.8%, but that re   ects in part the large number of potential
if pairs in the sample, almost 30 million.
    To interpret the estimated coe¢ cients we can start with a linear probability model using
1 (mif t > 0) following (28), which would yield coe¢ cients y and y     h with the same qual-
itative predictions described for import values. Now note that around no initial adoption
adopt_postif = 1 (mif;post ) 1 (mif;pre ) and using the changes over time operator, , we
obtain
                                  h
                        y         i     y          y                      y           y
adopt_postif =          h   ln              ;pre   h;post   ln   ipre +       ;post   h;post   ln   ipost +   af;t + eif t :
                                 ipre
                                                                                              (39)
      The di¤erencing implies we need only control for ...rm and time e¤ects and the coe¢ cient
                                           y
on pre-risk is the di¤erential impact      h > 0. If uncertainty was eliminated post accession
                                                                    y
then the coe¢ cient on the initial tari¤ would simply be              ;pre > 0: higher adoption of
products with initially higher tari¤s, and the model predicts that is also the case even if
uncertainty is not fully eliminated since y ;pre < y   h;post . Finally, conditional on pre-tari¤s,
the higher tari¤s are in the post period the lower the probability of new adoption since
  y           y
    ;post < h;post .
      The estimates in column 1 of Table 11 are consistent with all three predictions. The
elasticity of new adoption with respect to tari¤ risk after a reduction in uncertainty is 4.7
at the mean. This implies that WTO accession increased the probability of new adoption
for products with the mean tari¤ risk (0.07 in the data) relative to those without by about
33%.
      A ...nal exercise splits the sample into high and low productivity. According to the
theory, ...rms on the margin of adoption of an HS6 should have an adoption elasticity which
is independent of ...rm productivity, unlike the elasticities of values within an already-adopted
HS6 which we examined in previous sections.35 To construct productivity we lose about one
third of the sample but still ...nd a similar impact of uncertainty relative to the sample in
column 1 (the tari¤ estimates are now too imprecise to identify). The uncertainty e¤ect is
present in both high and low productivity samples. Their point estimates di¤er but this
merely re      ects the fact that high productivity are more than twice as likely to adopt on
average in the data. Thus the elasticities with respect to tari¤ risk at the mean are similar
  35
    The identi...cation is from ...rms on the margin of adoption, so ~ if 0 and in the appendix we show that
                                                                ut
the risk elasticity of adoption around this point is (      1) 1+ut , which is independent of ...rm productivity.




                                                        28
for high and low as predicted.


4.4     Quanti...cation
We explore the estimates and model structure to do the following: (1) extract information
about the probability of reversal, ; (2) quantify how accession increased imported input
values via substitution and complementarity and the impact this had on operating pro...ts.

4.4.1    WTO Commitment E¤ect on Probability of Reform Reversal

The key uncertainty measure for ...rm investment is the expected duration in a worst case
state. This is given by u = 1 , where here is the ...rm discount factor (not an estimation
coe¢ cient) and is the transition probability to the worst state, where tari¤ reforms are
reversed and protection increases. Using the relationship in (31) we used the estimates to
quantify the percent reduction in a related uncertainty measure, u= (1 + u), of 0:5 for the
manufacturing sample we use for the import quanti...cation exercises (Table 10, column 3).
However, it is also interesting to examine what we learn about the underlying probability
by using a reasonable value of , e.g. 0:85. Doing so we can obtain a percent change in u,
which is the same as that of      = pre , for any given pre .36
    We plot the post-WTO relative to its pre value in Figure 4. If there was no commitment
e¤ect then the probability would remain on the 45 degree line, the shaded area below it shows
the percentage point reduction for any pre using the import estimates. We ...nd the post-
WTO reversal probability is at most 0.13 (any pre 1) and its percent reduction is at least
63% (if pre 0:13).37

4.4.2    WTO E¤ects on Imported Inputs

We use the structural interpretation of the estimated parameters to quantify and decompose
the e¤ects of accession. We isolate the import growth from changing applied tari¤s, ln i ,
and the probability of reversal re   ected in u, holding all else ...xed. For any ...rm-product
this is given by the di¤erence of expression (22) between pre and post values, where the only
change in parameters is due to changes in u. We de...ne mif;t mif (ut ; t ), so it corresponds
  36
     To guide this choice we note that = (1 d)=(1 + r) where d is the constant death rate of ...rms and
r the real rate at which it discounts future pro...ts. A = 0:85 is consistent with alternative reasonable
combinations of these parameters; e.g. d = 0:125 (similar to what other authors) and r = 0:026 (the median
Chinese real interest rate). We would obtain a slightly higher value, 0.88, if we used d = 0:10 (the median
of the fraction of ...rms that exit in China in 2000-2006).
  37
     Handley and Limão (2017) estimate that Chinese exporters believed that the US would revert to column
2 tari¤s with a probability of 0.13, so, assuming China would reverse its own tari¤s in retaliation, this places
a lower bound on pre .


                                                      29
to the data for t = pre and to a counterfactual when only u and change to new values for
t = wto. In appendix B.2 we show this growth in imports predicted by the model is given
by the following function of the econometric parameters de...ned in section 3:

                                      Substitution
                                                                          Z
                                                                  Complementarity
              mif;wto
         E ln         = [(             h =h)    ri;pre +            h =h          ri;pre ]                         (40)
              mif;pre                                                         f
                        |                               {z                              }
                                                     Commitment
                                                                                                     Z
                                +[       ;wto        h;wto         ln   i   +      ;wto      h;wto       ln i ]:
                                                                                                     f
                                  |                                          {z                             }
                                                                  Applied Tari¤ Change


     The expression applies to any continuing input i by a ...rm f that uses a constant set of
                                          R
input categories with average policies f xi . The terms in brackets capture the commitment
and applied tari¤ change e¤ects-- each is decomposed into the respective substitution and
complementarity components. The commitment e¤ect depends on overall risk arising from
the historical mean and the unobserved component , i.e. ri;pre           h ln h
                                                                              i + (1    h) ln
ln i;pre .
     We ...rst assess the relative importance of each e¤ect for an input i with risk equal to the
                                                                 R
...rm average and equal to the tari¤ reduction, i.e. ri;pre = f ri;pre =       ln i . We present
                                                                38
these at the bottom of Table 10 and here focus on column 3. The substitution commitment
e¤ect is 6.2; it is stronger than complementarity (4.9) and over twice as large as tari¤
substitution.39 We are unable to identify the tari¤ elasticity level for the complementarity
e¤ect. But according to the model that e¤ect is positive when tari¤s fall. Thus the share of
the commitment e¤ect for this input as a share of all policy e¤ects is up to 80%.

4.4.3     Average growth

The growth varies across inputs with di¤erent policies and across ...rms with di¤erent input
sets via the complementarity e¤ects. The average e¤ect for any ...rms using a common set of
  38
       We focus on these because they use only observations where the HS6 categories in a CIC industry are
used
R         before and after-- holding constant the set of inputs available to ...rms in the industry used to compute
  f
     x i . The results are broadly similar if we use the unrestricted sample in column 2. The h for substitution
is 0.48 and obtained using (32); a similar formula yields 0.44 for the h in the complementarity e¤ects.
    39
       This ranking holds for all speci...cations in Table 10. Note that the estimated reduction in the probability
of increasing a tari¤ by 1 lp increases imports by more than an actual reduction in the tari¤ by 1 lp. This
re   ects the residual uncertainty post accession, which still attenuates the tari¤ impact. The counterfactual
tari¤ elasticity in the absence of uncertainty is ;wto juwto =0          + h (1 h) =h = 8:8.




                                                             30
inputs is
                                                                         Z
                     mif;wto
             E ;i ln         =         (      h =h)   +         h =h          ri;pre                        (41)
                     mif;pre                                             f
                                                                                               Z
                                       +       ;wto          h;wto   +       ;wto      h;wto       ln i :
                                                                                               f

                                                                           R
Table 12 evaluates these assuming an average input mix where f ln i = 5:0 lp and
R
    r
   f i;pre
           = 7:1 lp; the ...rst is the tari¤ change in 2000-2006 averaged over all HS6 traded in
both years and the second is the average of ln h     i = i;pre across the same i.
                                                                                 40
                                                                                    The ...rst column
uses the parameters from Table 10, column 3 described above. The average commitment
e¤ect is 79 lp with 35 lp arising from complementarity e¤ects; the applied tari¤ e¤ect is at
least 13 lp (from substitution).
     We also ...nd signi...cantly larger commitment e¤ects of accession for high productivity
...rms, 83 lp, than low productivity, 66 lp (column 3).

4.4.4     Aggregate growth

What do these result imply for aggregate input import growth? Denote the aggregate pre-
accession imports as mpre       if mif;pre and the counterfactual post accession values when

only (u; ) change as mwto        if mif;pre (mif;wto =mif;pre ). Hence the aggregate counterfac-
                     mwto            mif;pre  mif;wto
tual growth rate is mpre 1 = if m      pre    mif;pre
                                                       1 : the initial import weighted average
of ...rm-product input rates. There is considerable variation in risk (and tari¤s) across inputs
and their mix across ...rms so the aggregate and average growth can di¤er substantially. To
examine this we approximate aggregate growth with the following weighted average of the
predicted growth rates in (40)

                                       mwto                mif;pre      mif;wto
                                  ln                  if           E ln         :
                                       mpre                mpre         mif;pre
    We evaluate it with the parameters in Table 10 but now using import weighted policies for
                                                                                     mif;pre
each sample. In Table 12 we show the weighted tari¤ change in 2000-2006 is if m         pre
                                                                                             ln i =
  5:9 lp (for the speci...cation in column 3 of Table 10), slightly larger than the simple aver-
                                                                 mif;pre      h
age. The weighted historical risk is considerably lower, if m      pre
                                                                         ln i;pre
                                                                              i
                                                                                  = 4:4 lp, which is
consistent with the model'    s prediction that pre-accession ...rms imported less of any i with
high initial risk. The aggregate e¤ect from commitment is thus lower than its average but
  40
                                                                                                     R
    Since around the approximation point all inputs have similar shares we can factor out f xi , which
represents a simple average across inputs the ...rm uses for each xi . The
                                                                         R value used for average  risk implicitly
assumes that ln = E ln h   i so the overall mean   of the risk is simply    r
                                                                           f i;pre
                                                                                   = E i ln h
                                                                                            i = i;pre . Since we
recover h we can consider higher or lower ln , but this is the most neutral assumption.


                                                             31
still at least 49 lp.41
     In sum, the more conservative estimates imply that the policy e¤ects of accession in-
creased aggregate input imports of continuers by at least 65 lp with up to three quarters due
to commitment. As a reference, the observed aggregate growth in this sample for continuers
was 73 lp.

4.4.5    Current Pro...t E¤ects

We showed that lower tari¤s and tari¤ risk contributed signi...cantly to Chinese ...rm inter-
mediate import growth following WTO accession. This input expansion increases the ...rm'    s
current operating pro...ts. We can use the approximation in (24), to derive the following
commitment e¤ect on those pro...ts

                                                        f  (uwto ;       pre )
                                      E    f   ln                                 =                h =h          rpre ;                                         (42)
                                                         f (upre ;       pre )


where ri;pre is the average over the sample and we can show        1.42 It follows that the 35
log points found for the complementarity e¤ect on imports in the previous subsection is also
an upper bound for the impact on current operating pro...ts.
    We also provide a direct estimate of the pro...t e¤ect based on (24). Speci...cally we use
                                                                   Z                                      Z
                                                                                                                           h  l
               ln      ft   = af;t;I +                      1wto         ln      it   +        h   1wto          ln        i= i       + eif t ;                 (43)
                                                                     f                                       f

where pro...ts are measured at the ...rm level by sales net of cost of goods sold. The RHS
includes only the aggregate policy variables computed as in Table 10. In Table 13 column 1
we con...rm the predictions from uncertainty reduction:        <0<       h . Moreover, we can
compute the commitment e¤ect in (42) directly as         h =h   rpre = 3 lp. The e¤ect is 4.6
lp for pro...ts per worker (column 2).
  41
     This assumes ln = 4:4 so weighted risk equals the weighted historical measure. Alternatively, if we
keep ln = 7:1, the value used in the average, the weighted risk is about 5.8 and the aggregate commitment
e¤ect is 64 lp.
  42
     To obtain (42) we use (24) and di¤erence it with respect to ut :
                                                                                                                                      Z            h
                   f  (uwto ;    i;pre )                                                                    ut                                     i
        E   f ln                           =        (         1) [     0 (1           0)  E (s0 )]                               Ef      d ln      l
                                                                                                                                                           :
                    f (upre ;    i;pre )                                                                  1 + ut                       f           i
                                               |                                       {z                                 }      |        {z           }
                                                                                        h =h
                                                                                                                                            rpre

                                                                                                             0 (1     0)      E (s0 )
Using the import equation complementarity coe¢ cient and                                                                          E (s0 )
                                                                                                                                            we have            h =h   =
                                                                                                      0 (1       0 )(1+ 0 )
        m
        h =h   where            1 since    0        1.




                                                                              32
5    Conclusion
We provide a new model of input price uncertainty that captures both substitution and com-
plementarity e¤ects and derive its empirical implications. We test these using an important
episode that lowered input price uncertainty but the insights apply to other settings.
    Commitments to trade liberalization and trade agreements induce ...rms to make invest-
ments in new trade relationships and upgrades. Most research has focused on improved
market access for exporters through reduced policy uncertainty in trade agreements. Our
approach builds on and extends this research to imports when the future path of import
tari¤s is uncertain and there are sunk costs of adoption. We show that reductions in trade
policy uncertainty that lock-in applied tari¤s can increase adoption of imported varieties.
    We estimate the model using Chinese ...rm-level data before and after China'    s accession
to the WTO. Our estimates show that accession reduced uncertainty and that WTO com-
mitments for China'  s own import tari¤s explain a considerable portion of the large increase
in intermediate imports from 2000-2006 both through substitution and pro...t e¤ects. We
also show that imports are more responsive to continued tari¤ reductions after accession
because importers believed a reversion to historically higher tari¤s was less likely.
    An important caveat is that WTO accession reduced TPU, but it did not eliminate it.
The recent trade war between the US and China, Brexit, and other trade tensions are likely
to reduce some of the credibility of WTO commitments and existing trade agreements. Such
credibility takes time to rebuild. According to our model and ...ndings, the recent trade
tensions could continue to depress imported inputs even if recent increases in tari¤s are
reversed.




                                              33
  References
  Ahn, J., A. Khandelwal and S. Wei. 2011. "The Role of Intermediaries in Facilitating
  Trade," Journal of International Economics, 84(1): 73-85.
Alessandria, G., S. Y. Khan and A. Khederlarian. 2019. "Taking Stock of Trade Policy
  Uncertainty: Evidence from China's Pre-WTO Accession,"NBER Working Paper, 25965.
Amiti, M., M. Dai, R. C. Feenstra and J. Romalis. 2018. "How Did China'
                                                                      s WTO Entry
  Bene...t U.S. Consumers?,"NBER Working Paper, 23487.
Amiti, M. and J. Konings. 2007. "Trade Liberalization, Intermediate Inputs and Productiv-
  ity," American Economic Review, 97(5): 1611­  1638.
Antràs, P., and R. Staiger. 2012. "O¤shoring and the Role of Trade Agreements," American
  Economic Review, 102(7): 3140­   3183.
Antràs, P., T. C. Fort and F. Tintelnot. 2017. "The Margins of Global Sourcing: Theory
  and Evidence from U.S. Firms," American Economic Review, 107(9): 2514-64.
Baker, S., Bloom, N. and Davis, S. 2016. "Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty,"
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131 (4):1593-1636.
Bagwell, K. and R. W. Staiger. 2011. "What Do Trade Negotiators Negotiate About?
  Empirical Evidence from the World Trade Organization," American Economic Review,
  101(4): 1238-73.
Bagwell, K. and R. W. Staiger. 1999. "An Economic Theory of GATT,"American Economic
  Review, 89(1): 215-248.
Bernanke, B. S. 1983. "Irreversibility, Uncertainty, and Cyclical Investment," Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 98(1): 85-106.
Blaum, J., C. Lelarge and M. Peters. 2018. "The Gains from Input Trade with Heterogeneous
  Importers," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 10(4): 77-127.
Bloom, N., Bond, S., and Reenen, J. V. 2007. "Uncertainty and Investment Dynamics,"
  Review of Economic Studies, 74(2):391-415.
Brandt, L., J. Van Biesebroeck, L. Wang and Y. Zhang. 2017. "WTO Accession and Per-
  formance of Chinese Manufacturing Firms," American Economic Review, 107(9): 2784-
  2820.
Broda, C., N. Limão and D. Weinstein. 2008. "Optimal Tari¤s and Market Power: The
  Evidence," American Economic Review, 98(5): 2032-65.
Crowley, M. H. Song and N Meng. 2018. "Tari¤ Scares: Trade policy uncertainty and
  foreign market entry by Chinese ...rms," Journal of International Economics, 114: 96-115.
Feng, L., Z. Li and D. Swenson. 2017. "Trade Policy Uncertainty and Exports:Evidence
  from China'  s WTO Accession," Journal of International Economics, 106: 20-36.
Feng, L., Z. Li and D. Swenson. 2016. "The Connection between Imported Intermediate
  Inputs and Exports: Evidence from Chinese Firms," Journal of International Economics,
  101: 86-101.

                                            34
Gervais, Antoine. 2018. "Uncertainty, Risk Aversion and International Trade," Journal of
  International Economics, 115: 145-158.
Goldberg, P. K., A. Khandelwal, N. Pavcnik and P. Topalova. 2010. "Imported Intermedi-
  ate Inputs and Domestic Product Growth: Evidence from India," Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 125(4): 1727­ 1767.
Grossman, G. M. and E. Helpman. 1995. "Trade Wars and Trade Talks,"Journal of Political
  Economy, 103(4): 675-708.
Halpern, L., M. Koren and A. Szeidl. 2015. "Imported Inputs and Productivity," American
  Economic Review, 105(12): 3660­  3703.
Handley, K. and N. Limão. 2017. "Policy Uncertainty, Trade, and Welfare: Theory and
  Evidence for China and the U.S.," American Economic Review, 104: 2731-2783.
Handley, K. and N. Limão. 2015. "Trade and Investment under Policy Uncertainty: Theory
  and Firm Evidence," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7(4): 189­   222.
Handley, K. 2014. "Exporting under Trade Policy Uncertainty: Theory and Evidence,"
  Journal of International Economics, 94(1): 50­66.
Hanson, G. H., R. J. Mataloni and M. J. Slaughter. 2005. "Vertical Production Networks
  in Multinational Firms," Review of Economics and Statistics, 87(4): 664-678.
Hummels, D., J. Ishii and K. Yi. 2001. "The Nature and Growth of Vertical Specialization
  in World Trade," Journal of International Economics, 54(1): 75­96.
Johnson, R. C. and G. Noguera. 2012. "Accounting for Intermediates: Production Sharing
  and Trade in Value Added," Journal of International Economics, 86(2): 224-236.
Johnson, R. C. and G. Noguera. 2017. "A Portrait of Trade in Value Added over Four
  Decades," Review of Economics and Statistics, 99(5): 896-911.
Lardy, Nicholas R. 2002. Integrating China into the Global Economy, Brookings Institution,
  Washington, D.C.
Limão, N. and G. Maggi. 2015. "Uncertainty and Trade Agreements," American Economic
  Journal:Microeconomics, 7(4): 1-42.
Maggi, G. and A. Rodriguez-Clare. 1998. "The value of Trade Agreements in the Presence
  of Political Pressures," Journal of Political Economy, 106(3): 574­601.
Pierce, J. and P. Schott. 2016. "The Surprisingly Swift Decline of U.S. Manufacturing
   Employment," American Economic Review, 106(7): 1632-1662.
Tang, M. and S. Wei. 2009. "The Value of Making Commitments Externally: Evidence from
  WTO Accessions," Journal of International Economics, 78(2): 216-229.
Yu, M. 2015. "Processing Trade, Tari¤ Reductions, and Firm Productivity: Evidence from
  Chinese Firms," Economic Journal, 125(585): 943-988.




                                           35
A      Appendix
                             1
A.1     Result:              1       < 1 implies that (z ) is strictly concave.
Proof:
    h    The second i derivatives and cross-partials of (z ) can be written as zi zi (z ) =
               1  1                                                              1 2
ab2i 1      i  1
                     and zi zj (z ) = abi bj , respectively, where a = (z )      1
                                                                                     and bi = zii .
Let b denote an N 1 column vector whose elements are bi , and let A denote an N N
                                 1   1
diagonal matrix with b2  i   i   1
                                       on the diagonal. Thus, the Hessian of can be written
                   T
as H = a A + bb . Letting Hk denote the k th order leading principal submatrix of H, we
can likewise write Hk = a Ak + bk bT   k for k = 1; 2; :::; N . The k th leading principal minor
is,
                                          "                      # k "                     #
                                                  Xk
                                                              1    Y                 1
                                                                                         1
      jHk j = a 1 + bT     1
                      k Ak bk jAk j = a 1              i                  b2
                                                                           i   i
                                                  i=1
                                                              1    i=1
                                                                                     1

where the ...rst equality follows from the matrix determinant lemma. The concavity holds if
H is negative de...nite, which requires
                                      Pthat jHk j < 0 for k odd and jHk j > 0 for k even, and
                                        k        1                        1
a su¢ cient condition for this is 1     i=1 i    1
                                                    > 0 for all k , or    1
                                                                             < 1. QED

                                     1
A.2     Derivation of zi1 xi =                       (                 1)
                                          R1     1                                                                                          R1
The ...rm minimizes lagrangian             0
                                               zi1 xi + l +                  ln y        ln '        (1                ) ln l                0
                                                                                                                                                 ln xi di .
                                      1
First-order conditions are: zi1 xi = y and l = (1 ) y . Integrating and adding the
             R 1 11                  R 1 11                      1
FOCs gives: 0 zi xi + l = y or = 0 zi xi + l =y = c. Thus, zi1 xi = yc. Repla-
                                                                                         1
cing y with demand (1) and using p =                 (        1)
                                                                 c, we have zi1 xi = E                             (     1)
                                                                                                                               c            c. Whereas
                                                                                                          1
operating pro...t is:   = (p         c) y =      (       1)
                                                              c        c E    (     1)
                                                                                         c       =   (        1)
                                                                                                                   E       (       1)
                                                                                                                                        c         c. Sub-
                    1
stitution yields, zi1 xi =       (        1) .


A.3     Derivation of equation (19)
Equation (18) can be written as,

                                 l
                                          u h                 + ni l
                                                                   i                         l
                                     +               l                                       i   + ni
                            1+u           1+u        i   + ni + hi
                                                                                    l
                                                                                    i
                        l
which is quadratic in   i   + (ni         ni ). Simplifying gives,
                                                                   x
                                                 a+b                  =x
                                                                  x+c

                                                                  36
                       l                          (z l )                u    (z h )                       h               l
where x =              i   + ni , a =            1+u
                                                         ,      b=          1+u
                                                                                      ,c=                 i               i.

We can rule out the negative root (as ni u is constrained to be non-negative), leaving
                                                      q
                                                 1      1 (a+4bbc
                                                                +c)2
                        x = a + b (a + b + c)
                                                          2
                   q                                                                                                               1=2
                                  4bc
               1           1                                                         4 (z h )(                h       l
                                                                                                                       )
                               (a+b+c)2               1         1                u                            i       i
Let   i    =                   2
                                             =        2         2
                                                                    1           1+u ( (z l )U +                       l 2
                                                                                                                                           , then we have
                                                                                                                      i)
                                                                                                              h
                                                                                                              i


                                                  l
                                                  i   + ni =                    (z l )U                    (z l )U +                   h
                                                                                                                                       i
                                                                                                                                                l
                                                                                                                                                i           i

                                                  ni =              (z l )U (1                    i)              i
                                                                                                                               h
                                                                                                                               i
                                                                                                                                           l
                                                                                                                                           i
                                                                                                                                                        l
                                                                                                                                                        i



A.4         Proof of Lemma 1
Di¤erentiating (17) with respect to nj u gives,

                                                            l        l 1              l 1                                          h           h 1              h 1
                                                 zi zj (z       )    i                j    +u                     zi zj (z             )       i                j
                           Vni u nj u =                                                                                                                                         >0
                                                                                      (1 + u) (1                               )

Thus, V has strictly increasing di¤erences in ni u ; nj u for i; j 2 f1; :::; N g such that i 6= j .
Di¤erentiating (17) with respect to hj for i 6= j gives,

                                                                                                                      h                    1
                                                                                      h
                                                                                                                 ) h
                                                                                                          zi zj (z   i                          nj u
                                         Vni u        h   = (1              )u        j                                                                         0
                                                      j                                                     (1 + u) (1                          )

Thus, V has (weakly) decreasing di¤erences in ni u ;                                                                       h
                                                                                                                           j       for i 6= j . Di¤erentiating (17) with
respect to h
           i gives

                                                                                                              h                    1
                                                                                  h           zi zi (z            ) h i     ni u +                          zi (z
                                                                                                                                                                    h
                                                                                                                                                                        )
                                   Vni u     h   = (1               )u            i                                                                                         :
                                             i                                                                    (1 + u) (1     )
                                                         1                  1
Noting that                 zi zi (z )   =       zi (z ) zi         i       1
                                                                                      1 , we obtain

                                 (1     )u                                  h                     1
                                                                                                  h                                        1                    h 1
          Vn i u   h        =                                               i             zi (z       )                        i                    1           i               ni u + zih
                   i          (1 + u) (1   )                                                     zih                                       1
                                 (1     )u                                  h                  h 1                                         1            h 1
                            =                                               i             zi (z ) h                            i                        i           ni u + ni < 0
                              (1 + u) (1   )                                                     zi                                        1

Thus, V has strictly decreasing di¤erences in ni u ; h
                                                     i for i. Standard results from monotone
comparative statics (e.g., see Van Zandt (2002), Theorem 5) imply that any high-tari¤ vectors
 h
   and 0h such that h > 0h , we have ni u h         ni u 0h for all i. As certainty is just the
special case where 0h = l , and h > l by de...nition, the result is immediate.


                                                                                              37
Having established that ni u < ni c (where n c is the optimal n under certainty), it follows
that ~ u     c           u                               u          c
       i < ~ i . As G (~ i ) is increasing, we have G (~ i ) < G (~ i ).

Finally, we establish that for a given productivity, operating pro...t under certainty is greater
than the expected value of operating pro...t under uncertainty. Note that for any n it must
be that    n; l         n ; h , and thus, evaluated at n u , we have,

                                                1                                      u
                          n u;     l
                                                             n u;        l
                                                                              +                     n u;     h
                                               1+u                                    1+u

A su¢ cient condition is therefore, n c ; l      n u;                                   l
                                                                                            , where n c is the optimal n under
certainty. As n c maximizes (8), it must be that
                                           Z                                                    Z
                        n c;   l                 1
                                                        c                    n u;       l             1
                                                     Kni di                                               Kni u di
                       1                    0                                1                    0


                                                                         Z
                           n c;        l
                                                      n u;    l                   1
                                                                                      K (ni c       ni u ) di
                          1                           1                       0
                                                                  R1
Thus, the su¢ cient condition holds if and if                       0
                                                                         K (ni c              ni u ) di          0, which must be true
given ni u < ni c . QED.


A.5     Proof of Proposition 1
Taking the ratio of (20) to (12) gives
                                                                                                                        !
                                       u
                                        (z l )                    ni u                                ni c
                  mi u =mi c =                                                          =
                                       c (z )                                l 1                             l 1
                                                       ni + ni u             i              ni + ni c        i


Lemma 1 established that ni u                  ni c and the proof showed that,                                   u
                                                                                                                     (z l )   c
                                                                                                                                  (z l ). Thus,
mi u =mi c 1. QED.


A.6     Three State Model
Our model includes only downside risk (i.e., a positive probability of transitioning to a less
favorable state than the current one). In many irreversible investment problems, this focus
is without loss of generality, because of the "bad news principle" (Bernanke, 1983): when
...rms can wait and see before making investments then only the expected severity of bad
news matters. Here we con...rm the applicability of this principle to our setting.
Consider an alternative model with three states: the current state l, and two absorbing
states, h and g , where h > l > g . Let denote the probability of switching from the
current state, and let $ denote the probability of g conditional on switching.
For any absorbing state s and "legacy" vector of imported varieties n , the optimal vector


                                                              38
of imported varieties is:
                                             s
                                     n
                                     ^i (        j n ) = max f ~ i ( s ); ni g
where                                                  "        0                    Z                #
                                                                         s                1
                                                             ni ;                               0
                            ~ ( s ) = arg max                                    K            ni di
                                            0
                                              ni            1                         0

Following the proof of lemma 1, the maximand above has strictly increasing di¤erences
      0   0                                                       0
in ni ; nj for all i 6= j and strictly decreasing di¤erences in n ; which implies that
    g       l       h
~ ( ) > ~ ( ) > ~ ( ).
As in the main text, we denote the choice under uncertainty as ni u = max f ~ u
                                                                              i ; i g, where
~ u is the unconstrained optimum of the full problem, beginning in state l. Note that in
this problem, n u is the common legacy vector for states g and h. It follows that if ~ u 2
 ~ ( h ); ~ ( l ) , then
                                   ~( g ) > ~u ~( h)
and thus, n^ i h j ni u = ni u and n     ^ i ( g j ni u ) = max f ~ i ( g ); i g. Critically, n
                                                                                              ^ i ( g j ni u )
does not depend on ~ u ; rather, it is only a function of the exogenous component of ni u ,
namely, i . This implies that a marginal change ~ u (the endogenous component of ni u )
will not a¤ect either n^ i ( g j ni u ) or the continuation payo¤ in state g (so the latter can be
treated as exogenous in the full problem, and it drops out of the ...rst-order condition, as we
show below).
To formally show these points we ...rst de...ne the present discounted value of pro...ts gross of
initial sunk costs in state l recursively by,
                                 l                 l                                      l
                            n;       =      n;             + (1              )   n;
                                            h                                                           i
                                     +        (1          ^
                                                       $) V          h
                                                                         jn         ^(
                                                                                 + $V           g
                                                                                                    jn ) ;                  (A.1)

where for the extreme absorbing states s = g; h we have
                                "       0         Z 1                                                          #
                                            s
              ^ ( j n ) = max
                  s                 n i   ;              0
              V                               K       ni                                  ni 1[n 0 >n ] di .                (A.2)
                           ni
                              0    1               0
                                                                                                i    i



The indicator function 1[n 0 >n ] is unity if varieties are added beyond those from state l and
                          i    i
zero otherwise.
Solving (A.1) and subtracting the initial sunk costs yields the ...rm'   s initial state objective
function-- it maximizes:
                                                      Z 1
                         l      1       n; l
                  V n;     =                     K        (ni      i ) di
                             (1 + u) (1      )         0
                                u h            ^   h           ^       g
                                                                              i
                           +          (1 $) V        j n + $V ( j n )                       (A.3)
                             (1 + u)
                                                   h
subject to ni          i.   Note that n
                                      ^i               j ni u       = ni u and n
                                                                               ^i (             g
                                                                                                    j ni u ) = max f ~ i ( g );   ig
implies,

                                                             39
                                           Z 1
           l        1      n; l                                                                       u (1 $) n ; h
  V n;         =                      K        (ni                                           i ) di +
                 (1 + u) (1    )            0                                                          (1 + u) (1          )
                                                                                                  Z 1
                   u$       (max f ~ ( g ); g ; s )
               +                                                                             K        (max f ~ i ( g ); i g ni ) di                                      (A.4)
                 (1 + u)          1                                                                 0


The ...rst-order condition for ni >                        i       is thus
                                                      l                                                         h
                                 1                    ni                           u (1 $)                      ni                    u$
                     0=                                                 K+                                                    +             K
                              (1 + u) (1                   )                        (1 + u) (1                           )          (1 + u)

Letting u0 = u (1      $), the ...rst-order condition becomes

                                                                              l                                              h
                                            1                                 ni            u0                               ni
                                      K=                                                +
                                         (1 + u0 ) (1                                  ) (1 + u0 ) (1                              )
which is the same ...rst-order condition as in the two-state model in the main text with
u0 < u if $ > 0 since the probability of the worst case scenario is lower. Moreover, the
solution to this problem is such that ~ u 2 ~ ( h ); ~ ( l ) . Hence the addition of a third state
more favorable than the current state has no e¤ect on our results, it simply changes the
interpretation as described in the text.


A.7     Derivation of Approximations
We wish to approximate E ln (mi u ) and E ln                                                 l
                                                                                                 around ( 0 ; n0 ; '0 ). We start with
                                                                                                                                   Z     1
                  u                                                     l                            ~i
       E ln (mi ) = ln (                          1) + ln                   + G(~ i ) ln           l
                                                                                                                              +                 ln   l
                                                                                                                                                                     d
                                                                                                   i + ~i                              ~i            i   +

and ~ u
      i = (1      i)
                          l
                              U           i
                                                  h
                                                  i
                                                               l
                                                               i
                                                                             l
                                                                             i.    Di¤erentiating gives,

           dE ln (mi u ) = d ln                       l
                                                           + G(~ 0 ) (1                     ~0 ) d ln (~ i )
                                                                                            s                                     d ln      l
                                                                                                                                            i        0 d ln
                                                                                                                                                                 l
                                                                                                                                                                 i

and di¤erentiating ~ u
                     i gives,


                                      0                                                                     0                                                0
      d ln (~ u
              i) =                                 d ln             l
                                                                        U          d    i                                           d ln         l
                                                                                                                                                 i
                                  0           0                                                     0                0                                   0           0


Recall that,
                                                                                                                                   !1=2
                                        1             1                      u  4 h                     h
                                                                                                        i
                                                                                                                         l
                                                                                                                         i
                                  i   =                        1
                                        2             2                     1+u  lU +                   h                    l 2
                                                                                                        i                    i




                                                                                   40
And thus d         i   evaluated at ( 0 ; n0 ; '0 ) is
                                                                                                                    h
                                                                            u                  0                    i
                                                       d       i       =                               d ln         l
                                                                           1+u                     0                i


Using d       i   and s
                      ~0 =        0
                                      0
                                          0
                                              in d ln (~ u
                                                         i ) produces,

                                                                                                                                                       h
                                          1                        l              1        s
                                                                                           ~0                  l            u                          i
                        d ln (~ i ) =        d ln                      U                               d ln    i   +                      d ln         l
                                                                                                                                                                                (A.5)
                                          s
                                          ~0                                          s
                                                                                      ~0                                   1+u                         i

Using (A.5) and simplifying gives the approximation,
                                                           l                            l                                                 l                                             h
                                                                                            U                                             i                               u             i
E ln (mi u )           E ln (m0u )+ln                              +       0 ln                          (    0+           0 ) ln                          0 (1   s
                                                                                                                                                                  ~0 )       ln         l
                                                           0                                0                                             0                              1+u            i
                                                                                                                                                                            (A.6)
If we were only interested in the e¤ects of own current tari¤ and own TPU, then (A.6) would
su¢ ce. However, to obtain e¤ects of aggregate tari¤s and TPU, we need to unpack ln l
and ln l U . Taking derivatives gives,
                                                                                                                   Z    1
                                              l                               1                    (         1)
                               d ln                = d ln '                           +                                     dE ln zil di                                        (A.7)
                                                                                                            1       0
                                                                                          Z        1                                              Z    1
          l                      1                 (            1)           1                                                  u
 d ln         U = d ln '              +                                                                dE     ln zil di      +                             dE ln zih di         (A.8)
                                                               1            1+u                0                               1+u                 0

from which we get,
                                                                                       Z       1
                                                       (            1) u
                            d ln (U ) =                                                                dE ln zih                dE ln zil di
                                                                   1 1+u                   0


For s = l; h, we have
                                                                                                                                Z   1
                                                ~i
  dE    ln zis     = d ln (ni ) +             s
                                                     (d ln ~ i                        d ln         s
                                                                                                   i ) G(~ i )                                s
                                                                                                                                                           g ( )d        d ln   s
                                                                                                                                                                                i
                                              i + ~i                                                                             ln ~ i       i   +

which valuated at ( 0 ; n0 ; '0 ) becomes

                           dE ln zis = d ln (ni ) + s
                                                    ~0 G(~ 0 ) (d ln ~ i )                                                 E (s0 ) (d ln                   s
                                                                                                                                                           i)                   (A.9)

where E (s0 ) = (1               0)           (1           ~0 ) G(~ 0 ). Hence, we can already obtain an approximation
                                                           s
for ln (U ):                                                                                                    Z      1            h
                                                               (            1) u                                                    i
                                ln (U )                                          E (s0 )                                   ln       h
                                                                                                                                              di                            (A.10)
                                                                           1 1+u                                   0                i




                                                                                       41
Integrating (A.9) over i and taking the weighted average over the two possible states gives,
      Z 1                    Z 1                                       Z 1
  1               l       u              h
          dE ln zi di +          dE ln zi di = d ln (ni ) + s
                                                            ~0 G(~ 0 )     d ln ~ i di
1+u 0                   1+u 0                                           0
                                                          Z 1                        Z 1      h
                                                                     l        u               i
                                               E (s0 )         d ln i di +               d ln l
                                                                                                di
                                                           0                1 +  u     0      i

Substituting this expression into (A.8) gives,
                                            Z 1                              Z 1
           l               1      (    1)
    d ln U = d ln '          +                  d ln (ni ) di + s~0 G(~ 0 )      d ln ~ i di                          (A.11)
                                      1      0                                0
                                    Z 1                      Z 1           h
                    (    1)                   l        u                   i
                            E (s0 )     d ln i di +              d ln      l
                                                                                di                                    (A.12)
                       1             0               1+u 0                 i

Integration of (A.5) over all i, gives,
      Z 1                                      Z 1                                          Z   1            h
                       1        l       1 s ~0                  u                                            i
          d ln ~ i di = d ln U                     d ln l
                                                        i di +                                      d ln     l
                                                                                                                 di
        0              ~0
                       s                 s
                                         ~0     0              1+u                          0                i

                                                                                                     l
Substituting this expression into (A.11) allows us to approximate ln                                     U as:
               l                                                               Z   1
                   U                         '                  (         1)         ni
        ln                    (     1) ln              +                               ln
                                                                                        di
                   0                         '0                          1     0     n0
                                                        Z       1          l            Z 1                  h
                               (     1)                                    i          u                      i
                                        (1        0)                ln         di +         ln               l
                                                                                                                 di   (A.13)
                                    1                       0              0        1+u 0                    i

                                      l    U           l
Using (A.13) and (A.10) in ln 0 = ln       0
                                                ln (U ), gives the approximation for ln l
in the main text, and using using (A.13) and (A.10) in (A.6) produces equation (22) in the
main text.




                                                           42
B     Data and Estimation Appendix

B.1     Data sources and de...nitions of main variables
      Tari¤ (ln it ) Log of 1 plus the Chinese statutory MFN tari¤ rate in the HS6 product
      i in each year t, 2000-2006. HS6 codes are concorded to the 1996 version. Source:
      TRAINS via WITS except when missing (2002 for which we use WTO data).

      Tari¤ Risk (ln ih ln it ) where it is 1 plus the Chinese average MFN tari¤ rate
      in the HS6 product i and ih is the threat tari¤ factor: the historical mean in each i
      product in 1992-1999 (baseline) or the maximum of i in 1992-199 (robustness).

      Imports: log of Chinese ordinary (non-processing) import value in a ...rm-HS6-year.
      Source: Chinese Customs.

      Import Indicator (1(mif t > 0)): Chinese ordinary (non-processing) import dummy
      equal to 1 if a ...rm imports an intermediate HS6 and 0 otherwise in each year, 2000-
      2006. Used to construct adoption variable. Source: Chinese Customs.

      Post Indicator (1wto ): Post-WTO dummy that is equal to 1 for years since 2002, and
      0 otherwise.

      SOEs: State-owned enterprises. Source: Chinese Customs.

      Manufacturing Firms: Firm in Chinese Census with CIC industrial codes from 13-43
      matched to customs data using their names, zip codes and telephone numbers. Source:
      Chinese Customs and production data from the Chinese Bureau of Statistics.

      Cic4: 4-digit Chinese industry classi...cation. Source: Chinese ...rm level production
      data from the Chinese Bureau of Statistics.

      Section: UN de...ned "sections", which are coherent groups of HS-2 industries, as
      described in http://unstats.un.org/unsd/tradekb/Knowledgebase/HS. Source: United
      Nations.

      Intermediates: Product categories based on UN BEC classi...cation. Source: UN BEC
      classi...cation.


B.2     Derivation of quanti...cation equation (40)
Start with (22) and de...ne the structural parameters for each variable as b                          (    1) (    0   +   0 );
                             u
bh     (     1) (1 s ~0 ) 0 1+ u
                                 ;b        (    1) 0 (1    0 ) (1 + 0 );
                                                       ut
bh        (     1) [ 0 (1     0 ) (1 + 0 )   E (s0 )] 1+ut
                                                 l               h          Z        l            Z        h
                u                                i;t             i;t                 i;t                   i;t
       E ln   mif;t       +   f   +   i + b ln         + bh ln    l
                                                                       +b       ln         + bh       ln   l;t
                                                                                                               ;
                                                 0                i         f        0            f        i



                                                  43
where we allow for ...rms  R in di¤erent industries to have di¤erent technologies and thus average
policies, as re   ected in f . Around the approximation point the only time-varying coe¢ cient
is bh , via ut . All other including the ...xed e¤ect terms are constant and thus the di¤erence
over a given if between post and pre is
          u          l                     l                      l                         h                     h
        mif uwto ;   i;wto                 i;wto                  i;pre                     i;wto                 i;pre
 E ln     u          l
                             = b ln                    b ln               +    bwto
                                                                                h      ln   l
                                                                                                    bpre
                                                                                                     h       ln   l
                                                                                                                           +   f;t
        mif upre ;   i;pre                   0                      0                       i;wto                 i;pre
                             = (bh;wto bh;pre ) ri;pre + (b                           bh;wto )      ln i +             f
                             = ( h =h) ri;pre +        ;wto                       h;wto           ln i
                                            Z                                                         Z
                               +      h =h      ri;pre +                       ;wto          h;wto        ln       i
                                                         f                                              f

                                       R           l
                                                   i;t
                                                                    R            h
                                                                                 i;t
where in the ...rst line     f;t   b       f
                                             ln    0
                                                             + bh       f
                                                                          ln      l         and     f       the di¤erence over
                                                                                  j

time. The second line uses the relative price de...nition and ln i = ln l               l
                                                                                i;wto = i;pre as
well as the constant threat level over time, ln h            h
                                                  i;t = h ln i + (1   h) ln , and de...ned risk
             h
ri;pre ln i;t ln i;pre , and simpli...es. The last line applies the same steps to the uses the
de...nitions of the terms in  f after noting that in this approximation the set of inputs i is
constant.




                                                             44
           Table 1. Summary Statistics of Variables in Main Regressions
                                                   N         Mean                        SD
I. Firm-product Intermediate Imports All (Tables 2, 3, 6, 7)
                                Imports (ln)   4,466,183     7.764                     2.950
                             Tariff Risk-Pre    909,120      0.071                     0.048
                            Tariff Risk-Post   3,557,063     0.119                     0.067
                                   Tariff-Pre   909,120      0.121                     0.050
                                 Tariff-Post   3,557,063     0.075                     0.040
                       Tariff Risk-Pre(max)     909,120      0.167                     0.106
                     Tariff Risk-Post(max)     3,557,063     0.216                     0.121
II. Firm-product Intermediate Imports Manufacturing (Table 10)
                                Imports (ln)   1,690,405      7.58                       2.8
                             Tariff Risk-Pre    319,666      0.071                     0.048
                            Tariff Risk-Post   1,370,739     0.118                     0.066
                                   Tariff-Pre   319,666      0.118                     0.046
                                 Tariff-Post   1,370,739     0.075                     0.038
                     Mean Tariff Risk-Post     1,370,739     0.115                     0.018
                           Mean Tariff-Post    1,370,739     0.079                     0.008
             Imports (ln) High productivity     703,181      7.809                     2.811
              Imports (ln) Low productivity     207,467      7.305                     2.744
III. Firm-product New Imported Intermediate Adoption (Table 11)
                              New Adoption    29,379,409     0.018                     0.132
          New Adoption High Productivity       9,843,580     0.024                     0.152
          New Adoption Low Productivity        9,480,391     0.011                     0.106
                             Tariff Risk-Pre  29,379,409     0.073                     0.051
                                   Tariff-Pre 29,379,409     0.127                     0.057
                                 Tariff-Post  29,379,409     0.082                     0.041
Notes: Imports are (ln) of $US of each intermediate HS6 good imported by individual firms in a
given year. Tariffs (ln) are 1 plus the Chinese statutory MFN tariff rates at the hs6-year level.
Tariff Risk is measured as ln (mean/t), where mean is (1 plus) Chinese average MFN tariff rate
during the pre-WTO period 1992-1999, and  t is (1 plus) Chinese MFN tariff rate in current year.
Tariff Risk (max) replaces the mean with the max in a given HS6 in 1992-1999. Post is a post-
WTO dummy that is equal to 1 for years since 2002, and 0 otherwise. High productivity defined
as firms with real output/worker above the respective CIC industry median in the pre-WTO
period, low otherwise.
                         Table 2. Intermediates Import Value
                       Dependent Variable = Firm-HS6 Imports (ln)
                                 1              2           3                                 4

               Tariff Risk                                            -8.029***          -7.844***
                                                                        [0.543]            [0.538]
        Tariff Risk×Post                                              3.983***           3.985***
                                                                        [0.592]            [0.593]

                     Tariffs     -6.074***         -5.941***          -3.308***          -3.182***
                                   [0.473]           [0.475]            [0.519]            [0.508]
             Tariffs×Post        -1.986***         -1.943***          -4.233***          -4.194***
                                   [0.581]           [0.591]            [0.620]            [0.613]

            Fixed Effects          f+t+s               ft+s             f+t+s               ft+s
                       N         4,551,009          4,466,183         4,551,009          4,466,183
                      R2           0.286              0.329             0.293              0.335
Notes: Dependent variable imports (ln) are Chinese import values defined at the firm-hs6-year level.
Tariffs (ln) are 1 plus the Chinese statutory MFN tariff rates at the hs6-year level. Tariff Risk is
measured as ln (mean/t), where mean is (1 plus) Chinese average MFN tariff rate during the pre-
WTO period 1992-1999, and t is (1 plus) Chinese MFN tariff rate in current year. Post is a post-
WTO dummy that is equal to 1 for years since 2002, and 0 otherwise. Standard errors clustered at
the hs6-year level in parenthesis, with *, **, and *** denote, respectively, significance at 0.10, 0.05,
and 0.01. For fixed effects, f denotes firm, s denotes section, and t denotes time (year).
         Table 3. Intermediates Import Value - Robustness to Firm and Product Sample
                          Dependent Variable = Firm-HS6 Imports (ln)
        Firm sample               All                                  Manufacturing
      Import period               Any             Pre and Post                              Any              Pre and Post
                                   1                   2                                     3                    4

           Tariff Risk        -7.844***             -8.010***                           -5.640***             -5.894***
                                [0.538]               [0.651]                             [0.527]               [0.645]
   Tariff Risk×Post            3.985***              3.358***                            2.893***              2.932***
                                [0.593]               [0.727]                             [0.598]               [0.732]

                Tariffs       -3.182***             -3.433***                           -2.103***              -1.650**
                                [0.508]               [0.657]                             [0.522]               [0.655]
         Tariffs×Post         -4.194***             -3.596***                           -3.631***             -3.324***
                                [0.613]               [0.790]                             [0.642]               [0.793]

        Fixed Effects            ft+s                  ft+s                                 ft+s                  ft+s
                   N          4,466,183             1,178,469                            1,665,714              537,922
                  R2            0.335                 0.333                                0.286                 0.301
Notes: Dependent variable imports (ln) are Chinese import values defined at the firm-hs6-year level. Tariffs (ln) are 1
plus the Chinese statutory MFN tariff rates at the hs6-year level. Tariff Risk is measured as ln ( mean/t), where mean is
(1 plus) Chinese average MFN tariff rate during the pre-WTO period 1992-1999, and  t is (1 plus) Chinese MFN tariff
rate in current year. Post is a post-WTO dummy that is equal to 1 for years since 2002, and 0 otherwise. Standard errors
clustered at the hs6-year level in parenthesis, with *, **, and *** denote, respectively, significance at 0.10, 0.05, and
0.01. For fixed effects, f denotes firm, s denotes section, and t denotes time (year). Pre and post period indicates that the f-
HS6 pair was imported in at least one year pre and one post accession. Manufacturing firm subsample: those matched to
production census.
                  Table 4. Intermediates Import Value - SOE and non-SOE Firm Samples
                                 Dependent Variable = Firm-HS6 Imports (ln)
                                    State Owned                             Non-State Owned
                                  1                2                     3                 4

              Tariff Risk         -11.92***              -11.52***                     -5.777***                 -5.610***
                                    [0.711]                [0.695]                       [0.483]                   [0.484]
       Tariff Risk×Post           5.312***               5.201***                      2.738***                   2.716***
                                    [0.750]                [0.735]                       [0.541]                   [0.551]

                   Tariffs        -4.836***              -4.719***                     -2.020***                 -1.767***
                                    [0.671]                [0.656]                       [0.463]                   [0.454]
            Tariffs×Post          -5.792***              -5.685***                     -4.058***                 -4.160***
                                    [0.791]                [0.776]                       [0.575]                   [0.572]

           Fixed Effects            f+t+s                   ft+s                          f+t+s                     ft+s
                      N           1,171,481              1,160,895                      3,379,426                3,305,288
                     R2              0.25                   0.29                          0.305                    0.348
Notes: Dependent variable imports (ln) are Chinese import values defined at the firm-hs6-year level. Subsamples defined based
on the firm ownership information in Chinese customs data. Tariffs (ln) are 1 plus the Chinese statutory MFN tariff rates at the
hs6-year level. Tariff Risk is measured as ln ( mean/t), where mean is (1 plus) Chinese average MFN tariff rate during the pre-
WTO period 1992-1999, and t is (1 plus) Chinese MFN tariff rate in current year. Post is a post-WTO dummy that is equal to 1
for years since 2002, and 0 otherwise. Standard errors clustered at the hs6-year level in parenthesis, with *, **, and *** denote,
respectively, significance at 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01. For fixed effects, f denotes firm, s denotes section, and t denotes time (year).
                      Table 5. Intermediates Import Value - Variation by Firm Export Status
                                    Dependent Variable = Firm-HS6 Imports (ln)
                               Never Exporters              Always Exporters             New Exporters
                                1           2                3           4               5           6

            Tariff Risk -5.569***             -5.237***              -8.255***        -8.112***             -7.187***        -6.870***
                          [0.528]               [0.523]                [0.548]          [0.549]               [0.624]          [0.589]
      Tariff Risk×Post 2.443***                2.209***               3.629***         3.647***              3.750***         3.611***
                          [0.609]               [0.607]                [0.588]          [0.598]               [0.692]          [0.667]

                 Tariffs -1.639***            -1.451***              -3.550***        -3.399***             -2.668***        -2.171***
                           [0.473]              [0.465]                [0.536]          [0.528]               [0.568]          [0.543]
           Tariffs×Post -3.943***             -3.860***              -4.420***        -4.481***             -4.319***        -4.722***
                           [0.622]              [0.625]                [0.636]          [0.630]               [0.712]          [0.693]

          Fixed Effects        f+t+s             ft+s                  f+t+s             ft+s                  f+t+s             ft+s
                     N        485,104          462,189               1,612,633        1,602,324               295,458          290,141
                    R2         0.481            0.513                  0.228             0.27                  0.287            0.342
Notes: Dependent variable imports (ln) are Chinese import values defined at the firm-hs6-year level. Subsamples defined based on firm
export status from 2000-2006: never, always, and new exporters (in post-WTO). Tariffs (ln) are 1 plus the Chinese statutory MFN tariff
rates at the hs6-year level. Tariff Risk is measured as ln ( mean/t), where mean is (1 plus) Chinese average MFN tariff rate during the pre-
WTO period 1992-1999, and t is (1 plus) Chinese MFN tariff rate in current year. Post is a post-WTO dummy that is equal to 1 for
years since 2002, and 0 otherwise. Standard errors clustered at the hs6-year level in parenthesis, with *, **, and *** denote,
respectively, significance at 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01. For fixed effects, f denotes firm, s denotes section, and t denotes time (year).
                       Table 6. Intermediates Import Value - Robustness to Export TPU
                                   Dependent Variable = Firm-HS6 Imports (ln)
                  Firm sample                 All                                 Manufacturing
                                                            Continuing                                              Continuing
                  Input sample              All           Exporter country-                          All          Exporter country-
                                                                HS6                                               HS6-manuf. sector
                                             1                      2                                 3                      4

                     Tariff Risk        -7.844***              -7.766***                        -5.640***              -5.795***
                                          [0.538]                [0.562]                          [0.527]                [0.794]
              Tariff Risk×Post           3.985***               3.889***                         2.893***              3.179***
                                          [0.593]                [0.619]                          [0.598]                [0.888]

                          Tariffs       -3.182***              -3.225***                        -2.103***              -2.148***
                                          [0.508]                [0.536]                          [0.522]                [0.804]
                   Tariffs×Post         -4.194***              -4.117***                        -3.631***              -3.890***
                                          [0.613]                [0.647]                          [0.642]                [0.982]

                  Fixed Effects            ft+s                   ft+s                             ft+s                    ft+s
                             N          4,466,183              4,223,751                        1,665,714                548,024
                               R2         0.335                  0.335                            0.286                   0.355
Notes: Dependent variable imports (ln) are Chinese import values defined at the firm-hs6-year level. Tariffs (ln) are 1 plus the Chinese
statutory MFN tariff rates at the hs6-year level. Tariff Risk is measured as ln ( mean/t), where mean is (1 plus) Chinese average MFN
tariff rate during the pre-WTO period 1992-1999, and  t is (1 plus) Chinese MFN tariff rate in current year. Post is a post-WTO dummy
that is equal to 1 for years since 2002, and 0 otherwise. Standard errors clustered at the hs6-year level in parenthesis, with *, **, and
*** denote, respectively, significance at 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01. For fixed effects, f denotes firm, s denotes section, and t denotes time
(year). "Continuing Exporter country-HS6" includes exporter country-HS6 pairs with positive imports in all sample years. "Continuing
Exporter country-HS - manuf. sector" includes exporter country-HS6 pairs with positive imports in all sample years for firm's CIC
industry. Manufacturing firm subsample: those matched to production census.
  Table 7. Intermediates Import Value - Robustness to Alternative Risk Measure
                   Dependent Variable = Firm-HS6 Imports (ln)
                                     Baseline               Alternative Measure
                 Tariff Threat    Historical Avg               Historical Max
                                         1                            2

                          Tariff Risk              -7.844***                             -3.760***
                                                     [0.538]                               [0.237]
                   Tariff Risk×Post                 3.985***                              1.108***
                                                     [0.593]                               [0.269]

                               Tariffs             -3.182***                             -2.946***
                                                     [0.508]                               [0.510]
                        Tariffs×Post               -4.194***                             -3.180***
                                                     [0.613]                               [0.614]

                       Fixed Effects                  ft+s                                  ft+s
                                  N                4,466,183                             4,466,183
                                 R2                  0.335                                 0.338
Notes: Dependent variable imports (ln) are Chinese import values defined at the firm-hs6-year level. Tariffs
(ln) are 1 plus the Chinese statutory MFN tariff rates at the hs6-year level. Tariff Risk is measured in
column 2 as ln (max/t), where max is (1 plus) Chinese maximum MFN tariff rate during the pre-WTO
period 1992-1999, and t is (1 plus) Chinese MFN tariff rate in current year. Post is a post-WTO dummy
that is equal to 1 for years since 2002, and 0 otherwise. Standard errors clustered at the hs6-year level in
parenthesis, with *, **, and *** denote, respectively, significance at 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01. For fixed effects,
f denotes firm, s denotes section, and t denotes time (year).
       Table 8. Import Value - Intermediates vs. Consumption Goods
                  Dependent Variable = Firm-HS6 Imports (ln)
     Firm sample               All                       Manufacturing
BEC classification Intermediate Consumption        Intermediate Consumption
                        1             2                 3            4

         Tariff Risk -7.844***              -1.400***                -5.640***           0.137
                       [0.538]                [0.519]                  [0.527]          [0.951]
   Tariff Risk×Post 3.985***                 1.909***                2.893***            1.271
                       [0.593]                [0.530]                  [0.598]          [0.975]

              Tariffs -3.182***              -1.005**                -2.103***          -0.782
                        [0.508]               [0.415]                  [0.522]          [0.744]
        Tariffs×Post -4.194***              -2.457***                -3.631***        -2.137***
                        [0.613]               [0.468]                  [0.642]          [0.805]

       Fixed Effects   ft+s                    ft+s                     ft+s             ft+s
                  N 4,466,183                738,919                 1,665,714         149,668
                 R2   0.335                   0.425                    0.286            0.443
Notes: Dependent variable imports (ln) are Chinese import values defined at the firm-hs6-year level.
Tariffs (ln) are 1 plus the Chinese statutory MFN tariff rates at the hs6-year level. Tariff Risk is
measured as ln (mean/t), where mean is (1 plus) Chinese average MFN tariff rate during the pre-WTO
period 1992-1999, and t is (1 plus) Chinese MFN tariff rate in current year. Post is a post-WTO
dummy that is equal to 1 for years since 2002, and 0 otherwise. Standard errors clustered at the hs6-
year level in parenthesis, with *, **, and *** denote, respectively, significance at 0.10, 0.05, and
0.01. For fixed effects, f denotes firm, s denotes section, and t denotes time (year). Manufacturing
firm subsample: those matched to production census.
            Table 9. Intermediates Import Value - High vs. Low Initial Productivity
           Dependent Variable = Firm-HS6 Imports (ln); Sample: pre and post HS6-firm
    Firm productivity sample    High          Low                         Pooled
                                                                       High-Low      High-Low
                 Coefficient     All           All            Low
                                                                         Diff.         Diff.
                                  1              2                   3                   4

                    Tariff Risk -5.946***             -6.061***         -6.005***      0.0275           -0.189
                                  [0.666]               [0.705]           [0.682]     [0.397]          [0.367]
              Tariff Risk×Post 3.216***               2.405***           2.270***     0.995**          0.820**
                                  [0.757]               [0.789]           [0.769]     [0.452]          [0.417]

                         Tariffs -1.680**               -1.088           -1.353**    -0.26              -0.352
                                  [0.692]               [0.677]           [0.665]   [0.427]            [0.386]
                   Tariffs×Post -3.889***             -2.634***         -2.499*** -1.439***            -0.869*
                                  [0.846]               [0.823]           [0.803]   [0.537]            [0.488]

                  Fixed Effects       ft+s               ft+s                     ft+s                 ft+hs6t
                             N      337,276            142,090                  479,366                476,697
                            R2       0.263              0.358                    0.295                  0.415
Notes: Dependent variable imports (ln) are Chinese import values defined at the firm-hs6-year level. Tariffs
(ln) are 1 plus the Chinese statutory MFN tariff rates at the hs6-year level. Tariff Risk is measured as ln
(mean/t), where mean is (1 plus) Chinese average MFN tariff rate during the pre-WTO period 1992-
1999, and t is (1 plus) Chinese MFN tariff rate in current year. Post is a post-WTO dummy that is equal to 1
for years since 2002, and 0 otherwise. Standard errors clustered at the hs6-year level in parenthesis, with *, **,
and *** denote, respectively, significance at 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01. For fixed effects, f denotes firm, s denotes
section, and t denotes time (year), hs6t denotes hs6 by year. All observations are for firm-HS6 pairs imported
in at least one year pre and one post accession. Manufacturing firms matched to production census:
Productivity measured by real output/worker in pre WTO period; High subsample if above median
productivity of all firms within the same CIC industry, low otherwise.
                                Table 10. Intermediates Import Value - Profit Effects
                                    Dependent Variable = Firm-HS6 Imports (ln)
         Firm productivity sample     All         All                All                  High                                            Low
                   Import period      Any         Any           Pre and post          Pre and post                                    Pre and post
                                       1           2                  3                    4                                               5

                          Tariff Risk -5.826***              -5.856***               -5.947***                   -5.969***              -5.973***
                                       [0.528]                [0.531]                  [0.572]                     [0.602]               [0.642]
                    Tariff Risk×Post 2.964***                3.006***                 2.981***                    3.090***              2.510***
                                       [0.586]                [0.593]                  [0.642]                     [0.676]               [0.711]

                               Tariffs -2.405***             -2.425***               -2.445***                   -2.480***              -1.993***
                                        [0.528]               [0.530]                  [0.599]                     [0.634]               [0.660]
                         Tariffs×Post -3.467***              -3.455***               -3.193***                   -3.478***              -2.471***
                                        [0.641]               [0.645]                  [0.722]                     [0.765]               [0.781]

            Mean Tariff Risk×Post                            2.043***                 2.183***                   2.325***                1.922*
                                                              [0.317]                  [0.741]                    [0.697]                [1.123]
             Mean Tariffs(ln)×Post                           -1.523**                  -2.757*                    -2.878*                -2.363*
                                                              [0.635]                  [1.564]                    [1.645]                [1.381]

                    Fixed Effects     f+t+s        f+t+s                f+t+s                                      f+t+s                  f+t+s
                                N 1,690,405 1,690,405                  975,421                                    703,181                207,467
                                 2
                               R      0.246        0.246                0.234                                      0.208                  0.311
Accession effects if 1 lp risk and 1lp tariff reduction for all inputs
      Commitment Substitution          6.42         6.46                 6.17                                       6.56                   4.98
 Commitment Complementarity                         3.56                 4.93                                       5.20                   4.28
              Tariff Substitution      3.00         3.03                 2.67                                       3.08                   1.00

Notes: Dependent variable imports (ln) are Chinese import values defined at the firm-hs6-year level. Tariffs (ln) are 1 plus the Chinese statutory
MFN tariff rates at the hs6-year level. Tariff Risk is measured as ln (mean/t), where mean is (1 plus) Chinese average MFN tariff rate during the
pre-WTO period 1992-1999, and t is (1 plus) Chinese MFN tariff rate in current year. Post is a post-WTO dummy that is equal to 1 for years
since 2002, and 0 otherwise. Standard errors clustered at the hs6-year level in parenthesis, with *, **, and *** denote, respectively, significance at
0.10, 0.05, and 0.01. For fixed effects, f denotes firm, s denotes section, and t denotes time (year). Manufacturing firm subsample: those matched
to production census. Mean Tariff Risk/tariff: average Tariff Risk/tariff of all products imported by any firm in the CIC that the firm produces in.
Pre and post requires the imported inputs used in a given CIC to have been imported in at least one period before and one after. Productivity
measured by real output/worker in pre WTO period; High subsample if above median productivity of all firms within the same CIC industry, low
otherwise. Computation of the accession effects based on the regression coefficients described in quantification section. The values of h used to
compute commitment effects are obtained as described in the text.
                                Table 11. New Imported Intermediate Adoption
                           Dependent Variable = 1 if firm-HS6 import =0 pre and >0 in post
                                                                Productivity
        Firm sample All manufacturing                                                      High pre Y/L              Low pre Y/L
                                                              sample (pre Y/L)
                                      1                                  2                        3                         4

      Pre Tariff Risk           0.0727***                          0.0641***                0.0826***                 0.0449***
                                 [0.0188]                           [0.0174]                 [0.0229]                  [0.0120]

           Pre Tariffs           0.0176*                             -0.0119                   -0.0201                  -0.0034
                                 [0.0093]                           [0.0178]                  [0.0236]                  [0.0119]
          Post Tariffs          -0.0513**                           -0.00809                  -0.00587                  -0.0106
                                 [0.0221]                           [0.0202]                  [0.0268]                  [0.0138]

        Fixed Effects              f+s                                f+s                       f+s                       f+s
                   N           29,379,406                         19,323,970                 9,843,579                 9,480,391
                  R2              0.078                              0.078                     0.087                     0.055
Notes: Dependent Variable=1 if firm-HS6 import =0 pre and import>0 in post for subsample of products any firm in the same CIC
as f imported in at least one year. Tariffs (ln) are 1 plus the Chinese statutory MFN tariff rates at the hs6-year level. Tariff Risk is
measured as ln (mean/t), where mean is (1 plus) Chinese average MFN tariff rate during the pre-WTO period 1992-1999, and  t is
(1 plus) Chinese MFN tariff rate in current year. Post is a post-WTO dummy that is equal to 1 for years since 2002, and 0
otherwise. Standard errors clustered at the hs6-year level in parenthesis, with *, **, and *** denote, respectively, significance at
0.10, 0.05, and 0.01. For fixed effects, f denotes firm, s denotes section. Manufacturing firm subsample: those matched to
production census. Productivity subsamples: those firms with census data that allow computing real output per worker (Y/L).
          Table 12. Quantification of Accession Effects on Imported Intermediate Growth (lp)

                   Firm productivity sample              All                       High                       Low
Average Effect                                           92                          99                        71
                                 Commitment              79                          83                        66
                                     Tariffs             13                          15                        5.0
Aggregate Effect                                         65                          70                        42
                                 Commitment              49                          52                        37
                                     Tariffs             16                          18                        4.9

Weighted Risk 2000 (lp)                                  4.4                         4.4                       4.0
Weighted Tariff Change 2006-2000 (lp)                   -5.9                        -6.0                      -4.9
Notes: Computation of the accession effects based on the regression coefficients in Table 10 columns 3-5 as described
in quantification section. Commitment includes substitution and complementarity effects. The average uses 7.1 lp for
risk and -5 lp for tariff change for all specifications. Weighted risk uses firm-input import share in 2000 to weight pre
accession risk in the respective sample. A similar weight is used for tariff changes. These are used to compute the
aggregate effects. Productivity measured by real output/worker in pre WTO period; High subsample if above median
productivity of all firms within the same CIC industry, low otherwise.
             Table 13. Firm Profit Effects from Intermediates
                                     1                        2
 Dependent variable (ln):         Profits              Profits/Worker

    Mean Tariff Risk×Post                    0.174**                            0.286***
                                             [0.0781]                           [0.0640]
         Mean Tariffs×Post                   -0.334*                           -0.487***
                                              [0.183]                            [0.153]

                Fixed Effects                  f+t+s                             f+t+s
                           N                  158,422                           158,422
                              R2               0.866                             0.814
Notes: Dependent variables in ln are Profits=sales-cost of goods sold, Profit/worker. Mean
variables are defined as described in Table 8. Post is a post-WTO dummy that is equal to 1 for
years since 2002, and 0 otherwise. Standard errors clustered at the hs6-year level in parenthesis,
with *, **, and *** denote, respectively, significance at 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01. For fixed effects, f
denotes firm, s denotes section, and t denotes time (year).
                                                      Table A1. Dynamics of Chinese Imports, 2000-2006
                       Ordinary +
    Type of Imports                                                                              Ordinary (OI)
                       Processing
    Decomposition                                                                   By good:                     By ownership:                  By trading type:
                           All                         All
                                                                                  Intermediates                   State-Owned                    Intermediaries
                                                        Share of OI
                          Value               Value                             Value     Share of OI          Value     Share of OI           Value     Share of OI
                                                        +Processing

        2000               225                 133           59%                  90          68%                 72         54%                 43          32%
        2001               266                 164           62%                 105          64%                 89         54%                 52          32%
        2002               273                 159           58%                 102          64%                 83         52%                 49          31%
        2003               413                 250           61%                 164          66%                119         48%                 72          29%
        2004               561                 339           60%                 230          68%                149         44%                 93          27%
        2005               660                 386           58%                 272          70%                168         44%                100          26%
        2006               788                 469           60%                 329          70%                193         41%                111          24%

Notes: Values in billions US $. Source Chinese Customs. Intermediates classified using the UN BEC classification. Firms are classified as intermediaries similarly to
Ahn et al, 2010: if the name contains characters equivalent to "export", "import", "trade". The ommitted categories in OI are (i) capital and final good (by good
column); (ii) non-SOEs (by ownership column); (iii) non-intermediaries (by trading type column).
                              Table A2. Intermediates Tariffs in 2000 and 2006 by Section -- Summary Statistics
                                           Import Share     Mean        Median         SD        C.V.           Min Max
Section                                                                                                                 Obs.
                                             (2006)     2000 2006 2000 2006 2000 2006 2000 2006 2000 2006 2000 2006
1 Animals                                         0.001 0.14 0.10 0.14 0.10 0.09 0.06 0.63 0.55 0.00 0.00 0.41 0.18       38
2 Vegetables                                      0.027 0.13 0.12 0.14 0.10 0.09 0.11 0.72 0.95 0.00 0.00 0.34 0.50 114
3 Fats & Oils                                     0.012 0.21 0.12 0.18 0.10 0.08 0.04 0.36 0.37 0.08 0.05 0.34 0.22       37
4 Prepared Foodstuffs                             0.006 0.17 0.12 0.10 0.10 0.13 0.10 0.78 0.80 0.04 0.03 0.50 0.45       52
5 Minerals                                        0.308 0.04 0.03 0.04 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.60 0.70 0.00 0.00 0.09 0.08 146
6 Chemicals                                       0.126 0.09 0.06 0.09 0.05 0.04 0.03 0.42 0.48 0.02 0.00 0.41 0.24 707
7 Plastics, Rubber & Articles                     0.065 0.14 0.09 0.15 0.08 0.04 0.03 0.26 0.36 0.03 0.01 0.34 0.22 184
8 Hides, Leather, & Articles                      0.004 0.13 0.12 0.13 0.11 0.06 0.04 0.41 0.38 0.05 0.05 0.26 0.18       51
9 Wood, Straw & Articles                          0.015 0.10 0.04 0.11 0.04 0.05 0.04 0.51 0.89 0.01 0.00 0.18 0.15       70
10 Pulp, Paper & Articles                         0.024 0.13 0.05 0.14 0.07 0.07 0.03 0.57 0.55 0.00 0.00 0.37 0.07 120
11 Textiles & Articles                            0.010 0.18 0.08 0.18 0.10 0.06 0.03 0.34 0.33 0.03 0.03 0.29 0.17 500
12 Footwear, Headgear, other                      0.001 0.20 0.17 0.22 0.18 0.04 0.03 0.22 0.18 0.14 0.13 0.26 0.22       10
13 Stone, Plaster, Cement, other                  0.005 0.16 0.12 0.15 0.11 0.06 0.05 0.38 0.40 0.08 0.00 0.37 0.25 133
14 Precious stones, Metals, Jewellery,...         0.004 0.06 0.04 0.03 0.01 0.09 0.05 1.41 1.39 0.00 0.00 0.34 0.19       29
15 Base Metals & Articles                         0.104 0.09 0.06 0.10 0.06 0.04 0.03 0.46 0.55 0.01 0.00 0.26 0.26 491
16 Machinery; Elec. Equip.; Electronics           0.244 0.11 0.06 0.10 0.07 0.05 0.04 0.46 0.69 0.01 0.00 0.34 0.30 273
17 Vehicles, Aircraft, Vessels                    0.033 0.19 0.08 0.22 0.09 0.12 0.06 0.65 0.67 0.02 0.00 0.53 0.26       43
18 Optical, Medical & other instruments           0.009 0.14 0.10 0.17 0.13 0.05 0.06 0.33 0.54 0.03 0.00 0.20 0.18       76
19 Arms and Ammunition                            0.000 0.14 0.12 0.14 0.12 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.14 0.12 0.14 0.12        4
20 Miscellaneous Manufactures                     0.002 0.20 0.14 0.20 0.18 0.03 0.07 0.13 0.47 0.10 0.00 0.22 0.22       34
Notes: Tariffs (ln) are 1 plus the Chinese statutory MFN tariff rates at the hs6-year level for UN BEC intermediates. Data sources described in Appendix B1.
                         Table A3. Initial Tariff Risk and Import Growth 2000-2006 (ln) by Section -- Summary Statistics
                                          Import Share     Mean        Median         SD             C.V.        Min        Max
Section                                                                                                                              Obs.
                                            (2006)     Imports Risk Imports Risk Imports Risk Imports Risk Imports Risk Imports Risk
1 Animals                                        0.001 0.39 0.09 0.56 0.08 2.66 0.05 6.86 0.61 -5.90 0.00 6.84 0.19                    38
2 Vegetables                                     0.027 1.17 0.08 1.11 0.07 2.46 0.06 2.11 0.80 -7.93 0.00 7.83 0.20 114
3 Fats & Oils                                    0.012 0.90 0.05 0.79 0.04 2.18 0.03 2.42 0.68 -2.05 0.01 6.54 0.13                    37
4 Prepared Foodstuffs                            0.006 0.52 0.07 1.16 0.06 2.52 0.03 4.83 0.50 -9.37 0.01 5.67 0.19                    52
5 Minerals                                       0.308 1.69 0.07 1.41 0.06 2.13 0.05 1.26 0.77 -4.04 0.00 8.34 0.20 146
6 Chemicals                                      0.126 1.13 0.05 1.16 0.04 1.49 0.03 1.32 0.66 -5.15 0.00 8.66 0.31 707
7 Plastics, Rubber & Articles                    0.065 1.32 0.06 1.41 0.05 1.26 0.03 0.96 0.48 -2.81 0.01 6.43 0.15 184
8 Hides, Leather, & Articles                     0.004 1.85 0.10 1.62 0.10 1.65 0.05 0.89 0.57 -2.12 0.03 5.73 0.22                    51
9 Wood, Straw & Articles                         0.015 0.24 0.05 0.45 0.04 1.78 0.03 7.31 0.63 -2.91 0.00 6.19 0.12                    70
10 Pulp, Paper & Articles                        0.024 0.50 0.05 0.68 0.05 1.36 0.04 2.75 0.80 -3.13 0.00 4.92 0.19 120
11 Textiles & Articles                           0.010 1.56 0.13 1.42 0.13 1.75 0.06 1.12 0.42 -3.34 0.00 8.90 0.24 500
12 Footwear, Headgear, other                     0.001 2.12 0.22 2.50 0.22 1.59 0.04 0.75 0.18 -0.45 0.16 4.20 0.27                    10
13 Stone, Plaster, Cement, other                 0.005 0.93 0.09 1.07 0.08 1.26 0.04 1.35 0.48 -3.34 0.01 3.26 0.20 133
14 Precious stones, Metals, Jewellery,...        0.004 2.15 0.04 2.07 0.02 2.33 0.04 1.08 1.14 -3.27 0.00 9.73 0.12                    29
15 Base Metals & Articles                        0.104 1.53 0.05 1.44 0.03 1.72 0.05 1.12 1.01 -4.39 0.00 9.34 0.17 491
16 Machinery; Elec. Equip.; Electronics          0.244 0.98 0.05 1.20 0.04 1.34 0.04 1.36 0.81 -6.67 0.00 6.05 0.22 273
17 Vehicles, Aircraft, Vessels                   0.033 1.35 0.05 1.86 0.03 1.63 0.04 1.21 0.82 -3.88 0.00 3.86 0.13                    43
18 Optical, Medical & other instruments          0.009 1.08 0.08 1.34 0.09 1.71 0.06 1.58 0.69 -5.62 0.00 3.81 0.21                    76
19 Arms and Ammunition                           0.000 0.78 0.18 0.30 0.17 7.40 0.01 9.45 0.05 -6.01 0.17 8.66 0.19                     4
20 Miscellaneous Manufactures                    0.002 0.93 0.15 0.97 0.17 0.94 0.05 1.01 0.33 -1.76 0.06 2.81 0.24                    34
Notes: Initial Tariff Risk is measured as ln (mean/t), where mean is (1 plus) Chinese average MFN tariff rate during the pre-WTO period 1992-1999, and  t is (1 plus)
Chinese MFN tariff rate in 2000. UN BEC intermediates. Imports are in log changes. Data sources described in Appendix B1.
          Table A4. Manufacturing Firms Imported Intermediate Input Distribution (HS6)
                                     2000                                   2005
                                         Fraction Manuf.                        Fraction Manuf.
                            Firm #                                Firm #
                                            Firms (%)                              Firms (%)
             1              2,428              1.56               5,717               2.21
Intermediate 2-10                6,630                4.26                    14,429                5.58
Input        11-100              7,726                4.97                    12,720                4.92
Range        101+                 264                 0.17                      471                 0.18
              Any               17,063                11.0                    33,337               12.9
Notes: Source authors matching of Chinese Customs and Manufacturing Census data. Intermediates classified using
the UN BEC classification. The total number of manufacturing firms in the denominator is 155,497 and 258,403 in
2000 and 2005.
             Table A5. Firms' Imported Intermediate (HS-6) Statistics: Pre and Post; All and Continuing Firms
                                           Mean        Median           SD            Min           Max                          N
I. All Importing Manufacturing Firms
                                    Pre     12.9         4             23.7            1            380                       24,960
                                   Post     12.8         4             22.4            1            453                      107,591
II. Importing Manufacturing Firms in 2000 and 2005
                                    Pre     17.9         7             28.6            1            380                       14,011
                                   Post     19.5         8             27.9            1            453                       41,670
III. All Importing Firms
                                    Pre     11.7         3             26.3            1            887                       79,913
                                   Post     11.0         3             24.2            1            973                      332,498
IV. Importing Firms in 2000 and 2005
                                    Pre     18.3         7             34.2            1            887                       33,230
                                   Post     20.1         7             36.9            1            973                       80,297
Notes: Source Chinese Customs for panels III, IV and match with Manufacturing Census data for remaining. Intermediates classified using
the UN BEC classification. Years are 2000 and 2001 for pre and 2002-2006 for post.
                                Table A6. Firm Intermediate Import Decision - Persistence
                                     Dependent Variable = Firm-HS6 Import Indicator
       Firm sample                            All                                      Manufacturing
                              1           2         3           4            5          6          7                             8

   Lagged Import         0.130***      0.118***       0.130***       0.116***        0.176*** 0.160*** 0.176*** 0.158***
     Indicator           [0.00176]     [0.00148]      [0.00175]      [0.00148]       [0.00194] [0.00159] [0.00193] [0.00160]

       Fixed Effects   ft+s      ft+hs6      ft+st    ft+hs6-t                          ft+s     ft+hs6     ft+st   ft+hs6-t
                  N 15,887,012 15,886,999 15,887,012 15,886,997                      6,548,287 6,548,273 6,548,287 6,547,967
                   2
                 R      0.3       0.308       0.3       0.311                          0.243     0.254     0.243     0.259
Notes: Dependent variable =1 if f-HS6 >0 at t, 0 otherwise for subsample of products f imported in at least one year. Standard
errors clustered at the hs6-year level in parenthesis, with *, **, and *** denote, respectively, significance at 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01.
For fixed effects, f denotes firm, s denotes section, and t denotes time (year). Manufacturing firm subsample: those matched to
production census.
  Figure 1. China's Average Statutory Import Tariffs (1985-2006)




       .45
                           GATT Application

       .4
                              10/1986
       .35
       .3
       .25
       .2
       .15




                                                Socialist Market Economy
       .1




                                                         10/1992-
       .05




                                                                                WTO
                                                                               12/2001-
       0




             1984   1986   1988   1990   1992    1994    1996   1998   2000   2002   2004   2006

                                              Intermediates            All


Notes. Simple average of MFN statutory rates over all products or intermediates
(as defined by UN's Broad Economic Categories). Sources: Authors' calculations
using UN TRAINS and WTO data for 1992-2006 (1995 interpolated); Lardy
(2002, p. 34) for 1985, `88, `91, `92 (remaining interpolated). The Communist
Party Congress discussed the Socialist Market Economy in 10/1992 and it became
part of the Chinese constitution in 1993.



                              Figure 2. Varieties of Inputs
     Figure 3. Chinese Ordinary Imports and Intermediate Share

             500
                                                                                                                                                           .7


                                                                                          WTO Accession 12/2001
             400

                                                                                                                                                           .68

             300



                                                                                                                                                           .66
             200




             100                                                                                                                                           .64
                   2000                                                               2002                           2004                           2006

                                                                      Ordinary Imports, US Bil.(Left)                      Intermediate Share of OI


 Notes. Authors' calculations from Chinese Customs data. Ordinary imports (OI)
 identified by transaction identifiers; intermediate share uses UN BEC classification.



Figure 4. WTO Reduction in Uncertainty vs. Status Quo (Dashed)


                                                            1.0
                          Post-WTO Reversal Probability, 




                                                            0.5




                                                                                                                                          = 0.13

                                                                               / pre = - 63%
                                                            0.0
                                                                  0    0.13                             0.5                                   1.0
                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                           Pre-WTO Reversal Probability,  pre



Notes. Authors' calculations from baseline estimates assuming discount factor
 = 0.85. See the text for further description.
