                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           ETHNOGRAPHIC AND FIELD DATA IN HISTORICAL ECONOMICS

                                          Sara Lowes

                                      Working Paper 27918
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27918


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2020




Prepared for the "Handbook of Historical Economics", edited by Alberto Bisin and Giovanni
Federico. I thank Vafa Behnam Roudsari for excellent research assistance and Nathan Nunn for
helpful feedback. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Sara Lowes. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Ethnographic and Field Data in Historical Economics
Sara Lowes
NBER Working Paper No. 27918
October 2020
JEL No. C9,N01,N10,Z1

                                         ABSTRACT

This chapter will cover recent research in historical economics that uses ethnographic data and
data from surveys and lab experiments. The study of historical economics, particularly outside of
non-Western countries, has been constrained by availability of historical data. However, recent
work incorporates data and tools from other fields and sub-fields to fill this gap. For example,
economists are increasingly taking advantage of ethnographic data sets compiled by
anthropologists. There is also growing interest in the use of original survey data collection both
within and across countries and lab-in-the-field experiments to answer questions on culture and
institutions. Often, these tools are used together to provide complementary evidence on the
question of interest. These sources of data have been particularly important for research on areas
where there is limited historical data, and they have increased the scope of questions that can be
examined. This chapter will overview these recent developments and highlight the benefits of
these diverse methodologies and data sources.


Sara Lowes
Department of Economics
University of California at San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER
slowes@ucsd.edu
Contents
1   Introduction                                                                                                                                          3

2   Ethnographic Data Sources                                                                                                                             4
    2.1 Ethnographic Atlas, Standard Cross Cultural Survey, and Murdock Map                                                      .   .   .   .   .   .    4
    2.2 Validation and Extension of the Ethnographic Atlas . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                             .   .   .   .   .   .    6
        2.2.1 Validation of the Ethnographic Atlas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                             .   .   .   .   .   .    8
        2.2.2 Extensions of the Ethnographic Atlas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                             .   .   .   .   .   .    9

3   Additional Data Sources                                                                                                                              12
    3.1 Alternative Culture and Ethnographic Data Sets               .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   12
        3.1.1 Human Relations Area Files . . . . . . .               .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   12
        3.1.2 Seshat: Global History Databank . . . . .              .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   14
        3.1.3 Database of Religious History . . . . . .              .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   15
        3.1.4 Others . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   15
    3.2 Cross-National Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   16
        3.2.1 Hofstede's Values Survey Module . . . .                .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   16
        3.2.2 Global Preferences Survey . . . . . . . . .            .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   17
        3.2.3 Honesty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   17
        3.2.4 Folklore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   18
        3.2.5 Names . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   18
        3.2.6 Implicit Association Tests . . . . . . . . .           .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   18
        3.2.7 Newspapers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   19
        3.2.8 Public Attitude Surveys . . . . . . . . . .            .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   19

4   Lab-in-the-field experiments                                                                                                                         20
    4.1 What are lab-in-the-field experiments? . . . .       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   20
    4.2 Lab-in-the-field Experiments as Outcomes .           .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   21
         4.2.1 States, Institutions, and Colonialism .       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   21
         4.2.2 Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   27
         4.2.3 The Church and Missionaries . . . . .         .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   27
         4.2.4 Social Exclusion and Violence . . . .         .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   28
         4.2.5 Kinship Structure . . . . . . . . . . . .     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   29
    4.3 Lab-in-the-field Experiments as Mechanisms           .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   30
    4.4 Practical Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   34

5 Conclusion                                                                                                                                             36

References                                                                                                                                               37

List of Tables
    1    Examples of Economics Papers that Use the EA, SCCS, Murdock Map, Ethnologue
         or Ancestral Characteristics Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                                    7
    2    Additional Sources of Cultural Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                                     13
    3    Historical Economics and Lab-in-the-Field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                                       22

List of Figures
    1    Societies in the Ethnographic Atlas and SCCS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                                         5

                                                    1
2   Afrobarometer Respondents and Murdock Homeland                   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   10
3   Ancestral Characteristics of Modern Populations . . . .          .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   11
4   Lab-in-Field Training and Enumeration . . . . . . . . .          .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   24
5   Screenshot of Mobutu IAT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   25
6   Congo Free State Concessions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   31
7   Matrilineal Belt in Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   33




                                                2
1. Introduction

Work in historical economics naturally often relies on access to historical data. However, this has

tended to limit the extent to which regions without much historical data can be studied. The

result is that economic research often focuses on areas for which there are good archival records,

neglecting those areas for which there are limited data.

  However, there has been a growing interest in alternative approaches to studying historical

economics. These approaches include incorporating datasets compiled outside of economics and

the collection of novel survey and experimental data. These approaches offer an opportunity to

both increase the geographic coverage of research as well as the types of questions that can be

answered. Often, these data sources and strategies focus on measuring various aspects of culture

and preferences.

  This article will first introduce various ethnographic data sources that can be used to study

cultural traits. These datasets, generally compiled by anthropologists and historians, provide new

potential sources of cultural and historical data for economic historians. They cover a diverse set

of topics, from cultural practices, historic state formation, and religious beliefs. The relevance

of these datasets for economists highlights the growing inter-disciplinary nature of research in

historical economics and the links between economics and history, sociology, psychology, and

evolutionary anthropology.

  I will then review recent research using alternative data sources and strategies ­ such as

original survey data collection within and across countries and lab-in-the-field experiments ­

to explore questions in historical economics. I describe existing cross-cultural data sets and how

they have been used.

  I will argue that lab-in-the-field experiments expand the types of questions that can be an-

swered within economics. I describe how they are being used in a growing literature combining

economic history with lab-in-the-field experiments. These papers build off of a deep lab exper-

imental literature, and apply these methods and measurement strategies to new contexts and

research questions. I distinguish between papers in which the experimental results are the key

outcomes and those where the experimental results are used to understand persistence mecha-

nisms. Finally, I will describe some of the practical challenges of administering lab-in-the-field

experiments, particularly for work in historical economics.



                                                3
2. Ethnographic Data Sources

2.1. Ethnographic Atlas, Standard Cross Cultural Survey, and Murdock Map

There are several ethnographic data sources ­ data on the customs and cultures of particular

groups ­ that economists frequently use. The most commonly used data sets are the Ethnographic

Atlas (Murdock, 1957, 1967) and the related Standard Cross Cultural Survey (Murdock and White,

1969).

   The Ethnographic Atlas (EA) is an ethnicity level database with pre-industrial characteristics

on 1,265 ethnic groups from around the world. The EA was compiled by Murdock (1967), based

on his own reading and coding of available ethnographies. The EA bibliographies contain the

information for the underlying ethnographies, as well as suggestions on which authors were

deemed to be the authority on the particular subject.

   The information in the database is meant to represent the earliest date for which there is

reliable information; this means that the earliest observations are from the Old World. For

places without many written records, the data in the EA are intended to reflect a society's

characteristics prior to European contact; however, the observations were generally recorded by

Europeans upon contact. The EA contains a rich variety of data on economic activities, political

and social organization, and cultural practices. Examples of the variables present in the EA are:

location (latitude and longitude); major subsistence activities (gathering, hunting, fishing, animal

husbandry, agriculture); cultural practices (marriage payments, family organization, practice of

polygyny); and political organization (jurisdictional levels, succession rules for local leaders, class

structure). See Figure 1 for the geographic distribution of societies included in the EA.

   The Standard Cross Cultural Survey (SCCS) is a sample of 186 ethnic groups, chosen from

cultural groupings in the EA (Murdock and White, 1969). Ethnic groups in the EA were classified

into "independent" cultural clusters, and approximately one ethnic group per cluster was chosen

to be included in the SCCS. Criteria for inclusion in the sample were either that the ethnic group

had good ethnographic coverage or that it was particularly distinctive in some respect (Murdock

and White, 2006). The goal was to both represent cultural variation but to also eliminate cases

where similarities across groups were due to cultural diffusion or common origin (referred to

as "Galton's problem").1 While fewer groups are represented in the SCCS, there are over 2000
  1 Some anthropologists have objected to the attempt at identifying "independent" cultural groups. See Mace and
Pagel (1994), who advocate for the construction of phylogenies to map patterns of cultural descent.


                                                       4
variables in the data set. The groups in red in Figure 1 are the subset of ethnic groups chosen

from the EA that are in the SCCS.
                    Figure 1: Societies in the Ethnographic Atlas and SCCS




  For work on Africa, the EA is often paired with the Murdock ethnic group boundary map

(Murdock, 1959), in which Murdock outlines the historical boundaries of ethnic groups as of the

nineteenth century. There are 835 ethnic group boundaries in the Murdock map. In the EA,

there are data on approximately 527 ethnic groups in Africa. However, there is not a perfect

1:1 matching between the EA and the Murdock map boundaries. First, not all ethnic groups

represented on the Murdock map are present in the EA. Second, some groups present in the

EA are not identified on the map. Third, ethnic group names can be spelled differently across

the data sets. Finally, the geographic coordinates provided in the EA at times do not align with

the boundaries of the ethnic group in the map. Because of these concordance difficulties, there

are multiple strategies for matching across the EA and the Murdock map. Additionally, there

are multiple approaches to interpolating the data for ethnic groups without an exact match (e.g.

through cultural proximity, language groups, or geographic proximity). Fenske (2013) provides

detailed information on matches between the EA and map for cases where there is not an exact

name match. AfricaMap (2020) also provide a shapefile with a concordance between the Murdock

map and data from the Ethnographic Atlas.

  The EA has been used in many papers in economics. Perhaps one of the earliest uses is from


                                               5
Gennaioli and Rainer (2007), who examine the relationship between jurisdictional hierarchy ­

defined as the number of jurisdictional levels above the village level ­ and economic performance.

The authors find a strong positive association between an ethnic group's precolonial centralization

and education, health, and infrastructure today. Nunn (2008) and Nunn and Wantchekon (2011)

also make use of the EA and Murdock boundaries. Nunn (2008) estimates the number of slaves

exported during the slave trades by country. He finds that exposure to the slave trades is

negatively associated with economic development. He then examines the effects of exposure

to the slave trade on state development, finding a negative correlation between the slave trade

and centralization. Subsequently, Nunn and Wantchekon (2011) use ethnicity level estimates of

slave trade intensity to examine the effects of the slave trade on trust levels; they find that greater

exposure to the slave trade leads to lower levels of trust in others.

   Many subsequent papers uses the EA data, SCCS data, or Murdock map boundary data,

including: Alesina, Giuliano and Nunn (2013), Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2013, 2014),

Fenske (2014), Alsan (2015), Fenske (2015), Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2016), Enke (2019).

These papers explore a wide variety of questions on the long run development of Africa. See

Table 1 for examples of papers in economics that use the EA, SCCS, Murdock boundaries, or

Ancestral Characteristics data. See Bahrami-Rad, Becker and Henrich (2018) for published papers

in anthropology that also use the EA.


2.2. Validation and Extension of the Ethnographic Atlas

Despite the heavy reliance on the EA, there are several potential shortcomings of the data. First,

ethnic groups are sampled at different time periods. The dates for which the data are recorded

span a millennia. However, the majority of observations are from the 19th and 20th centuries.

It is also difficult to ascertain the historical depth of the observed characteristics ­ for example,

the EA does not speak to whether an ethnic group has always practiced matrilineal kinship or

if it is a recent practice. Second, coverage in the EA is almost certainly non-random, perhaps

due to availability of information, accessibility, and group prominence. This issue is perhaps

more clear with the SCCS, in which the selected sub-sample of groups was chosen based on data

availability. Third, the underlying data for the EA come from ethnographies; it can be challenging

to codify this richer set of data systematically, and subtle distinctions across places can be lost.

Finally, European groups are under-represented in the EA sample. Relatedly, the Murdock map


                                                  6
           Table 1: Examples of Economics Papers that Use the EA, SCCS, Murdock Map, Ethnologue or Ancestral Characteristics Data

                       Authors                                   Journal                  Dataset              Explanatory Variable                     Outcome Variable
             Ahmed and Stasavage (2020)           American Political Science Review        SCCS               Agricultural Suitability                 Council Governance
     Akbari, Bahrami-Rad and Kimbrough (2019)    J. of Econ. Behavior & Organization       E, EA          In-Marriage vs Out-Marriage                       Corruption
         Alesina, Giuliano and Nunn (2011)        American Economic Review: P&P        E, EA, SCCS,             Plough Agriculture                            Fertility
                 Alesina et al. (2013)              Quarterly Journal of Economics     E, EA, SCCS              Plough Agriculture                         Gender Roles
         Alesina, Giuliano and Nunn (2018)                     PLoS ONE                    E, EA                Plough Agriculture                   Male-Female Sex Ratio
                     Alsan (2015)                     American Economic Review           E, EA, M                     TseTse Fly              Political Centralization, Population
                   Anderson (2007)                 Journal of Economic Perspectives         EA                   Class Stratification                 Incidence of Dowries
                   Anderson (2018)                    American Economic Review               M                      Legal Origins                       Female HIV Rates
        Ashraf, Bau, Nunn and Voena (2020)            Journal of Political Economy         E, EA        Existence of Bride Price Practices              Female Education
                     Baker (2008)                     Journal of Economic Growth           SCCS        Population, Technological Diffusion          Incidence of Agriculture
               Baker and Miceli (2005)           J. of Econ. Behavior & Organization       SCCS          Population, Social Stratification                  Inheritance
                     Becker (2019)                               Mimeo                  AC, E, EA                    Pastoralism                 Female Mobility, Infibulation
             Becker, Enke and Falk (2020)       American Economic Association P & P          E             Ancestral Migration Patterns               Economic Preferences
        BenYishay, Grosjean and Vecci (2017)            Journal of Economic Dev.       E, EA, SCCS                  Reef Density                     Incidence of Martiliny
              Botticini and Siow (2003)               American Economic Review              EA                Post-Marital Residence                  Incidence of Dowries
                     Buggle (2020)                    Journal of Economic Growth       AC, E, EA, M            Irrigation Agriculture                  Collectivist Norms
        Desmet, Gomes and no Ortín (2020)        Journal of Development Economics       AC, E, EA            Ethnolinguistic Diversity                     Public Goods
                     Dippel (2014)                            Econometrica                  EA                  Shared Governance                             Income
                      Enke (2019)                   Quarterly Journal of Economics      AC, E, EA                Kinship Tightness            In-group Loyalty, Norm Adherence
                     Fenske (2013)                        The Economic Journal             EA, M            Suitability for Agriculture         Land Rights, Slavery, Polygyny
                     Fenske (2014)                 J. of European Econ. Association        EA, M                Ecological Diversity              Pre-colonial Centralization




7
                     Fenske (2015)               Journal of Development Economics          EA, M        Gender Roles, Class Stratification                   Polygamy
             Gennaioli and Rainer (2007)              Journal of Economic Growth        EA, SCCS            Precolonial Centralization               Public Goods Provision
              Giuliano and Nunn (2013)             American Economic Review P&P             EA          Historical Democratic Institutions      Modern Democratic Institutions
         Giuliano and Nunn (Forthcoming)              Review of Economic Studies        AC, E, EA      Intergenerational Enviro. Similarity            Cultural Persistence
                     Gomes (2020)                     Journal of Economic Growth             E                   Cultural Distance                            Health
                    Lowes (2018a)                                Mimeo                    EA, M,       Lineage and Inheritance by Gender                   Competition
                    Lowes (2018b)                                Mimeo                     EA, M       Lineage and Inheritance by Gender              Spousal Cooperation
                Michalopoulos (2012)                  American Economic Review               E           Geographic Land Endowments                 Ethnolinguistic Diversity
       Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2013)                   Econometrica                 EA, M            Precolonial Centralization                 Local Light Density
       Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2014)         Quarterly Journal of Economics         EA, M              Colonial Border Design                       Night Lights
       Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2016)           American Economic Review             EA, M              Colonial Border Design               Political Violence, Income
     Michalopoulos, Putterman and Weil (2019)      J. of European Econ. Association        EA, M      Historical Dependence on Agriculture              Income, Education
         Mayshar, Moav and Pascali (2020)                        Mimeo                  EA, SCCS              Cereal Appropriability                         Hierarchy
        Moscona, Nunn and Robinson (2020)                     Econometrica                   M                  Segmentary Lineage                            Conflict
        Moscona, Nunn and Robinson (2017)         American Economic Review P & P             M                  Segmentary Lineage            Trust in Relatives vs. Non-Relatives
                     Nunn (2008)                    Quarterly Journal of Economics         EA, M            Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade             Precolonial Centralization
            Nunn and Wantchekon (2011)                American Economic Review             EA, M            Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade                         Trust
                     Obikili (2016)                    Economic History Review             EA, M            Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade        Number of Decision Making Entities
                     Schulz (2017)                               Mimeo                  AC, E, EA              Kinship Organization                   Political Participation
                      Teso (2019)                  J. of European Econ. Association        EA, M            Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade                    Gender Norms
       Corno, Hildebrandt and Voena (2020)                    Econometrica                  EA                 Bride Price vs Dowry                       Early Marriage
    AC is the Ancestral Characteristics database (Giuliano and Nunn, 2018). E is the Ethnologue (Gordon, 2009). EA is the Ethnographic Atlas (Murdock,
    1957, 1967). M is the Murdock Map (Murdock, 1959). SCCS is the Standard Cross Cultural Survey (Murdock and White, 1969).
boundaries, which are often taken as a given in many of the analyses presented above, are almost

certainly noisy and over-simplified representations of reality. In practice, ethnic group boundaries

overlap and shift over time.


2.2.1. Validation of the Ethnographic Atlas

There have been several recent efforts to validate the data in the Ethnographic Atlas and build

upon the data available in the EA. Bahrami-Rad et al. (2018) seek to validate the EA data against

nationally representative contemporary data from the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS)

(ICF, 2020). The DHS data include individual level data for more than 790,000 individuals from

300 ethnic groups in 43 countries. The authors identify variables that can be matched across the

EA (or SCCS) and the DHS ­ such as patrilocality, polygyny, reliance on animal husbandry, and

breastfeeding duration. Reassuringly, across many dimensions, the authors find a positive and

significant correlation between the historical characteristics and the present day data. Rijpma

and Carmichael (2016) compare data in the EA on family structure with country level data from

Todd (1985), who classifies practices related to endogamy, co-residence, and inheritance, and in

general, they find concordance. However, the Todd data are much less granular since they are at

the country level.

   Other validation efforts seek to examine the extent to which an individual's self-reported

ethnicity coincides with the ethnic group homeland they are located in on the Murdock map. For

example, Moscona et al. (2020) show that the share of individuals whose self-reported ethnicity in

the Afrobarometer corresponds with the Murdock ethnic group homeland increases substantially

at an ethnic group boundary border. This analysis is done on a sample of 80 ethnic groups for

which a segmentary lineage society is adjacent to a non-segmentary lineage group.

   However, there appears to be substantial heterogeneity in the extent to which there is concor-

dance between an individual's self-reported ethnic group and the ethnic group homeland they

are located in. Figure 2 presents data from Afrobaromter rounds 3 to 6. Ethnic group names

were matched between the Murdock map and the Afrobarometer using the following steps. First,

names were matched exactly between the two data sets. This resulted in a match rate of 42

percent. To increase the match rate, I digitized the index of the Murdock (1959), in which all

the ethnic groups covered in the book are assigned cultural codes. Murdock assigns culturally

proximate groups the same cultural code and also provides alternative names for the same group.


                                                 8
The digitized index is then used to increase Afrobarometer and Murdock matches, as groups

sharing the same code are then matched using the name that is on the Murdock map. This results

in a match rate of 54 percent.

   For those ethnic groups for which it was possible to construct a match, Figure 2a presents the

share of respondents with a self-reported ethnicity that corresponds with the ethnic homeland

where they are located. It is clear that there is substantial heterogeneity in the extent to which

individuals randomly sampled for the Afrobarometer have an ethnicity that corresponds with the

Murdock boundary where they are located. For example, in Southern Africa, only a small share

of those sampled have a self-reported ethnicity that concords with the Murdock ethnic group

boundary.

   Figure 2b undertakes a slightly different exercise. It presents the share of individuals with a

self-reported ethnicity that are actually located in that ethnicity's homeland boundary. Again,

there is quite a lot of variation in the mobility of groups. While some ethnic groups seem to be

quite mobile, such that only a small percentage of individuals with that self-reported ethnicity live

within their ethnic homeland, individuals from other groups are almost entirely located within

their ethnic homeland boundaries. Thus, while the Murdock map boundaries do appear to be

meaningful, there is also substantial variation in the diversity of some areas and the mobility of

various groups.


2.2.2. Extensions of the Ethnographic Atlas

Giuliano and Nunn (2018) augment the data in the Ethnographic Atlas with several additional

data sources. First, they use data from Korotayev et al. (2004), which has information on groups

in Siberia and Bondarenko et al. (2005), which has data on groups in Eastern Europe. They also

include data on European groups from Murdock (1957). Additionally, data from the Ethnologue:

Languages of the World (Gordon, 2009) provides information on the current geographic distribu-

tion of over 7,000 languages and dialects. Finally, Giuliano and Nunn include various geographic

variables, such as climate, ruggedness, and distance to the coast. The ethnographic data are

matched to the present day data on the distribution of language groups at the grid-cell level ­

effectively assuming that the transmission of ancestral traits is correlated with language. This

comprehensive data set is described in detail in Giuliano and Nunn (2018). See Figure 3 for the

distribution of the cultural group boundaries in the Giuliano and Nunn (2018) data.


                                                 9
               Figure 2: Afrobarometer Respondents and Murdock Homeland




                 (a) Share of respondents with same ethnicity as Murdock home-
                 land.




                 (b) Share of respondents of an ethnic group that are in their
                 Murdock homeland.

The figure uses data from Afrobarometer Rounds 3-6 (AfroBarometer Data, 2020) and the Mur-
dock Index Murdock (1959). The ethnic group boundaries are the Murdock Map boundaries
digitized from Murdock (1959).



                                              10
                   Figure 3: Ancestral Characteristics of Modern Populations




          This map is constructed using the shapefile provided by Giuliano and Nunn (2018).



  There are other efforts to improve the quality, coverage, and historical depth of the data in the

Ethnographic Atlas. This can be done by supplementing from other ethnographic data sources.

One potentially rich data source for Africa is the Ethnographic Survey of Africa, a series of books

edited by Daryll Forde and published by the International Africa Institute between 1950 and 1977

(and recently re-issued by Routledge). The series includes 50 books with detailed ethnographies

on many groups (Forde, 2017). Often, this includes data outside of what is reported in the EA.

For example, Moscona et al. (2020) use the books to code whether 145 ethnic groups have the

practice of segmentary lineages, a form of kinship structure characterized by unilineal descent, a

shared ancestor, and sub-units within the broader lineage. They use this newly coded data to test

whether segmentary lineage systems increase conflict.

  Lowes (2018b) uses detailed ethnographic data on the Democratic Republic of Congo from

Vansina (1966). This allows her to digitize a more granular ethnic group boundary map for the

DRC that may more accurately reflect ethnic group boundaries ­ as it allows for multiple groups

to be present in one area and represents more granular cultural groups. She then assigns each

group to matrilineal or patrilineal kinship status. Her resulting data has information on over 380

groups for DRC. She finds that matrilineal kinship structure undermines spousal cooperation but

has benefits for investment in children and the well-being of women.

  An alternative strategy for addressing the lack of historical depth for some of these traits is

to construct measures that take into account changes over time. For example, Depetris-Chauvin


                                                 11
(2016) examines how long-run exposure to statehood at a sub-national level affects conflict. To

do this, he compiles a list of historical states, their boundaries, and their chronologies. This

allows him to construct the fraction of years that a territory was exposed to a state-like institution

between 1000 and 1850 CE. He finds that exposure to historical state-hood reduces conflict.


3. Additional Data Sources

3.1. Alternative Culture and Ethnographic Data Sets

There are many other culture and ethnographic data sets that have yet to be widely used within

economics. I briefly describe these various data sets, many of which are currently used in

anthropology. Table 2 provides a summary of these data sources and the links to access them.

Slingerland et al. (2020) describe the challenges associated with constructing and maintaining

these types of cross-cultural databases. Some of the key challenges include how to choose a

unit of analysis, appropriately coding data, managing uncertainty, and the sustainability of the

databases.


3.1.1. Human Relations Area Files

Human Relations Area Files (HRAF) are a collection of ethnographies that have been subject

coded. While the original collection is in paper and microfiche, HRAF maintains two online

databases: eHRAF World Cultures and eHRAF Archaeology. The eHRAF databases are online

collections of ethnographic and archaeological texts that have been subject-indexed at the para-

graph level. The indexing relies on the "Outline of Cultural Materials" ­ a classification system of

social and cultural life developed by Murdock. The subject classification system has a hierarchical

structure so that searches can be broadened or refined within a subject. The second index is

the "Outline of World Cultures," also created by Murdock, which indexes cultures by region

and country. It covers over 2,500 cultures. All cultures that are covered in the SCCS are also

included in the eHRAF World Cultures database. Approximately 300 cultures are in the eHRAF

World Cultures database (with new cultures added each year), covering nearly 600,000 pages of

ethnographies. Topics covered include information on the economy, history, family and kinship,

sociopolitical organization and religion. The eHRAF Archaeology data indexes archaeological




                                                 12
                                                             Table 2: Additional Sources of Cultural Data

                                                                                  Panel A: Culture Databases
     Name                                                              URL                                 Subject                                 Overview
     Database of Places, language, culture                          d-place.org                     Culture, environment,              Cultural, environment, linguistic,
     and environment (D-Place) Kirby et al. (2016)                                                        language                     geographic for over 1400 societies.
     Database of Religious History (DRH)                       religiondatabase.org                        Religion                  Approx. 400 entries for religious groups.
     Slingerland and Sullivan (2017)
     eHRAF World Cultures (eHRAF)                           ehrafworldcultures.yale.edu                     Culture                             Approx. 320 cultures;
     Ember (2012)                                                                                                                       searchable subject indexed database.
     eHRAF Archaeology (eHRAF)                               ehrafarchaeology.yale.edu                      Culture                    Approx. 100 archaeological traditions;
     Ember (2012)                                                                                                                       searchable subject indexed database.
     Ethnographic Survey of Africa (ESA)                               NA                               Culture (Africa)               A series of 50 books on African ethnic
     Forde (2017)                                                                                                                                groups and culture.
     Pulotu: Database of Pacific Religious Beliefs              pulotu.shh.mpg.de                   Religion (Austronesia)          Over 100 Austronesian cultures; 62 variables
     and Practices (Pulotu) Watts et al. (2015)                                                                              on religion, history, society, and the natural environment.
     Seshat: Global History Databank (Seshat)                  seshatdatabank.info                          Culture            Historical political, economic and religious variables




13
     Turchin et al. (Forthcoming)                                                                                              for 30 "natural geographic areas" around the world.

                                                                                  Panel B: Cross-National Data
     Name                                                                URL                                Subject                                   Overview
     Cohn et al. (2019)                              dataverse.harvard.edu/dataverse/honesty/              Honesty                    Cross national experiment with wallets.
     Global Preferences Survey                          briq-institute.org/global-preferences             Preferences            Cross national data set of 80,000 people from 76
     Falk et al. (2018)                                                                                                         countries with time and risk preferences, altruism,
                                                                                                                                positive reciprocity, negative reciprocity, and trust.
     Gachter and Schulz (2016)                         https://datadryad.org/stash/dataset/                Honesty                             Die rolling experiment
                                                              doi:10.5061/dryad.9k358                                                           across 23 countries.
     Values Survey Module                                        geerthofstede.com                      Cultural Values             Survey instrument for cross cultural value
     Hofstede (1980)                                                                                                               measurement. Country level values dataset.
     Folklore Michalopoulos and Xue (2019)                             NA                               Folklore motifs               Motifs from folklore for 1000 societies.
     Berezkin (2015)                                                                                                                               Linked to EA.
     newspapers.com (2020)                                       newspapers.com                      Digitized newspapers           18,000 + newspapers from 1700s to 2000s.
     Xu et al. (2020)                                           projectimplict.com                            IATs                       Materials for and data from IATs.
traditions for over 100 societies. Data include culture name, region and sub region, subsistence

type, and beginning and end dates.

   Recent work using the eHRAF World Cultures database is Jackson, Gelfand and Ember (2020)

who examine the relationship between ecological threats and cultural tightness. The hypothesis is

that ecological threats increase the need for coordination and cooperation. Societies that face these

types of challenges will respond by creating "tighter" norms that more harshly punish deviant

behavior. Using the eHRAF data, the authors find evidence that cultural tightness is associated

with ecological threat.


3.1.2. Seshat: Global History Databank

Seshat is a database of human polities over time. It was established in 2011 and was compiled by

scholars in the social sciences and humanities. The goal of the database is to systematically collect

data on the social and political organization of societies and to document how they have changed

over time. In particular, the database is intended to facilitate understanding the evolution of

societies and the processes that generate cultural change. The Seshat data covers the time period

between the Neolithic and Industrial Revolutions (approximately 4,000 BCE to 1,900 CE). The

unit of analysis is a polity, which is defined as an independent political unit and can vary in scale

from a village to a complex state. To construct a sample, the researchers divided the world into 10

regions. They define three "natural geographic areas" (NGA) within each region by identifying

a polity that emerged early, a polity that emerged in an intermediate time period, and a polity

that emerged relatively late. The resulting 30 NGAs serve as the initial sample, from which

polities are tracked over time. The resulting database has over 1500 variables for 400 polities. The

dataset includes variables on social complexity, warfare, religion, institutions, technology, and

public goods provision. For more information on the dataset's construction, see Turchin et al.

(Forthcoming).

   A recent paper that uses the Seshat data set is Whitehouse et al. (2019), who examine whether

moralizing gods precede or follow the creation of complex societies. They argue that moralizing

gods follow the creation of complex societies. This is in contrast to other theories that suggest

moralizing gods help facilitate large scale cooperation and thus may promote complex societies

(Norenzayan et al., 2016). However, Beheim et al. (2019) argue that data quality issues are driving

these results. Missing data are treated as known absence of moralizing gods, representing 61


                                                 14
percent of the data in the analysis. The results reverse when this is recoded. Beheim et al. (2019)

also suggest that the coding of Seshat data has some systematic inaccuracies and inadequate data

quality management.


3.1.3. Database of Religious History

The Database of Religious History (DRH) is a database that is intended to bring together the

best scholarly opinions on historical religious traditions (Slingerland and Sullivan, 2017). The

database includes qualitative and quantitative historical data that are contributed by field experts

and are peer-reviewed. Unlike the SCCS or eHRAF, the unit of analysis is not a cultural group

but a "religious group". The focus is on religious groups from the pre-modern period; the

data are for groups up to 1700 CE, prior to Western colonialism. Religious scholars submit

information on the attributes of these various religious groups ­ such as beliefs and practices.

The database relies on experts to synthesize their knowledge on a particular religious group

and construct binary standardized data. Entries on religious groups are often accompanied with

photos, manuscripts, and links to primary and secondary data sources. As of 2017, the DRH

had 230 priority variables and 220 non-priority variables. There are approximately 400 entries.

The selection of priority variables is driven by the observation that religions are associated with

certain beliefs and practices and may extend pro-social behavior. Examples of variables include:

presence of supernatural beings, size and structure of the religious group, scripture, presence of

moral norms, and level of social complexity.


3.1.4. Others

I briefly describe briefly several other cultural and ethnographic databases.

   Pulotu: Database of Pacific Religions is a database of Austronesian supernatural beliefs and

practices for 116 cultures. The data set includes 62 variables related to religion, history, society,

and the natural environment. The data can be matched with Austronesian language phylogenies

(Watts et al., 2015).

   D-PLACE: Database of Places, Language, Culture and Environment (D-PLACE) is a database

with information on geography, language, culture and environment for over 1400 human societies

(Kirby et al., 2016). The data for D-PLACE combines data from the Ethnographic Atlas, the

Binford Hunter-Gatherer dataset (Binford, 2001, Binford and Johnson, n.d.), the Standard Cross


                                                 15
Cultural Sample, and the Western North American Indians dataset (Jorgensen, 1980, 1999b,a).

The Binford Hunter-Gather set describes cultural practices for 338 hunter-gather groups, a third

of which are not included in the EA. The Western North American Indian dataset codifies cultural

practices for 172 societies in Western North America, approximately 20 of which are not in the

previous data sets.

   The data are at the cultural group level at a given location and time. For each data point,

D-PLACE includes reference to the original primary sources and comments regarding coding

choices. D-PLACE links to eHRAF. D-PLACE also includes information on language affiliation,

following the classifications of Glottolog (Hammarström et al., 2020). The data include a wide

variety of environmental data: e.g. ecoregion, biome, elevation, slope, precipitation, and temper-

ature.


3.2. Cross-National Data

There has been increasing interest and ability to create cross-national data sets that measure

cultural variation.   Many of these efforts involve survey and experimental measures across

cultures.


3.2.1. Hofstede's Values Survey Module

The Values Survey Module (VSM) is a way to measure values across societies. The instrument

was introduced in Hofstede (1980), where he proposes several key dimensions on which cultures

vary: power distance, uncertainty avoidance, individualism versus collectivism, and masculinity

versus femininity. Power distance is the extent to which less powerful individuals are willing

to accept unequal power distributions. Uncertainty avoidance captures a willingness to tolerate

uncertainty and ambiguity. Individualism versus collectivism is the extent to which individuals

feel independent rather than being part of a collective whole. Masculinity is the extent to which

emotional gender roles are distinct ­ in which men are supposed to be assertive and tough

(Hofstede, 2013). Subsequent versions of the VSM measure additional attributes: long term

orientation, the extent to which a culture is future oriented and indulgence, in which freedom

rather than duty is valued. The survey instruments are publicly available and have been translated

into many languages.




                                               16
3.2.2. Global Preferences Survey

Falk et al. (2018) explore cultural variation by collecting survey data from 80,000 people across

76 countries. These countries represent approximately 90 percent of the world's population.

The samples within each country are representative. The sample includes 15 countries in the

Americas, 25 in Europe, 22 in Asia and the Pacific, and 15 in Africa. The median sample size per

country was 1,000 respondents. The survey includes questions to measure: time and risk prefer-

ences, altruism, positive reciprocity, negative reciprocity, and trust. While the survey questions

are not incentivized, the survey modules were experimentally validated prior to the survey's

administration. This minimizes the cost associated with collecting the data, as implementing

experiments is expensive. The process of validation and the exact survey questions are described

in detail in Falk et al. (2018). The authors then map the distribution of global preferences, how

preferences vary by gender, age, and cognitive ability, examine geographic correlates, and show

that the survey measures are correlated with relevant outcomes, such as savings.


3.2.3. Honesty

Gachter and Schulz (2016) explore the relationship between intrinsic honesty and a society level

measure of "prevalence of rule violations" (PRV) based on 2003 country-level data on corruption,

tax evasion, and fraudulent politics. Across 23 countries, they conduct a die rolling experiment

with 2,568 students as a measure of intrinsic honesty. In the die rolling experiment, individuals

are asked to roll a six-sided die and to report the number they observe. Their payment is tied to

the outcome of the die roll: if they roll a one they receive one money unit, a two they receive two

money units etc. However, if they roll a six they receive nothing. In a fully honest society, the

average money claimed would be 2.5; in a fully dishonest society it would be 5. They find that

intrinsic honesty as measured in the die rolling task is higher in societies that have a lower PRV.

   Cohn et al. (2019) conduct an experiment to measure honesty in 355 cities across 40 countries.

The authors "turned in" over 17,000 wallets to one of five types of societal institutions: banks,

cultural establishments, post offices, hotels, or public offices. The authors experimentally varied

whether the wallet contained money (approximately US $13.45). The key outcome was whether

the recipient of the wallet contacted the owner, whose fictitious contact information was on a

business card in the wallet. The first key outcome is that wallets are much more likely to be



                                                17
reported when they had money in them. Second, there is substantial variation across countries

in the rates at which wallets are reported. In some some countries more than 70 percent are

reported (e.g. Denmark, Sweden) while in others less than 20 percent are reported (e.g. Kenya

and Mexico). For a sub-sample of countries, the authors increase the amount of money in the

wallet to $94.15. They find even higher rates of wallet reporting when there is more money in the

wallet.


3.2.4. Folklore

Michalopoulos and Xue (2019) compile a folklore database based off of the life work of anthro-

pologist Yuri Berezkin (Berezkin, 2015, 2016). The authors define folklore as "the collection of

traditional beliefs, customs, myths, legends, and stories of a community". The database codes

the spatial distribution of thousands of motifs ­ the unit of analysis in a tale or myth ­ across

1,000 societies. The authors link the Berezkin database to the EA. They show that motifs are

associated with the natural environment and institutional setting. For example, groups with

more earthquake related motifs live closer to earthquake areas. They also show that motifs are

predictive of historical norms and how they are correlated with present day attitudes.


3.2.5. Names

Knudsen (2019) examines the relationship between emigration and individualism. Using emigra-

tion data from Scandinavia between 1850 and 1920, she first documents that those who are more

individualistic are more likely to migrate. To overcome the challenge of measuring individualism,

she constructs a measure based on the commonness of first names; those who chose more unique

first names are considered more individualist. She validates this measure of individualism and

collectivism against historical and present day data. She finds that as a result of this type of

selective migration sending areas from Scandinavia are more collectivist. A similar strategy

is employed in Bazzi, Fiszbein and Gebresilasse (Forthcoming), who examine the relationship

between frontier culture and individualism in the US.


3.2.6. Implicit Association Tests

Implicit Association Tests (IATs) are intended to measure a subject's implicit attitude toward a

subject, particularly those that a subject may be unable or unwilling to report. The idea is to

                                               18
measure the strength of an individual's association between various concepts (e.g. black people)

and evaluations or stereotypes (e.g. good and bad). Individuals are shown words or stimuli

related to the concept of interest and must sort those with the evaluation. The intuition is that

if a subject has a stronger association between an object and an evaluation, then the subject will

be able to more quickly sort the object and the evaluation together. For example, if an individual

has a strong association between "women" and "the humanities", it will be easier to sort words

related to women with words related to "the humanities" than worth words related to "science".

   Project Implicit is a non-profit organization that allows individuals to take IATs, administer

their own IATs, and use the data from the IATs that have been administered on the website.

Examples of the IATs available include: age IAT, Gender-Science IAT, Race IAT, Weapons IAT

(Greenwald et al., n.d., Nosek et al., 2007, Xu et al., 2020).


3.2.7. Newspapers

A potentially rich source of information on culture is newspapers.com, a digital archive of

historical and present day newspapers (newspapers.com, 2020). It is one of the largest online

newspaper archives, with more than 18,400 newspapers from the 1700s to the 2000s. It has

digitized over 600 million pages of newspapers, for which it is possible to do keyword searches.

   One example of how this data can be used comes from Ottinger and Winkler (2020), who

examine the relationship between political threat and the use of anti-Black propaganda in the

U.S. South following the 1892 presidential elections. To measure anti-Black propaganda, the

authors develop an automated script that accesses the database and records keyword frequencies.

Specifically, they proxy for anti-Black propaganda by searching for the presence of the words

"rape" and "negro". The keyword frequencies can then be linked to data on the newspaper's

location and the date of publication. They find that where Democrats faced more of a threat from

the Populist Party there is an increase in anti-Black propaganda.


3.2.8. Public Attitude Surveys

Finally, there are several publicly available public attitude surveys that measure various cultural

traits. These are periodic surveys conducted across many countries. Some of the key surveys are:

the World Values Survey (WVS), AfroBaromter, AmericasBaromter, ArabBarometer, EuroBarome-

ter, LatinoBarometer, and AsianBaromter (World Values Survey Data, 2020, AfroBarometer Data,


                                                   19
2020, AmericasBarometer Data, 2020, AsianBarometer Data, 2020, ArabBarometer Data, 2020,

EuroBarometer Data, 2020, LatinoBarometer Data, 2020). The Pew Research Center also conducts

surveys, particularly related to civic culture and religious beliefs (Pew Research Center, 2020).

The associated websites for these organizations have detailed information on sampling, survey

instruments, and available data.


4. Lab-in-the-field experiments

A complementary strategy to the use of pre-existing ethnographic and cultural data is the

collection of new survey and experimental data. While this is still relatively infrequent ­ given

the high costs of data collection ­ it is an important tool for examining mechanisms and outcomes

in places with limited historical data.


4.1. What are lab-in-the-field experiments?

Lab-in-the-field experiments are lab experiments that are conducted in a "naturalistic" setting

(Gneezy and Imas, 2017).      Lab-in-the-field experiments may help address some of the key

concerns with lab experiments. First, lab experiments are often conducted with populations of

convenience, such as students. These populations may not be broadly representative, particularly

given that most of these experiments are conducted with so-called "WEIRD" (Western, Educated,

Industrialized, Rich and Democratic) populations.

   Second, while lab experiments are often conducive to precise measurement because they are

conducted in a highly controlled environment, the setting may be too abstract. Lab-in-the-field

experiments may help address these issues by using validated lab experiments with relevant pop-

ulations in a more naturalistic environment. Gneezy and Imas (2017) suggest that lab-in-the-field

experiments be used as part of an RCT at baseline to test whether treatment depends on measured

behavior or as an outcome of a randomized controlled trials (RCTs). See Gneezy and Imas (2017)

for a detailed overview of the benefits of lab-in-the-field experiments, their relationship to RCTs,

and a discussion of recent lab-in-the-field papers.

   Common lab experiments are the dictator game, ultimatum game, public goods game (or vol-

untary contribution mechanism), measures to elicit time and risk preferences, random allocation

game, cheating game, and joy of destruction game. Other measures include IATs, which measure

an individuals implicit views towards a target object or person.

                                                20
   There is a growing interest in the use of lab experiments to complement work in historical

economics. This is particularly appealing in settings with limited historical data. As of yet,

there are few papers that combine lab-in-the-field work with historical economics. In historical

economics, lab-in-the-field experiments are either used as outcomes or as a way of understanding

mechanisms. In contrast, Gneezy and Imas focus on lab-in-the-field experiments as a way of

measuring social preferences or helping to design and target policies.

   I will review the work in historical economics that makes use of lab-in-the-field experiments.

The first set of papers are those that use the lab-in-the-field measures as the primary outcomes,

asking how an historical event or treatment shapes the experimental outcome. The second set

of papers use the experimental measures as a way of understanding cultural or institutional

mechanisms.


4.2. Lab-in-the-field Experiments as Outcomes

4.2.1. States, Institutions, and Colonialism

Lowes et al. (2017) examine the effects of the historical Kuba state on present day norms of

rule following. The Kuba Kingdom was an historical Kingdom is Central Africa, what is today

the Democratic Republic of Congo. The Kuba Kingdom had well developed state institutions,

including an unwritten constitution, a capital city, separation of powers, a judiciary, a police

force, and the provision of public goods. The Kingdom was created by an innovative outsider,

who united groups, including the Kuba, on one side of a river, but left other culturally similar

groups, primarily the Lele, outside of the Kingdom on the other side of the river. This provides

a natural experiment in which groups that had a similar history and culture were differentially

exposed to the state.

   The authors were interested in understanding how exposure to the state affects norms of rule

following. However, there was no pre-existing data would have allowed them to answer this

question. Therefore, the authors went to Kananga, the major city closest to the Kuba Kingdom's

capital, Mushenge. In Kananga, they sampled individuals from the Kuba and Lele ethnic groups,

as well as other culturally proximate groups in the region.

   Respondents participated in a series of lab experiments intended to measure propensity to

follow rules. The primary experiment was the Resource Allocation Game (RAG). In this task,



                                                21
                                                                  Table 3: Historical Economics and Lab-in-the-Field
      Authors                                           Journal                    Location                 Treatment                      Experiments                     Outcome Variable
      Bergeron (2020)                                   Mimeo                        DRC                   Missionaries                    Referral Task             Kinship ties, universal morality
      Blouin (2019)                                     Mimeo                  Rwanda, Burundi             Forced Labor                         TG                          Trust, Contracts
      Chaudhary et al. (2020)            J. of Econ. Behavior & Organization         India            British/Princely State                    PG                            Cooperation
      De Juan and Koos (2019)                     World Development                  DRC                 Bushi Kingdom                          DG                            Cooperation
      Gangadharan et al. (2018)                         Mimeo                     Cambodia                   Genocide                JOD, DG, honesty, TG, Risk                 Pro-social
      Gneezy, Leonard and List (2009)                Econometrica              India & Tanzania        Matrilineal Kinship               Competition Task                   competitiveness
      Heldring (Forthcoming)                  Review of Economic Studies           Rwanda              Nyiginya kingdom                        RAG                        Violence, Obedience
      Hruschka et al. (2014)                        Human Nature                    Various              Pathogen Stress                       RAG                         Favoring In-group
                                                                                                        Material Security
      Karaja and Rubin (2017)                          Mimeo                      Romania         Habsburg/Ottoman institutions                   TG                              Trust
      Lowes (2018b)                                    Mimeo                       DRC                 Matrilineal kinship                DG, UG, PG, IAT            Cooperation, Health, Education




22
                                                                                                                                          Risk, Time, Stress
      Lowes and Montero (2020)                        Mimeo                         DRC                Rubber Concessions                     DG, RDG                    Development, Pro-social
      Lowes et al. (2017)                          Econometrica                     DRC                  Kuba Kingdom                      RAG, UG, IAT                      Rule Following
      Ramos-Toro (2019)                               Mimeo                       Colombia                Leper colony                           DG                         Pro-social, Trust
      Rustagi (2020)                                  Mimeo                      Switzerland               Institutions                           PG                          Cooperation
      Schulz et al. (2019)                            Science                      Global               Medieval Church                           PG                   Individualism, Conformity,
                                                                                                                                                                          Impartial Pro-sociality
      Valencia Caicedo and Voth (2018)               Mimeo                        Paraguay                Missionaries            LOC, Cheating game, DG, TG, Risk         Non-cognitive Skills
      Walker (2020)                          J. Comparative Economics             Romania         Habsburg/Ottoman institutions              Risk, Time                     Pro-social, Trust



     DG is the dictator game. IAT is the implicit association test. JOD is the joy of destruction game. LOC is locus of control. PG is the public
     goods game. RAG is the resource allocation game. TG is the trust game.
individuals are given thirty 100 CF bills to allocate between themselves and another player. They

are told that in order to allocate the bills, they must roll a die that has three white sides and

three black sides. Before each roll, they decide in their heads which color to associate with

themselves and which color to associate with the other player. They then roll the die, and make

the allocation of the 100 CF bill based on the outcome of the die roll. However, given that the

association made by the individual is not observable to the researcher, the respondent can choose

to deviate from the rules and allocate to themselves if they wish. While this is not verifiable at

the individual level, it is possible to assess whether on average groups deviate from the fifty-fifty

split that should result from members of a group following the rules. Participants made allocation

decisions with real money in the privacy of a tent. Instructions were administered in the local

languages. See Figure 4 for a depiction of the "mobile lab" set up and of enumerator training.

   By comparing individuals from just inside the Kuba Kingdom to those just outside the Kuba

Kingdom, the paper finds that Kuba individuals are less likely to follow the rules in the RAG,

which is interpreted as less strong norms of rule following among the Kuba. This result is

consistent with models in which strong states crowd out parental investment in the norm of rule

following. They find that Kuba parents are also more likely to report that it is less important to

teach values related to rule following to children.

   In addition to experimental data, the authors collected other complementary data. For ex-

ample, the respondents completed Implicit Association Tests (IATs) to measure their implicit

association towards Joseph Mobutu Sese-Seko, the president of DRC from 1965 to 1997. The

concern was that perhaps the effect observed in the lab experiment was driven by differential

treatment of the Kuba during Mobutu's rule. However, it is difficult to measure exposure to

Mobutu's policies. The IAT thus served as proxy for the experience under Mobutu. See Figure 5

for an example of an IAT screenshot.

   A related paper, De Juan and Koos (2019), explores how the pre-colonial Bushi state in

Eastern Congo shapes cooperation. The Bushi Kingdom emphasized social integration and the

creation of broad horizontal networks. The authors collect survey and experimental data from

1000 participants across 100 villages near the historical Bushi Kingdom border. Their primary

outcome is participation in community works programs as reported by respondents. They find

that individuals from villages from inside the Bushi Kingdom report participating more in these

community work programs. As a behavioral measure, the authors give the respondents the


                                                 23
                         Figure 4: Lab-in-Field Training and Enumeration




                                        (a) Enumerator Training




                                        (b) Experimental Setup

These images depict an example of the experimental set up for administering lab-in-the-field experiments
and of enumerator training in DRC.




                                                  24
                                Figure 5: Screenshot of Mobutu IAT




This is a screenshot of the Mobutu IAT in which images related to Mobutu would be sorted to the left side
of the screen along with "happy" images.



opportunity to donate part of the compensation they receive for participating in the survey to an

education program. They find that individuals from inside the former kingdom are more likely

donate, which they interpret as evidence of more pro-social behavior.

   Rustagi (2020) also examines the role of institutions for cooperation. He focuses on Switzer-

land, where during the middle ages some Swiss municipalities acquired self-governance while

others remained under feudalism for an additional 600 years. He combines survey and exper-

imental data to examine how historical self-governance affects cooperation. He conducts an

online one-shot anonymous public goods game with 262 individuals from 174 municipalities.

The experimental results suggest greater experience with self-governance increases conditional

cooperation ­ e.g. willingness to increase public goods contributions as the other player increases

their contribution. He finds a similar increase in cooperative attitudes in World Value Survey data

and data from the Swiss Household Panel.

   Blouin (2019) explores how historical forced labor shapes ethnic relations in Rwanda and

Burundi. During the colonial era, Belgian authorities implemented a coffee production quota.

Additionally, the Belgians encouraged Tutsi chiefs to coerce Hutu farmers to produce coffee to

meet the quota. Given that there was variation in coffee suitability but the quota was uniform

there is variation in the extent to which meeting the quota would require forced labor.

   To examine the legacy of forced labor for inter-ethnic relations, he collects lab-in-the-field

data with Hutu and Tutsi farmers in Rwanda and Burundi.                Given that Rwanda prohibits



                                                   25
explicit mention of ethnic affiliation, ethnic identity is inferred through eligibility for the genocide

survivor fund. He conducts in-person trust games with 869 farmers from 143 different villages.

In the trust game, a player 1 is given an endowment. They can send part of that endowment

to a player 2; any amount sent to the player 2 was doubled. Player 2 can then choose to return

some of that increased amount to the player 1. Generally, the amount sent by player 1 to player

2 is interpreted as a measure of trusting behavior and the share returned by player 2 to player 1

as a measure of trust worthiness. Additionally, he conducts a "partner selection task", in which

individuals could choose other participants in the session as their partner. The outcome of interest

is the share of those chosen that are from the other ethnic group. Finally, he collects data on real

world agricultural insurance contracts ­ as a measure of real world cooperation. Hutu from areas

that experienced forced labor send less in the trust game when paired with a Tutsi, are less likely

to choose a Tutsi partner, and make fewer agricultural agreements. The results suggest that the

Belgian policy of manipulating social identity has had long run effects on inter-ethnic relations.

   Chaudhary et al. (2020) examine how exposure to British colonialism relative to Princely States

in India affects present day norms of cooperation. The hypothesis is that the institutions of British

India may have affected cooperative norms because these individuals were exposed to taxation

and had a longer history of living with outsiders relative to individuals in Princely States. The

authors conduct public goods games with 554 individuals from three towns, one of which was

formerly part of British India. They also vary the identity of the other members of the group; in

some cases groups are mixed and include individuals from another town. They find that relative

to a neighboring town in a Princely State, individuals from the town that was part of British India

cooperate more with others, regardless of their identity. The results are driven by individuals

whose parents are from the town.

   In a related paper, Karaja and Rubin (2017) compare towns that are along the former Hab-

sburg/Austrian and Ottomans/Russian border in Romania. The Habsburg administration was

relatively less corrupt and more efficient than the Ottoman administration. The authors hypoth-

esize that the more rapacious Ottoman institutions may have undermined trust, particularly in

outsiders. They take advantage of a natural experiment because the border between the Ottoman

and Habsburgs was somewhat arbitrary. They conduct trust games with individuals in three

towns along this historical border. They find that individuals from the former Habsburg side

whose grandparents are from the town are more trusting of outsiders ­ i.e. they send more in the


                                                  26
first stage of the trust game.


4.2.2. Environment

Hruschka et al. (2014) examine how pathogen stress affects willingness to favor an in-group

member. The hypothesis is that greater pathogen stress leads individuals to be more likely to

favor in group members. To test this, they administer lab-in-the-field experiments across eight

different societies with 223 individuals. The experiment is the Resource Allocation Game (RAG),

described above. In one version the allocations are made between an in-group and out-group

member; in a second version the individual allocated between themselves and an anonymous

out-group member. They find no evidence for the pathogen stress hypothesis. Rather, individuals

are more likely to follow the impartial allocation rule when there is better institutional quality

and material security.


4.2.3. The Church and Missionaries

Schulz et al. (2019) explore how the Western Church (which became the Roman Catholic Church)

shaped European kinship structures. The authors hypothesize that by undermining kin-based

institutions (e.g. by banning cousin marriage), the Western Church encouraged the development

of independent nuclear or stem families. This is turn led to social norms less dominated by

in-group loyalty and conformism and greater individualism and impersonal cooperation. To test

this hypothesis, the authors compile a wide variety of surveys and lab experiments to measure

their outcomes of interest: individualism, conformity, and impersonal pro-sociality. Some of the

key lab experimental measures are a public goods games and a die rolling task where payments

are linked to the reported outcome of the die roll as a measure of honesty. They find that greater

exposure to the Western Church is associated with less intensive kinship, greater individualism,

less conformity, and more fairness towards strangers.

   Building on work that finds that the Guarani Jesuit missionaries have had a long-run impact

on education and income in Argentina, Brazil, and Paraguay (Valencia Caicedo, 2019), Valencia

Caicedo and Voth (2018) use a series of lab-in-the-field experiments and surveys to measure the

effects of the Jesuit missionaries on non-cognitive skills. They collect data from approximately

500 individuals in Paraguay from areas with low and high presence of missionaries to examine

the effect of missionary presence. They implement the Rotter Locus of Control Scale, which is


                                               27
a series of questions intended the measure the extent to which individuals feel that they have

agency in their lives. They also conducted the dictator game, trust game, a cheating game (as

in Hanna and Wang (2017), Lowes et al. (2017)) and implemented questions measuring time and

risk preferences. They find that areas with greater exposure to the missionaries report having

more of an internal locus of control, allocate more to the other player in a dictator game, return

more money in the trust game to the other player, cheat less in the rule following game, and are

more risk averse.

   Related work explores how exposure to missionaries in the Democratic Republic of Congo

is associated with the scope of cooperation Bergeron (2020). The paper examines the extent to

which exposure to missionaries increases cooperation beyond kin (i.e. family members or co-

ethnics) and whether individuals have more universal moral systems. To examine this question,

he digitizes historical maps of missionary presence in the DRC and collects survey and lab-in-

the-field data with 1,000 individuals presently residing in the city of Kananga. He measures

exposure to missionaries based on the distance of an individual's village of origin to the nearest

mission station. He measures kin preference with a series of survey questions and with a lab

experiment. The survey questions elicit attitudes toward various other groups including nuclear

family members, extended family, coethnics, non-coethnics, foreigners etc. As part of the survey,

participants are asked to refer social network members for paid and unpaid activities. This allows

him to examine whether respondents are more likely to recommend kin relative to non-kin for

the paid tasks. He finds that exposure to missionaries is associated with weaker kin ties and

individuals are less likely to refer kin in the lab experiment. The survey responses are consistent

with missionary exposure encouraging more universal moral values.


4.2.4. Social Exclusion and Violence

Ramos-Toro (2019) examines how social exclusion impacts social preferences. The setting is a

former leper colony, in Colombia. Historically, individuals with leprosy were forcibly isolated at

specific locations, as the disease was mistakenly believed to be highly contagious. Treatment in

the leper colony was characterized by isolation from family and friends and loss of citizenship.

These policies were enforced by the colony physicians. By the 20th century, approximately 8000

lepers were living in the Agua de Dios colony. The author collects data from individuals living in

and around Agua de Dios. Individuals participated in two dictator games, one in which the other


                                                28
player is from the same municipality (i.e. an in-group member) and one in which the other player

is from a different munincipality (an out-group member). He finds that individuals living in the

former leper colony are more generous in the dictator game. However, they also demonstrate a

larger in-group preference, suggesting greater identity awareness. He also collects data on how

social exclusion affects views towards modern medicine. He finds that individuals from Agua

de Dios are less likely trust physicians and less likely to believe the HPV vaccine is safe. This

translates into lower infant vaccination rates.

   To examine the transmission of these social preferences, he collects data to measure how

aware of the history of exclusion individuals are. Additionally, he experimentally manipulates

knowledge of the non-medical history of exclusion or the history of the role of medicine and

physicians. The history of exclusion information increases in-group preferences and the medical

history information decreases trust in modern medicine. A placebo information treatment on

trees has no significant effect. The results suggest long lasting effects of social exclusion on

preferences, that this experience shapes views of the group that is associated with implementing

the exclusion, and that knowledge of this history is an important mechanism.

   A large literature documents the effects of exposure to violence on pro-social preferences,

suggesting that exposure to violence may actually increase pro-social preferences (see Bauer et

al. (2016) for a review of this literature). However, few papers examines the long-run impact of

exposure to violence. Gangadharan et al. (2018) examine the effect of exposure to the Cambodian

genocide on anti-social behavior. During the Cambodian genocide an estimate 1.7 million Cam-

bodians were killed by the Khmer Rouge. Most individuals that survived the Khmer Rouge rule

were either directly affected by this violence or witnessed violence. The authors use variation

in intensity of estimated deaths to measure exposure to violence. They collect data from 492

individuals across districts with estimated differential exposure to Khmer Rouge violence. They

find that those direct exposed to KR violence in areas with a greater KR mortality rate are less

altruistic, are more likely to destroy another player's endowment, and are more dishonest than

those from areas with less exposure.


4.2.5. Kinship Structure

In matrilineal societies, lineage is traced through female members rather than male members. This

may have implications for a wide variety of social preferences. Gneezy et al. (2009) explore the


                                                  29
effects of matrilineal relative to patrilineal kinship structure on preference for competition. Using

a task where individuals can choose whether to compete or be paid in a piece-rate scheme, they

find that there is a gap between men and women's preference for competition among a patrilineal

group in Tanzania. However, among a matrilineal group in India, there is no longer a gap in

preference for competition. Subsequent papers have built on this work, but test this hypothesis

with more groups (Anderson et al., 2013, Flory et al., 2017). Other work examines how various

other preferences vary between matrilineal and patrilineal groups, including altruism and risk

preferences (Gong and Yang, 2012, Gong, Yan and Yang, 2015, Lowes, 2018a). See Lowes (2020)

for a review of this literature.


4.3. Lab-in-the-field Experiments as Mechanisms

Lowes and Montero (2020) examine how private concessions granted during the colonial era affect

present day development in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). The Congo Free State,

which was the personal colony of King Leopold II of Belgium between 1892 and 1908, was divided

into concessions where private companies were given monopoly rights over resource extraction.

The most infamous of these concessions, Abir and Anversoise, focused on the extraction of

rubber. The concession companies were characterized by extreme violence to force villages to

meet rubber quotas and by indirect rule ­ coopting local leaders to enforce the rubber quotas.

They examine the effects of exposure to these concessions using the arbitrarily defined borders of

the two northern most concessions and a geographic regression discontinuity design. Using data

from the Demographic and Health Surveys for DRC, they find that exposure to these concessions

is associated with worse development outcomes: lower levels of education, health, and wealth.

   To understand mechanisms, they collected survey and experimental data from Gemena, a town

along the boundary of one of the former concessions. They collect data on the role of culture and

institutions for shaping present day development outcomes. They sample over 500 individuals

from Gemena, whose ancestors come from in and outside the former concession boundary. They

collect survey data on local institutional quality, how chiefs are chosen, public goods provision,

and trust and closeness in a wide variety of others. They also conduct two lab-in-the-field

experiments including a dictator game and a reverse dictator game. In the reverse dictator

game individuals decide how much of another individual's earned endowment to allocate to

themselves. They also complete the earnings task, once they have already made the allocation


                                                 30
                             Figure 6: Congo Free State Concessions




This is a map of the concessions granted in the CFS as of 1904. Abir and Anversoise are the two
Northern concessions.



decision. This is meant to capture the extent an individual is willing to redistribute for themselves

and tax another's earned income.

   They find two key sets of results. First, individuals with ancestors from inside the former

concessions come from villages with less accountable leaders. These leaders are less likely to be

elected and more likely to be hereditary. They also provide fewer public goods. This suggests that

local institutions inside the former concessions are of lower quality. Second, they find evidence of

more pro-social norms and more acceptance of sharing and redistribution. Individuals from the

former concessions report feeling more trusting of and close to others. They self report believing

sharing and redistribution are important, and also reallocate more of another's earned endow-

ment to themselves. They find no significant differences in allocations in the dictator game, which

is a measure of altruism. They interpret these results as consistent with the concession system

undermining local institutions and with social norms responding to the weakened institutions.

   Heldring (Forthcoming) examines how exposure to the the precolonial state affects violence

and norms of rule following in Rwanda. The hypothesis is that states inculcate norms of rule

following and that greater exposure to the state will lead to more obedience of state policy. To



                                                 31
test this hypothesis, he leverages the slow expansion of the precolonial Rwandan state ­ the

Nyiginya kingdom ­ which expanded over several centuries. He combines data on length of

exposure to the precolonial state with data on violence perpetrated during the genocide and

with lab-in-the-field data. He finds that great exposure to the Nyiginya kingdom is associated

with more violence during the genocide. To provide evidence on mechanisms, he conducts a

lab-in-the-field experiment with individuals from areas with differential exposure to the historical

state. He implements the RAG (as in Lowes et al. (2017)). He finds that those individuals from

areas with longer exposure to the pre-colonial state are more likely to follow the rules ­ i.e. to

not cheat for material gain ­ those those with less exposure. He interprets this as evidence that

the historical state inculcates norms of obedience, which also led to greater violence during the

genocide as individuals followed orders to participate in the killings.

   Lowes (2018b) examines how kinship structure affects outcomes for women and children and

spousal cooperation. The DRC is intersected by the so-called matrilineal belt, which describes the

distribution of matrilineal ethnic groups across the center of Africa. In matrilineal systems lineage

and inheritance are traced through female group members rather than through male group mem-

bers. This means that children are part of their mother's kin group and that women in matrilineal

systems generally have greater support from their kin. Anthropolgists had hypothesized that

matrilineal systems may improve outcomes for women, but that women's empowerment may also

lead to decreased spousal cooperation. Using data from the DHS and a geographic regression

discontinuity design along the matrilineal belt border, she finds that women from matrilineal

areas are less likely to support domestic violence and less likely to experience domestic violence.

Children of matrilineal women also fare better; they are more educated and healthier, with many

of these benefits accruing to girl children.

   To examine mechanisms she collected survey and experimental data from 320 couples in the

city of Kananga. About 40 percent of the sample are from ethnic groups that practice matrilineal

kinship. While the individuals have villages of origin along the matrilineal belt, they are all

presently located in the same institutional environment. The individuals in the sample complete

a dictator game, an ultimatum game, and a modified public goods game with their spouse and

with a stranger of the opposite sex. In the public goods game, individuals roll a die with three

white sides and three black sides. If they see black side, they get an additional 500 CF to their

PG endowment of 1000 CF. They are then asked to allocate their endowment across an envelope


                                                 32
                                    Figure 7: Matrilineal Belt in Africa




                       . Legend
                             Country Borders
                             Kananga
                         Murdock Ethnic Groups
                             Other (Duolateral, Bilateral, Mixed)
                             Patrilineal
                             Matrilineal




for themselves and a "shared" envelope. Any contributions to the shared envelope are increased

by 1.5 or by 2. For a household to maximize earnings in the experiment, each individual should

contribute all of their endowment to the shared envelope. In practice, couples rarely allocate

more than half of their endowment to the shared envelope. Matrilineal individuals allocate even

less than patrilineal individuals to the shared envelope. This is particularly the case when they

win the unobserved bonus and it becomes relatively easier to be less cooperative with the spouse.

This differential behavior of matrilineal individuals is specific to being paired with a spouse;

matrilineal individuals no longer differentially contribute less when they win the bonus and are

paired with a stranger of the opposite sex. The results are robust to controlling for altruism, as

measured in the dictator game. These results are consistent with matrilineal kinship undermining

spousal cooperation. However, by being less cooperative, women may retain more control over

their earnings in the experiment.

  Walker (2020) exploits the former Habsburg-Ottoman boundary discontinuity to explore how

these imperial legacies shape savings behavior. The Habsburg Monarchy was more financially

developed and more decentralized relative to the Ottomans. The Habsburg legal institutions

were also known to be relatively less corrupt. She collects experimental and survey data with 331



                                                                    33
semi-subsistence farmers along the former border. She measures risk preferences with choices

between lotteries and time preferences by asking individuals to choose between smaller amounts

in a near period and larger amounts in a later period. All of these experiments were incentivized.

Using survey data, she finds that individuals from the former Habsburg side save more. However,

she finds no evidence that this is driven by time or risk preferences. Instead, financial access seems

to drive the results, with individuals on the former Habsburg side have greater access to financial

institutions.


4.4. Practical Issues

Implementing lab-in-the-field experiments presents a wide variety of practical challenges. While

not all of these challenges are specific to lab-in-the-field experiments in historical economics,

some of these challenges become particularly important when dealing with historical treatments.

I highlight a few of these challenges and potential resolutions.

   There are several potential challenges with sample selection. Sample selection will likely take

place in two parts. First, it will be important to choose a location or locations from which to

collect data. Second, individuals must be recruited to participate in the study.

   Choosing a location from which to collect data will likely be driven by the historical episode

of interest and the identification strategy. For example, in Lowes et al. (2017) where they are

interested in how the Kuba state affects norms of rule following, they focus on individuals

living in a major city near the Kuba Kingdom. They sample individuals within the city of

Kananga, some of whose ancestors come from the Kuba Kingdom and others whose ancestors

come from outside the Kingdom. There are several benefit to this strategy. It is analogous to the

epidemiological approach in which individuals from different cultural (or historical) backgrounds

share a common institutional environment (Fernández, 2011). This helps separate institutions

from internalized cultural norms. In the context of data collection and developing countries,

it is also a very practical approach in that it decreases implementation costs and eases data

collection demands. The historical treatment variable is then linked to where an individual is

from, rather than to their current location (for other examples see e.g. Lowes (2018b), Lowes and

Montero (2020), Bergeron (2020) where respondents' village of origin are mapped to the historical

treatment variable).




                                                 34
   A potential challenge, however, is addressing selection into migration based on the historical

treatment of interest. The concern is that the historical variable itself may affect migration

choices, making the sample of individuals in that location a selected sample and potentially not

representative of the group of interest. Note, this issue applies to many lab experiments where

convenience samples are used.

   There are several strategies to deal with this. In Lowes et al. (2017) they collect detailed

migration information, including reasons for migration and timing of migration. This allows

them to show that the Kuba do not report different reasons for migration ­ for example, they

are not more likely to have migrated because they were asked to leave their village of origin. An

additional strategy is to use any existing data to show how the sample selected in the location of

choice differs from a potential broader and more representative sample for whom you may have

only limited demographic data rather than detailed survey and experimental data.

   The second strategy for choosing locations to sample would be to randomly select villages that

meet a particular inclusion criteria. For example, Heldring (Forthcoming) collects data in villages

along a border that designated a longer period of time under the pre-colonial state. This strategy

helps diminish the issue of selection into migration. However, it can be costly and logistically

challenging, particularly in places with limited infrastructure. It also makes it more difficult to

disentangle cultural and institutional variables.

   The second part of sample selection is to recruit individuals to participate in the lab experi-

ment. There may not be a pre-existing sampling frame from which to select individuals. This is

often the case in developing countries where they can be limited administrative or public survey

data available. One method of addressing this issue is to set up a sampling frame, perhaps by

using satellite data and a method of randomly choosing geographic units, and then randomly

sampling individuals within these units. It may be important to record refusal data to be able to

show individuals are not differentially refusing to participate based on the treatment of interest.

Again, whether individuals are statistically representative of the group of interest is a challenge

for lab experiments more broadly, but becomes more salient with lab-in-the-field experiments, as

one of the benefits of lab-in-the-field experiments is working with the group of interest.

   Finally, another practical consideration is writing and submitting prior to field work a pre-

analysis plan for the project. Initially, primarily randomized controlled trials were expected to

have pre-analysis plans. However, it is now common place for researchers to submit pre-analysis


                                                    35
plans for lab experiments as well. A common repository for these pre-analysis plans is the AEA

randomized controlled trial registry.2


5. Conclusion

Work in historical economics has often relied on existing historical data. However, ethnographic

data sets and lab-in-the-field and survey methods increase the scope of the research questions

that can be empirically explored in historical economics. These approaches may be particularly

helpful in cases where there is limited written historical records and increase the representation

of non-"WEIRD" societies in economics research.

   This article has first reviewed some of the most commonly used ethnographic data sources,

including the Ethnographic Atlas and the Standard Cross Cultural Survey. I discuss how these

data were constructed, potential limitations of the data, and efforts to validate and improve

upon these data sets. Additionally, I provide examples of how these datasets have been used

in economics research. I then describe alternative ethnographic data sources that have been

compiled by anthropologists and historians, but have yet to be widely used in economics. I also

discuss other survey and experimental resources that can be used to measure cultural traits across

cultures.

   Finally, I discuss the use of lab-in-the-field experiments in historical economics. There are

still few papers that combine historical economics and experimental methods. Lab-in-the-field

experiments have been used as both outcomes and as a way of understanding persistence. I

highlight some of the benefits of these methods, potential problems, and practical implementation

issues. These data sets and methods offer an opportunity for future research in the realm of

historical economics and to increase the connections between work in historical economics and

other disciplines.




  2   The web address for the AEA RCT registry is https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/.


                                                        36
References

AfricaMap, September 2020. https://worldmap.harvard.edu/africamap/.

AfroBarometer Data, September 2020. afrobarometer.org.

Ahmed, Ali T. and David Stasavage, "Origins of Early Democracy," Americal Political Science
 Review, 2020, 114 (2), 502­518.

Akbari, Mahsa, Duman Bahrami-Rad, and Erik O. Kimbrough, "Kinship, fractionalization and
 corruption," Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 2019, 166, 493­528.

Alesina, Alberto, Paola Giuliano, and Nathan Nunn, "Fertility and the Plough," American
  Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 2011, 101 (3), 499­503.

  , , and , "On the Origins of Gender Roles: Women and the Plough," Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 2013, 128 (2), 469­530.

  ,   , and   , "Taditional agricultural practices and the sex ratio today," PLoS ONE, 2018, 13 (1).

Alsan, Marcella, "The Effect of the TseTse Fly on African Development," American Economic
  Review, 2015, 105 (1), 382­410.

AmericasBarometer Data, September 2020. vanderbilt.edu/lapop.

Anderson, Siwan, "The Economics of Dowry and Brideprice," Journal of Economic Perspectives,
 Fall 2007, 21 (4), 151­174.

  , "Legal Origins and Female HIV," American Economic Review, June 2018, 108 (6), 1407­1439.

Anderson, Steffan, Seda Ertac, Uri Sneezy, John A. List, and Sandra Maximiano, "Gender, Com-
 petitiveness, and Socialization at a Young Age: Evidence from a Matrilineal and a Patriarchal
 Society," The Review of Economics and Statistics, October 2013, 95 (4), 1438­1443.

ArabBarometer Data, September 2020. www.arabbarometer.org.

Ashraf, Nava, Natalie Bau, Nathan Nunn, and Alessandra Voena, "Bride Price and Female
  Education," Journal of Political Economy, 2019 2020, 128 (2), 591­641.

AsianBarometer Data, September 2020. asianbarometer.org.

Bahrami-Rad, Duman, Anke Becker, and Joseph Henrich, "Tabulated Nonsense? Testing the
  Validity of the Ethnographic Atlas and the Persistence of Culture," 2018. Working paper,
  Harvard University.

Baker, Matthew J., "A structural model of the transition to agriculture," Journal of Economic
  Growth, 2008, 13.

   and Thomas J. Miceli, "Land inheritance rules: theory and cross-cultural analysis," Journal of
  Economic Behavior & Organization, January 2005, 56 (1), 77­102.

Bauer, Michal, Christopher Blattman, Julie Chytilová, Joseph Henrich, Edward Miguel, and
  Tamar Mitts, "Can War Foster Cooperation?," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2016, 30 (3),
  249­274.

Bazzi, Samuel, Martin Fiszbein, and Mesay Gebresilasse, "Frontier Culture: The Roots and
  Persistence of "Rugged Individualism" in the United States," Econometrica, Forthcoming.

                                                37
Becker, Anke, "On the Economic Origins of Restrictions on Women's Sexuality," June 2019.
  Mimeo.

  , Benjamin Enke, and Armin Falk, "Ancient Origins of the Global Variation in Economic
  Preferences," AEA Papers and Proceedings, May 2020, 110, 319­23.

Beheim, Bret, Quentin Atkinson, Joseph Bulbulia, Will Gervais, Russell D. Gray, Joseph
  Henrich, Martin Lang, M. Willis Monroe, Michael Muthukrishna, Ara Norenzayan, Ben-
  jamin Grant Purzycki, Azim Shariff, Edward Slingerland, Rachel Spicer, and Aiyana K.
  Willard, "Corrected analyses show that moralizing gods precede compelx societies but serious
  data concerns remain," 2019.

BenYishay, Ariel, Pauline Grosjean, and Joe Vecci, "The Fish is the Friend of Matriliny: Reef
  Density and Matrilineal Inheritance," Journal of Development Economics, July 2017, 127, 234­249.

Berezkin, Yuri E., "Folklore and mythology catalogue: Its layout and potential for research," in
  Frog Lukin and Karina Lukin, eds., Between text and practice: Mythology, religion, and research,
  Vol. 10 The Retrospective Methods Network Newsletter Folklore Studies/Department of Phi-
  losophy, History, Culture and Art Studies University of Helsinki Helsinki 2015.

  , "Peopling of the New World in light of the data on distribution of folklore motifs," in R. Kenna,
  M. M. Carron, and P. M. Carron, eds., Maths meets myths: Quantitative approaches to ancient
  narratives, Vol. 10 Springer Verlag 2016, pp. 71­89.

Bergeron, Augustin, "Religion and the Scope of Morality: Evidence from Exposure to Missions
  in the D.R. Congo," May 2020.

Binford, Lewis R., Constructing frames of reference: an analytical method for archaeological theory
  building using ethnographic and environmental data sets, University of California Press, 2001.

  and Amber Johnson, "Documentation for Program for Calculating Environmental and Hunter-
  Gatherer Frames of Reference (ENVCALC2)."

Blouin, Arthur, "Culture and Contracts: The Historical Legacy of Forced Labor," December 2019.

Bondarenko, Dmitri, Alexander Kazankov, Daria Khaltourina, and Andrey Korotayev, "Ethno-
  graphic Atlas XXXI: Peoples of Easternmost Europe," Ethnology, 2005, 44 (3), 261­289.

Botticini, Maristella and Aloysius Siow, "Why Dowries?," American Economic Review, 2003, 93,
  1385­1398.

Buggle, Johannes, "Growing Collectivism: Irrigation, Group Conformity and Technological
  Divergence," Journal of Economic Growth, 2020, 25 (2), 147­193.

Chaudhary, Latika, Jared Rubin, Sriya Iyer, and Anand Shrivastava, "Culture and colonial
 legacy: Evidence from public goods games," Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 2020,
 173, 107­129.

Cohn, Alain, Michel Andre Marechal, David Tannenbaum, and Christian Lukas Zund, "Civic
  honesty around the globe," Science, 2019, 365, 70­73.

Corno, Lucia, Nicole Hildebrandt, and Alessandra Voena, "Age of Marriage, Weather Shocks
  and the Direction of Marriage Payments," Econometrica, May 2020, 88 (3), 879­915.

De Juan, Alexander and Carlo Koos, "The Historical Roots of Cooperative Behavior: Evidence
 from Eastern Congo," World Development, April 2019, 116, 100­112.

                                                 38
Depetris-Chauvin, Emilio, "State History and Contemporary Conflict: Evidence from Sub-
 Saharan Africa," 2016.

Desmet, Klaus, Joseph Flavian Gomes, and Ignacio Ortu no Ortín, "The Geography of Linguis-
 tic Diversity and the Provision of Public Goods," Journal of Development Economics, March 2020,
 143.

Dippel, Christian, "Forced Coexistence and Economic Development: Evidence from Native
  American Reservations," Econometrica, November 2014, 82 (6), 2131­2165.

Ember, Carol R., Leadership in Science and Technology: A Reference Handbook, Vol. 2, Los Angeles:
 Sage,

Enke, Benjamin, "Kinship, Cooperation, and the Evolution of Moral Systems," Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 2019, p. forthcoming.

EuroBarometer Data, September 2020. gesis.org/en/eurobarometer-data-service/home.

Falk, Armin, Anke Becker, Thomas Dohmen, Benjamin Enke, David Huffman, and Uwe
  Sunde, "Global Evidence on Economic Preferences," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2018, 133
  (4), 1645­1692.

Fenske, James, "Does land abundance explain African institutions?," The Economic Journal, De-
  cember 2013, 123 (573), 1363­1390.

  , "Ecology, Trade and States in Pre-Colonial Africa," Journal of the European Economic Association,
  June 2014, 12 (3), 612­640.

  , "African Polygamy: Past and Present," Journal of Development Economics, 2015, 117, 58­73.
  Mimeo, Oxford University.

Fernández, Raquel, "Does Culture Matter?," in Matthew O. Jackson Jess Benhabib and Alberto
  Bisin, eds., Handbook of Social Economics, Vol. 1A, Elsevier, 2011, chapter 11, pp. 481­510.

Flory, Jeffrey, Kenneth L. Leonard, Magda Tsaneva, and Kathryn Vasilaky, "Changes in Com-
  petitiveness with Motherhood Stages and Culture: Evidence from Patrilocal and Matrilocal
  Society," February 2017.

Forde, Daryll, Ethnographic Survey of Africa, Routledge, 2017.

Gachter, Simon and Jonathan F. Schulz, "Intrinsic honesty and the prevalence of rule violations
 across societies," Nature, March 2016, 531.

Gangadharan, Lata, Asadul Islam, Chandarany Ouch, and Liang Choon Wang, "The Long-term
 effects of genocide on antisocial preferences," October 2018.

Gennaioli, Nicola and Ilia Rainer, "The Modern Impact of Precolonial Centralization in Africa,"
 Journal of Economic Growth, 2007, 12 (3), 185­234.

Giuliano, Paola and Nathan Nunn, "The Transmission of Democracy: From the Village to the
  Nation State," American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 2013, 103 (3), 86­92.

   and , "Ancestral Characteristics of Modern Populations," Economic History of Developing
  Regions, 2018, 33 (1), 1­17.

   and , "Understanding Cultural Persistence and Change," Review of Economic Studies, 2016
  Forthcoming.

                                                 39
Gneezy, Uri and Alex Imas, "Lab in the Field: Measuring Preferences in the Wild," in Abhijit
 Banerjee and Esther Duflo, eds., Handbook of Field Experiments, Vol. 1, Elsevier, North Holland,
 2017.

  , Kenneth L. Leonard, and John A. List, "Gender Differences in Competition: Evidence from a
  Matrilineal and a Patriarchal Society," Econometrica, 2009.

Gomes, Joseph Flavian, "The health costs of ethnic distance: evidence from Sub-Saharan Africa,"
 Journal of Economic Growth, 2020, 25, 95­226.

Gong, Binglin and Chun-Lei Yang, "Gender Differences in Risk Attitudes: Field Experiments
 on the Matrilineal Mosuo and the Patriarchal Yi," Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization,
 2012, 83 (1), 59­65.

  , Huibin Yan, and Chun-Lei Yang, "Gender differences in the dictator experiment: evidence
  from the matrilineal Mosuo and the patriarcha Yi," Experimental Economics, 2015, 18, 302­313.

Gordon, Raymond G., Ethnologue: Languages of the World, 16th Edition, SIL International, 2009.

Greenwald, Tony, Mahzarin Banaji, and Brian Nozek.

Hammarström, Harald, Robert Forkel, Martin Haspelmath, and Sebastian Bank, Glottolog 4.2.1,
 Jena: Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History, 2020.

Hanna, Rema and Shing-Yi Wang, "Dishonesty and Selection into Public Service: Evidence from
 India," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2017, 9 (3), 262­290.

Heldring, Leander, "The Origins of Violence in Rwanda," Review of Economic Studies, Forthcom-
 ing.

Hofstede, Geert, Culture's consequences: International differences in work-related values, Beverly Hills,
 CA: Sage, 1980.

  , "Replicating and Extending Cross-National Value Studies: Rwards and Pitfalls - An example
  from Middle East Studies," Academy of International Business Insights, 2013, 13 (2), 5­7.

Hruschka, Daniel, Charles Efferson, Ting Jiang, Ashlan Falleta-Cowden, Sveinn Sigurdsson,
 Rita McNamara, Madeline Sands, Shirajum Munira, Edward Slingerland, and Joseph Hen-
 rich, "Impartial Institutions, Pathogen Stress, and the Expanding Social Network," Human
 Nature, 2014.

ICF, "Demographic and Health Surveys," 2020.

Jackson, Joshua Conrad, Michele Gelfand, and Carol R. Ember, "A global analysis of cultural
  tightness in non-industrial societies," Proceedings of the Royal Society B, 2020.

Jorgensen, Joseph G., "Western Indians: Comparative environments, languages, and cultures of
  172 Western American Indian tribes," 1980. San Francisco: WH Freema.

  , "Codebook for Western Indians Data," World Cultures, 1999, 19 (2), 144­293.

  , "An empirical procedure for defining and sampling culture bearing units in continuous
  geographic areas," World Cultures, 1999, 10 (2), 139­143.

Karaja, Elira and Jared Rubin, "The Cultural Transmission of Trust: Evidence from a Lab in the
 Field on a Natural Experiment," June 2017.


                                                   40
Kirby, Kathryn R., Russell D. Gray, Simon J. Greenhill, Fiona M. Jordan, Stephanie Gomes-Ng,
  Hans-Jorg Bibiko, Damian E. Blasi, Carlos A. Botero, Claire Bowern, Carol R. Ember, Dan
  Leehr, Bobbi S. Low, Joe McCarter, William Divale, and Michael C. Gavin, "D-PLACE: A
  global database of cultural, linguistic and environmental diversity," Plos One, 2016.

Knudsen, Anne Sofie Beck, "Those Who Stayed: Selection and cultural change during the Age
 of Mass Migration," October 2019.

Korotayev, Andrey, Alexander Kazankov, Svetlana Borinskaya, Daria Khaltourina, and Dmitri
 Bondarenko, "Ethnographic Atlas XXX: Peoples of Siberia," Ethnology, 2004, 43, 83­92.

LatinoBarometer Data, September 2020. latinobarometro.org.

Lowes, Sara, "Kinship Structure, Stress, and the Gender Gap in Competition," April 2018.

  , "Matrilineal Kinship and Spousal Cooperation: Evidence from the Matrilineal Belt," 2018.
  Mimeo.

  , "Kinship Structure and Women: Evidence from Economics," Daedalus, 2020.

   and Eduardo Montero, "Concessions, Violence, and Indirect Rule: Evidence from the Congo
  Free State," 2020.

  , Nathan Nunn, James A. Robinson, and Jonathan L. Weigel, "The Evolution of Culture and
  Institutions: Evidence from the Kuba Kingdom," Econometrica, 2017, 85 (4), 1065­1091.

Mace, Ruth and Mark Pagel, "The Comparative Method in Anthropology," Current Anthropology,
 1994, 35 (549-557).

Mayshar, Joram, Omer Moav, and Luigi Pascali, "The Origin of the State: Land Productivity or
 Appropriability?," February 2020. Mimeo.

Michalopoulos, Stelios, "The Origins of Ethnolinguistic Diversity," American Economic Review,
 2012, 102 (4), 1508­1539.

  and Elias Papaioannou, "Precolonial Ethnic Institutions and Contemporary African Develop-
  ment," Econometrica, 2013, 81 (1), 113­152.

   and , "National Institutions and Subnational Development in Africa," Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 2014, 129 (1), 151­213.

   and , "The Long-Run Effects of the Scramble in Africa," American Economic Review, 2016, 106
  (7), 1802­1848.

  and Melanie Xue, "Folklore," January 2019.

  , Louis Putterman, and David Weil, "The Influence of Ancestral Lifeways on Individual Eco-
  nomic Outcomes in Sub-Saharan Africa," Journal of the European Economic Association, August
  2019, 17 (4), 1186­1231.

Moscona, Jacob, Nathan Nunn, and James A. Robinson, "Keeping it in the family: Lineage
 organization and the scope of trust in Sub-Saharan Africa," American Economic Review: Papers
 and Proceedings, 2017, 107 (5), 565­571.

  ,   , and James A. Robinson, "Social Structure and Conflict: Evidence from Sub-Saharan
  Africa," Econometrica, 2020, 88 (5).


                                               41
Murdock, George P. and Douglas R. White, "Standard Cross-Cultural Sample: online edition,"
 July 2006. UC Irvine Working Paper.

Murdock, George Peter, "World Ethnographic Sample," Ethnology, 1957, 59 (4), 664­687.

  , Africa: Its Peoples and Their Cultural History, New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1959.

  , Ethnographic Atlas, Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1967.

  and Douglas R. White, "Standard Cross-Cultural Sample," Ethnology, 1969, 8 (4), 329­369.

newspapers.com, September 2020. newspapers.com.

Norenzayan, Ara, Azim F. Shariff, Will M. Gervais, Aiyana K. Willard, Rita A. McNamara,
 Edward Slingerland, and Joseph Henrich, "The Cultural Evolution of Prosocial Religions,"
 Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 2016, 39, 1­65.

Nosek, B. A., F. L. Smyth, J. J. Hansen, T. Devos, N. M. Linder, K. A. Ratliff (Ranganath),
 C. T. Smith, K. R. Olson, D. Chugh, A. G. Greenwald, and M. R. Banaji, "Pervasiveness and
 correlates of implicit attitudes and stereotypes," European Review of Social Psychology, 2007, 18,
 36­88.

Nunn, Nathan, "The Long-Term Effects of Africa's Slave Trades," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 2008, 123 (1), 139­176.

   and Leonard Wantchekon, "The Slave Trade and the Origins of Mistrust in Africa," American
  Economic Review, 2011, 101 (7), 3221­3252.

Obikili, Nonso, "The trans-Atlantic slave trade and local political fragmentation in Africa," The
 Economic History Review, November 2016, 69 (4), 1157­1177.

Ottinger, Sebastian and Max Winkler, "Political Threat and Propaganda: Evidence from the U.S.
  South," July 2020.

Pew Research Center, September 2020. pewresearch.org.

Ramos-Toro, Diego, "Social Exclusion and Social Preferences: Evidence from Colombia's Leper
  Colony," October 2019.

Rijpma, Auke and Sarah G. Carmichael, "Testing Todd and Matching Murdock: Global Data on
  Historical Family Characteristics," Economic History of Developing Regions, 2016, 31 (1), 10­46.

Rustagi, Devesh, "Historical Self-Governance and Norms of Cooperation," 2020.

Schulz, Jonathan, "The Churches' Bans on Consanguineous Marriages, Kin Networks and
  Democracy," 2017. Mimeo, Yale University.

Schulz, Jonathan F., Duman Bahrami-Rad, Jonathan P. Beauchamp, and Joseph Henrich, "The
  Church, intensive kinship, and global psychological variation," Science, 2019, 707.

Slingerland, Edward and Brenton Sullivan, "Durkheim with Data: The Database of Religious
  History," Journal of the American Academy of Religion, 2017, 85 (2), 312­347.

  , Quentin D. Atkinson, Carol R. Ember, Oliver Sheehan, Michael Muthukrishna, Joseph Bul-
  bulia, and Russel D. Gray, "Coding culture: challenges and recommendations for comparative
  cultural databases," Evolutionary Human Sciences, 2020, 2 (29).


                                                42
Teso, Edoardo, "The Long-Term Effect of Demographic Shocks on the Evolution of Gender Roles:
  Evidence from the Transatlantic Slave Trade," Journal of the European Economic Association, 2019,
  p. forthcoming.

Todd, Emmanuel, The Explanation of Ideology: Family Structures and Social Systems, Oxford: Black-
  well Publishers, 1985.

Turchin, Peter, Harvey Whitehouse, Pieter Francois, Daniel Hoyer, Abel Alves, John Baines,
  David Baker, Marta Bartkowiak, Jennifer Bates, James Bennett, Julye Bidmead, Peter Bol,
  Alessandro Ceccarelli, Kostis Christakis, David Christian, Alan Covey, Franco De Angelis,
  Timothy K. Earle, Neil R. Edwards, Gary Feinman, Stephanie Grohmann, Philip B. Holden,
  Arni Juliusson, Andrey Korotayev, Nikolay Kradin, Axel Kristinsson, Jennifer Larson, Oren
  Litwin, Victor Mair, Joseph G. Manning, Patrick Manning, Arkadiusz Marciniak, Gregory
  McMahon, John Miksic, Juan Carlos Moreno Garcia, Ian Morris, Ruth Mostern, Daniel
  Mullins, Oluwole Oyebamiji, Peter Peregrine, Cameron Petrie, Johannes Preiser-Kapeller,
  Peter Rudiak-Gould, Paula Sabloff, Patrick Savage, Charles Spencer, Miriam Stark, Barend
  ter Haar, Stefan Thurner, Vesna Wallace, Nina Witoszek, and Liye Xie, "An Introduction to
  Seshat: Global History Databank," Journal of Cognitive Historiography, Forthcoming.

Valencia Caicedo, Felipe, "The Mission: Human Capital Transmission, Economic Persistence,
  and Culture in South America," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2019, 134 (1), 507­556.

   and Hans-Joachim Voth, "Christ's Shadow: Non-Cognitive Skills and Prosocial Behavior
  Amongst the Guarani," October 2018.

Vansina, Jan, Introduction a l'Ethnographie du Congo, Centre de Recherche et d'Information Socio-
  Politiques, 1966.

Walker, Sarah, "Historical Legacies in Savings: Evidence from Romania," Journal of Comparative
 Economics, 2020, 48 (1), 76­99.

Watts, Joseph, Oliver Sheehan, Simon J. Greenhil, Stephanie Gomes-Ng, Quentin D. Atkinson,
 Joseph Bulbulia, and Russell D. Gray, "Pulotu: Database of Austronesian Supernatural Beliefs
 and Practices," Plos One, 2015.

Whitehouse, Harvey, Pieter Francois, Patrick E. Savage, Thomas E. Currie, Kevin C. Feeney, En-
 rico Cioni, Rosalind Purcell, Robert M. Ross, Jennifer Larson, John Baines, Barend ter Haar,
 Alan Covey, , and Peter Turchin, "Complex Societies Precede Moralizing Gods throughout
 World History," Nature, 2019, 568 (7751), 226­229.

World Values Survey Data, September 2020. worldvaluessurvey.org.

Xu, Kaiyuan, Brian A. Nosek, Anthony G. Greenwald, Kate A. Ratliff, Yoav Bar-Anan,
  Emily Umansky, and Mahzarin R. Banaji, "Project Implicit Demo Website Datasets,"
  https://osf.io/y9hiq/ March 2020.




                                                43
