                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          THE MICRO ANATOMY OF MACRO CONSUMPTION ADJUSTMENTS

                                         Rafael Guntin
                                        Pablo Ottonello
                                          Diego Perez

                                      Working Paper 27917
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27917


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2020




We thank Mark Aguiar, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Loukas Karabarbounis, Brent Neiman, Luigi
Pistaferri, and the participants of various seminars and conferences for useful comments and
suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Rafael Guntin, Pablo Ottonello, and Diego Perez. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Micro Anatomy of Macro Consumption Adjustments
Rafael Guntin, Pablo Ottonello, and Diego Perez
NBER Working Paper No. 27917
October 2020
JEL No. E21,E60,F41,F44

                                         ABSTRACT

We study crises characterized by large adjustments of aggregate consumption through their
microlevel patterns. We show that leading theories designed to explain aggregate consumption
dynamics differ markedly in their cross-sectional predictions. While theories based on financial
frictions predict that rich households with liquid assets should be able to smooth consumption
during bad times, neoclassical theories predict that these agents would optimally adjust their
consumption if crises severely affect their permanent income. Using microlevel data on several
episodes of large aggregate-consumption adjustment, we document that rich households
significantly adjust consumption relative to their income, consistent with the permanent-income
hypothesis of consumption during crises. We discuss our findings' implications for the
effectiveness of stabilization policies that target consumption during crises.

Rafael Guntin                                  Diego Perez
New York University                            Department of Economics
rg3128@nyu.edu                                 New York University
                                               19 West 4th Street
Pablo Ottonello                                New York, NY 10012
Department of Economics                        and NBER
University of Michigan                         diego.perez@nyu.edu
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109 and
NBER
ottonellopablo@gmail.com
1. Introduction
The main crises in macroeconomic history tend to be characterized by large adjustments of
aggregate consumption. Salient examples of these, depicted in Figure 1, include the recent
Euro crisis, emerging-markets sudden stops, and the Great Depression. These episodes
attracted significant attention from macroeconomists because of the lack of consumption
smoothing relative to income, in apparent contrast to the predictions of canonical business-
cycle theories.
    Two main hypotheses have been proposed to date to explain the aggregate-consumption
dynamics observed during these crises. One is a neoclassical view, which links consumption
dynamics to changes in permanent income. This view argues that these crises involve a large
contraction of households' permanent income, which leads to a sharp contraction of desired
levels of consumption (Aguiar and Gopinath, 2007; Barro, 2006). The other view hinges
on financial frictions, and argues that the tightening of credit market conditions prevents
consumption smoothing during crises. For instance, theories based on collateral constraints
argue that even transitory negative income shocks, when followed by a tightening of financial
frictions, preclude households' consumption smoothing (see, for example, Mendoza, 2010;
Eggertsson and Krugman, 2012). Distinguishing between these views plays a central role in
policy design: Though stabilization policies can be effective in the financial-frictions view of
crises, their role is more limited when aggregate consumption dynamics is primarily driven
by permanent income.
    In this paper, we reassess this central debate in macroeconomics by studying the mi-
crolevel anatomy of large consumption adjustments. The central idea of the paper is that
the two main classes of theories that explain aggregate consumption dynamics differ sub-
stantially in their microlevel cross-sectional predictions. On one hand, theories based on
financial frictions predict that rich households with liquid assets should be able to smooth
consumption, and experience a milder consumption adjustment during crises than would
poor households. On the other hand, theories based on large and persistent fluctuations of
income predict that rich households could experience large consumption adjustments during

                                               2
       Figure 1: Selected Episodes of Aggregate Consumption Adjustment During Crises

            (A) Euro Crisis              (B) Emerging-Market Crises                   (C) Great Depression
 102

 100                                   100                                    100

  98
                                        99                                     95
  96

                                        98
  94                                                                           90


  92                                    97
                                                                               85
  90
                                        96
  88                                                                           80


  86                                    95

  2008       2010    2012     2014    t=0 (Peak)        t=1             t=2    1929         1931       1933




Notes : This figure shows the dynamics of real aggregate private consumption and real GDP for selected
crises. Panel (A) shows the average of Greece, Italy, Ireland, Portugal, and Spain for the Euro crisis that
started in 2008. Data source: WDI. Panel (B) shows the average of a set of 24 emerging market recession
episodes since the 1980s that occurred during episodes of "systemic sudden stop," identified in Calvo and
Ottonello (2016). Data source: WDI. Panel (c) shows the average of 16 Great Depression episodes starting
in 1929, identified in Barro (2006). Data source: Barro and Ursua (2008). In all episodes, consumption and
income are set to 100 at the peak before the recession.



crises, potentially similar to those of poor households. Using household microlevel data that
cover several episodes of large consumption adjustment, we find that, consistent with the
permanent-income view, households with high income and liquid assets adjust their con-
sumption severely. This lack of consumption smoothing is ubiquitous across all types of
households, which indicates that it would be hard to understand the dynamics of aggregate
consumption in the absence of permanent income shocks during these episodes.
        We begin by constructing a tractable heterogeneous-agent model of optimal consumption
under income fluctuations in a small open economy. Households can borrow from the rest
of the world using non-state-contingent bonds and face borrowing constraints. In addition,
households face idiosyncratic income risk, which gives rise to heterogeneity that can be
linked to the microdata. We then conduct two crisis experiments in this economy that
capture the two main views on aggregate-consumption adjustments. The first experiment
captures the permanent-income view of crises and consists of a permanent contraction in the


                                                    3
expected path of aggregate income. The second experiment captures the financial-frictions
view of crises and consists of a transitory contraction in aggregate income accompanied by
a tightening of borrowing constraints.
    We show that these two views of crises differ sharply in their cross-sectional predictions.
We first illustrate this with a particular case that can be solved analytically, and charac-
terize the consumption responses of all households to a contractionary aggregate income
shock. In the permanent-income-view experiment the consumption responses of all house-
holds have a unitary consumption-income elasticity. Since the aggregate shock is permanent,
all households suffer a drop in their permanent income and adjust their consumption accord-
ingly. This behavior stands in contrast to the consumption response of households in the
financial-frictions-view experiment. In this case, consumption-income elasticities differ across
households. Income-rich households display low elasticities that depend on the persistence of
the aggregate shock. Income-poor households are more likely to be borrowing-constrained,
and their consumption elasticities are determined by the tightening of the borrowing con-
straint during the crisis. Therefore, the behavior of income-rich households in response to
an aggregate income shock differs across the two types of theories.
    Motivated by the different predictions of the two views of aggregate consumption ad-
justments, we use microlevel expenditure and income data to document the cross-sectional
patterns of consumption adjustment during these episodes. We focus on five episodes of
large aggregate consumption adjustment over the last decades with available microlevel data
on expenditure and income. The first two episodes are from the recent Euro crisis, a widely
studied crisis in the international macro literature over the last decade. We focus on Italy
and Spain, which were two countries at the epicenter that have available microlevel data on
households' expenditure, income and assets. The other three episodes are from emerging-
markets sudden stops. One corresponds to the Tequila crisis in Mexico, and the other two
are the 2008-09 crises in Mexico and Peru, in the context of the global financial crisis.
These episodes are also widely studied events in the sudden-stop literature and have avail-
able microlevel data. For each of these five crisis episodes, we measure consumption-income
elasticities, from the peak to the trough of the crisis, for households with different levels


                                               4
of income. All data sets contain disaggregated expenditure information, which allows us to
measure nondurable consumption, and households characteristics, which allow us to follow
the standard practice in the consumption literature and residualize expenditure and income
from observable characteristics.
    Our main empirical result is the large consumption adjustment for top-income house-
holds. In all episodes, top-income households (e.g., top 10% or 5%) exhibit a consumption-
income elasticity similar to or larger than the average consumption-income elasticity in the
economy and close to 1. These large elasticities of high-income households are also observed
within households with high levels of liquid assets and are ubiquitous: They are observed in
young, middle-aged, and old households; households with different levels of education; house-
holds that are non-business owners and those that are; households engaged in all economic
activities; and households in different geographic regions of the countries under analysis.
Overall, our results indicate no consumption smoothing-type behavior for any household
type, making it challenging to explain the microlevel household behavior during episodes of
macro consumption adjustment based on tightening of credit conditions.
    We then perform a quantitative analysis of the crisis experiments calibrated to the
Italian economy. To facilitate the comparison between the two views, we perform the ex-
periments as two different types of aggregate shocks that hit an economy with the same
microlevel structure. The permanent-income-view experiment consists of a contraction on
aggregate income that is expected to be of a permanent nature, with borrowing constraints
unaffected. The financial-frictions-view experiment consists of a contractionary shock to ag-
gregate income that is expected to be transitory but borrowing constraints are tightened as
a consequence of the shock. In both cases, we parametrize the aggregate shocks to match
the observed aggregate contraction in income and the average consumption-income elasticity
in the episode. Therefore, both experiments are deliberately designed to explain the macro
data.
    Our main quantitative exercise consists of comparing the consumption-income elastici-
ties along the income distribution for the two views of crises, with that observed in the data.
In the Italian data, the crisis is characterized by a flat pattern of consumption adjustments,


                                              5
with consumption-income elasticities close to one for all income deciles. These data patterns
are in sharp contrast to model predictions under the financial-friction-view experiment in
which there is a decaying pattern of elasticities along the income distribution, with richer
households exhibiting more consumption smoothing. However, the data patterns are closely
aligned with predictions under the permanent-income-view experiment in which all house-
holds adjust their desired level of consumption in response to changes in their permanent
income.
    We conduct several extensions of our baseline model which shows that the comparison
between crisis views and the data is robust to key features of the environment. First, we
show that our results are robust to accounting for the observed negative revaluation of liquid
assets that happened during the crisis, which is stronger for income-rich households and
could in principle explain the large consumption adjustment of those households. Consistent
with this result, in the data, we find that households with high and low wealth to income
ratios exhibit similar consumption-income elasticities during crises. Second, we show that
permanent-income view can also explain the patterns observed in emerging markets once we
extend the model with non-homotheticities and account for the larger share of households
close to subsistence levels of consumption observed in emerging economies, relative to the
developed markets. We conclude that the permanent-income view of crises can go a long
way in explaining both the macro- and micro-level patterns of consumption adjustment.
    We argue that discerning between the views of macro adjustments has relevant impli-
cations for policy. We illustrate this by analyzing the effects of stabilization policies under
the different crisis experiments. We show that the effects of these policies is significantly
smaller under the permanent-income view of crises, than under the financial-frictions view.
Our findings suggest the challenge that stabilization policies can face for dealing with crises
that involve macro-consumption adjustments.
    Finally, it is worth stressing that the findings of our paper do not imply that financial
frictions are not relevant for crisis dynamics. Rather, they suggest that their importance
can primarily come through how they persistently affect income, since the dynamics of
consumption at the macro level can be largely understood through the permanent-income


                                              6
theory.


Related Literature Our paper contributes to three strands of the literature. First, to
the literature that studies episodes of large aggregate consumption adjustments, which in-
cludes consumption disasters (Barro, 2006; Barro and Ursua, 2008); sudden stop episodes
(Calvo, 1998, 2005); financial crises (Reinhart and Rogoff, 2009); and economic depressions
(Kehoe and Prescott, 2007). Recent work has studied the heterogeneous impacts of crises
on households' consumption (see, for example, Petev, Pistaferri and Saporta, 2012; Chetty,
Friedman, Hendren, Stepner et al., 2020, for the Great Recession and current Covid cri-
sis, respectively). We contribute to this literature by analyzing how the micro-anatomy of
various episodes of aggregate consumption adjustment can shed light on the theories that
explain aggregate dynamics.
      Second, our paper contributes the literature on international business cycles and capital
flows (e.g., Backus, Kehoe and Kydland, 1992; Gourinchas and Rey, 2007). A central ques-
tion in this area is whether international financial integration and capital flows help smooth
consumption (e.g., Aguiar and Gopinath, 2007) or exacerbate fluctuations (e.g., Neumeyer
and Perri, 2005; Mendoza, 2010; Garc´
                                    ia-Cicco, Pancrazi and Uribe, 2010). We contribute to
this literature by reassessing this debate using a heterogeneous-agents model combined with
microlevel data, and showing that excess sensitivity of consumption can be largely under-
stood through changes in permanent income. In this sense, our paper is methodologically
closer to studies in international macroeconomics that analyze micro-aspects of business cy-
cles related to firm dynamics and misallocation, such as Gopinath and Neiman (2014) and
                  ¨
Gopinath, Kalemli-Ozcan, Karabarbounis and Villegas-Sanchez (2017).1
      Finally, our paper is also related to the large body of literature that studies house-
holds' heterogeneity. We build on the micro-level measurement used in this literature (see,
for example, Blundell, Pistaferri and Preston 2008; Aguiar, Bils and Boar 2020, and the
work surveyed in Jappelli and Pistaferri 2017) as well as on macro models that incorporate
incomplete markets and households' heterogeneity (see, for example, Kaplan and Violante,
  1
   Other related papers include Gourinchas, Philippon and Vayanos (2017) and Chodorow-Reich, Karabar-
bounis and Kekre (2019), who study the Greek economic depression.

                                                 7
2014; Werning, 2015; Guerrieri and Lorenzoni, 2017).2 Methodologically, our work is related
to the papers that use microlevel moments to inform macro theories. Examples include the
early work of Bils and Klenow (2004), Aguiar and Hurst (2007), the work surveyed in Naka-
mura and Steinsson (2018), and more recently, Straub (2018) and Berger, Bocola and Dovis
(2019) in the context of consumption dynamics. We identify a set of moments, namely, the
distribution of consumption responses, which can help distinguish between broad classes of
theories of adjustments during crises.3
     The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the theory and charac-
terizes the consumption responses of households in response to an aggregate shock. Section
3 presents the empirical analysis. Section 4 performs a quantitative analysis of the base-
line model and other model extensions. Section 5 analyzes the macroeconomic effects of
stabilization policies. Section 6 concludes.



2. Theoretical Framework
In this section we lay out a model of large consumption adjustments with heterogeneous
agents that serves as a guide to our empirical analysis.


2.1. Environment

We model a small open economy composed of a continuum of heterogeneous households.
Each household has preferences defined over an infinite stream of consumption,

                                                  
                                             E0          t u(cit ),                                      (1)
                                                  t=0

   2
     For a recent survey of this literature see Kaplan and Violante (2018). Two other related bodies of work
are those that study consumption inequality (see, for example, Attanasio, Battistin and Ichimura, 2004;
Krueger and Perri, 2006; Aguiar and Bils, 2015; Quadrini and R´   ios-Rull, 2015, and references therein) and
consumption during the life cycle (see, for example, Huggett, 1996; Carroll, 1997; Gourinchas and Parker,
2002).
   3
     In this sense, our approach is related to the early work of Cochrane (1994), Campbell and Deaton
(1989) and Blundell and Preston (1998) who use consumption data to inform about the permanent-income
hypothesis.




                                                        8
where u(·) is increasing and concave, cit denotes consumption of household i in period t, and
  (0, 1) is the subjective discount factor. Each period, households receive an endowment
of tradable goods yit , given by


                                                yit = µit Yt ,                                            (2)


where µit is the idiosyncratic component of endowment and Yt is the aggregate endowment.
We assume that µit is a stochastic process and, for the moment, we do not impose any
structure to this process. We assume that Yt follows a deterministic path, and study the
effects of unexpected aggregate shocks.4
     Asset markets are incomplete, and households can save and borrow in a riskless bond
that pays 1 + r in the following period, where r is the international interest rate. The
household's budget constraint is given by


                                      cit = yit + ait+1 - (1 + r)ait ,                                    (3)


where ait+1 are the household's i bond purchases in period t that pay in period t + 1. Finally,
we assume that households face the following borrowing constraint:


                                            ait+1  -f (Yt ),                                              (4)


where  > 0, and f (Yt )  0 is a non-decreasing function. This general functional form
associated to the borrowing constraint nests various cases commonly used in the literature.
The case of f (Yt ) = 1 corresponds to a fixed debt limit typically used in Bewley models.
The case of f (Yt ) strictly increasing captures a financial amplification mechanism by which
a recession tightens access to credit due to a fall in asset prices in general equilibrium.
This mechanism has been widely studied in the macro-finance literature (see, for example,
Kiyotaki and Moore, 1997; Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist, 1999; Mendoza, 2010).
    4
      As we show later, our results are unaffected if we study an economy with aggregate risk in which Yt also
follows a stochastic process.



                                                      9
    The household's problem is to choose state-contingent plans {cit , ait+1 }t=0 to maximize

(1) subject to the budget constraint (3), the borrowing constraint (4), and the laws of motion
that characterize the income stochastic process.
    This model setup is well-suited to conduct crisis experiments that capture two central
views of macro consumption adjustments. On the one hand, by varying only aggregate
income we can capture theories that have attributed the large response of aggregate con-
sumption during crises to changes in permanent income (as in, for example, Barro, 2006;
Aguiar and Gopinath, 2007). On the other hand, by tightening borrowing constraints to-
gether with income, we can capture the view that attributes macro consumption adjustments
to debt-deflation theories through which recessions reduce the value of collateral and tighten
access to borrowing (as in, for example, Mendoza, 2002, 2010). We define these two crisis
experiments in the context of our model below, and study the cross-sectional implications
of these two views.


2.2. Consumption Dynamics During Output Contractions: An Analytical Case

To obtain an analytical characterization of individual consumption responses, in this section
we make the following parametric assumptions.

Assumption 1a. The period utility is given by u(c) = ac - bc2 , where a, b > 0.

Assumption 1b.  (1 + r) = 1.

    The main results do not rely on these assumptions. In Section 4, we relax them and
show that the quantitative results are aligned with the analytical characterization of this
section. Given these assumptions, the Euler equation simplifies to


                                    cit = Et [cit+1 ] - it ,


where it is the Lagrange multiplier associated to the borrowing constraint (4). Solving for




                                              10
consumption iterating forward we obtain

                                                                                    
                                     r                yit+s           r                    it+s
          cit =      rait         +     Et                   -           Et                                  .   (5)
                                    1+r       s=0
                                                    (1 + r)s         1+r           s=0
                                                                                         (1 + r)s
                    flow from
                  liquid assets
                                    flow from permanent income   value of binging constraint in the future


    The optimal unrestricted consumption includes a flow from initial assets (first term)
and a flow from the net present value of the permanent income (second term). The presence
of the borrowing constraint may preclude attaining this level of consumption if there is a
positive probability of a binding constraint in the future (third term).


Permanent-income view We first study a permanent aggregate income shock that does
not affect the borrowing constraint, which we label the permanent income view of crises
(PI view ). In this experiment, all households suffer a proportional drop in their perma-
nent income. Hence, the optimal response for all households is to adjust consumption by
approximately the same proportion as the drop in income.
    We formalize this result in the following proposition that characterizes the consumption
behavior of all households when the interest rate is sufficiently small. This condition on
the interest rate allows for an analytical characterization by ensuring that the households'
income that comes from liquid assets is sufficiently small. Later, in Section 4 we relax this
assumption and find that the quantitative results are in line with the characterization of this
                                                                                                cit yit
particular case. Define the consumption-income elasticity as cy  limr0                          yit cit
                                                                                                        .

Proposition 1. Suppose that  is sufficiently large, f (Yt ) = 1 and that aggregate income is
at its steady-state level Yss . Assume that in period t the economy experiences an unexpected
shock to aggregate income that is expected to be permanent, i.e., Yt+h = Yt < Yss . The
optimal consumption response to this aggregate income shock has cy = 1, for all µit .

Proof. See Appendix A

    The proposition states that there are unitary consumption-income elasticities in response
to a permanent aggregate income shock, for all households. The condition of the interest rate


                                                         11
being sufficiently small ensures that the households' income that comes from liquid assets
is sufficiently small. We come back to analyze the role of income from liquid assets in the
Sections 3 and 4.


Financial-frictions view We then study a mean-reverting aggregate income shock that
also tightens the borrowing constraints, which we label the financial-frictions view of crises
(FF-view). In this case, the consumption response of households to a mean-reverting in-
come shock is heterogeneous. While unconstrained households are able to smooth their
consumption adjustment in response to the income shock, the households that are borrowing-
constrained have to adjust their consumption as their credit access is tightened.
    We formalize this result in the following proposition. Denote the elasticity of the bor-
                                                        Y
rowing constraint to aggregate income as f Y  fY (Y ) f ( Y)
                                                             . Additionally, define constrained
households as those with ait+1 = -f (Yt ), and permanently unconstrained households as
those with it+s = 0, for all s  0 in equation (5).

Proposition 2. Suppose that aggregate income is at its steady-state level Yss . Assume
that in period t the economy experiences a shock to aggregate income that is expected to be
mean-reverting, i.e., Yt+h = Yt + (1 - )Yss , with 0 <  < 1.

  1. The consumption-income elasticity of a constrained household i is increasing in the
     income elasticity of the borrowing constraint, i.e., cy = gi (f Y ), with gi > 0. Addi-
     tionally, when evaluated at initial debt at the borrowing constraint, cy  1.

  2. The consumption-income elasticity of permanently unconstrained households has cy <
     1, decreasing in  and cy  0 when   0.

  3. If µit is mean-reverting, bounded below and unbounded above, households with high
     enough µit are permanently unconstrained.

Proof. See Appendix A

    This proposition states that the consumption-income elasticity of constrained house-
holds is determined by the elasticity of the borrowing constraint to aggregate income. If

                                              12
access to credit tightens during a recession ­in the model this would correspond to a high
f Y ­ constrained households need to adjust their consumption by more than their drop
in income. In contrast, the consumption-income elasticity of unconstrained households is
smaller, and close to zero if the aggregate shock is transitory. The proposition also argues
that, under the additional assumption of µit being mean-reverting, bounded below and un-
bounded above, households with high enough idiosyncratic income are more likely to be
borrowing-constrained.
    The case a high f Y captures the key mechanism through which financial-frictions models
can account for episodes of large consumption adjustments. These theories endogenize how
these episodes have associated contractions in asset prices, which tighten access to credit
through a lower value of collateral (see, for example, Mendoza, 2010). The key difference
is that prior theories, by working under the representative-agent framework, were able to
account for aggregate consumption patterns with this mechanism. What we stress in our
heterogeneous-agents theory is that, if present, this mechanism is more likely to affect the
agents that are close to the borrowing constraint.


Distinguishing between the two views A corollary of this analysis is that the pre-
diction consumption responses across the distribution of households differ across theories,
particularly for the income-rich households. Under the PI view, the consumption-income
elasticity of the income-rich households is as large as the average elasticity, while under the
FF view, it is lower than the average elasticity.



3. Empirical Analysis
We now document households' micro-level patterns during episodes of large adjustments of
aggregate consumption. Section 3.1 describes the sample of episodes, data, and measurement
strategy. Section 3.2 describes our main empirical results. Section 3.3 presents additional
empirical analysis and discusses alternative interpretations of the results.




                                              13
3.1. Data Description

Sample of episodes and data sources Our empirical analysis includes five episodes of
large adjustment of aggregate consumption, two episodes from the Euro crisis, and three
episodes from emerging markets that have been identified in the literature of sudden stops.
       The European countries included in the analysis are Italy and Spain, which have been at
the epicenter of the Euro crisis. Panels (a) and (b) of Figure 2 depict the dynamics of output
and consumption during these two episodes, with similar large adjustments of consumption
and output. Both countries have rich microdata on households' expenditure and income,
along with households' asset positions. In the case of Italy, these data come from a single
consolidated survey (Survey on Household Income and Wealth ). In the case of Spain, they
come from two surveys collected by the National Statistical Institute and the Bank of Spain
(Encuesta de Prespuestos Familiares and Encuesta Financiera de las Familias ).
       The emerging economies included in the analysis are Mexico and Peru. These Latin
American economies feature three widely studied episodes in the literature of sudden stops:
the Mexican 1994 Tequila crisis and the 2008 recession in the context of the global financial
crisis which affected both Mexico and Peru. Figure 2 shows that in all episodes, aggregate
consumption exhibits sharp adjustments, tracking the dynamics of output.5 For Mexico, the
data come from the survey Encuesta Nacional de Ingresos y Gastos de los Hogares, and for
Peru, from the survey Encuesta Nacional de Hogares.
       Appendix B provides a detailed description of variables, frequency, and coverage of
the data. To further characterize the data in our empirical analysis, Appendix C follows
the method of Blundell et al. (2008) to provide estimates of partial consumption insurance
coefficients for the countries with panel data in our sample, Italy and Peru. For both countries
we obtain partial insurance coefficients for transitory shocks larger than those estimated for
the U.S. in Blundell et al. (2008) (0.05), with estimates of 0.30 for Italy and 0.20 for Peru.
In Italy, the partial insurance coefficient for permanent shocks is 0.66, which is close to that
   5
     In these crises, Mexico experienced recessions with contractions of output above 10 p.p. from peak to
trough relative to trend. Peru did not experience a contraction in output but a strong growth reversal. Before
the global financial crisis, output per capita was growing at annual rates of around 6%­7%, but during the
crisis growth reversed to 0%.


                                                     14
in the U.S. In Peru, this coefficient is larger, close to 0.78. Our estimates from Italy are
similar to those obtained by Jappelli and Pistaferri (2011) using the same dataset. Overall,
our results suggest that the countries in our sample exhibit less consumption insurance than
the U.S., which makes them interesting laboratories to study the role of financial frictions
potentially driving aggregate consumption crises.

Figure 2: Episodes Included in the Empirical Analysis: Macro-Consumption Adjustment
                                                                          Euro Crisis
                                          (a) Italy                                                        (b) Spain
                     .1




                                                                                           .05
                     .05




                                                                                           0
                     0




                                                                                           -.05




                               output
                               consumption
                     -.05




                               nondurable consumption
                                                                                           -.1




                     2005q3          2007q3     2009q3          2011q3       2013q3        2005q3      2007q3    2009q3       2011q3      2013q3


                                                                EMs Sudden Stops
           (a) Mexico '94                                                 (b) Mexico '08                                               (c) Peru '08
                                                                                                                     .04
                                                         .05
  0




                                                                                                                     .02
                                                         0




                                                                                                                     0
  -.05




                                                                                                                     -.02
                                                         -.05
  -.1




                                                                                                                     -.04




  1994q2    1994q4          1995q2            1995q4     2007q4          2008q2       2008q4      2009q2    2009q4   2007q4      2008q2      2008q4   2009q2   2009q4



Notes : All variables are in per capita terms and log difference with respect to trend. Output refers to
GDP, Consumption refers to private consumption expenditure; non durable consumption includes private
consumption expenditure on nondurable goods and services. Further details in Appendix B. Data sources:
OECD, FRED, Bank of Italy, INE Spain, INEGI Mexico, and INEI Peru.




Measurement We are interested in analyzing the consumption-income elasticity for house-
holds with different incomes (as in our theoretical framework in Section 2). For this, we follow
standard practices in the consumption literature (e.g., Blundell et al., 2008) and residual-
ize the measures of consumption and income by projecting these variables onto households'
observable characteristics: number of family members, number of children in the household,

                                                                                      15
gender, age, education of the household head, and geographic dummies (for details, see
Appendix B.2). We also include time trends to detrend the series. Our baseline measure
focuses on monetary nondurable consumption and monetary nonfinancial after-tax income;
we analyze other categories of consumption and income in the robustness analysis.
       Our theoretical results in Section 2, show that a useful statistic to distinguish between
different theories of aggregate consumption adjustments is the consumption-income elastic-
ity for different households in response to the aggregate shock. In the data, consumption
and income move in response to aggregate and idiosyncratic shocks. To isolate the move-
ments in response to the aggregate shock, we compute consumption-income elasticities by
averaging consumption and income for households in different income groups. To the ex-
tent that the idiosyncratic component of these variables can be averaged out in each group,
this statistic approximates the theoretical object of interest. More specifically, we measure
                                                                                          h log cj, +h
consumption-income elasticities of households in income group j as ^j
                                                                    cy =                  h log y j, +h
                                                                                                        ,   where
         1                                1
cj,t    nj,t   iIj,t   ci,t and y j,t    nj,t   iIj,t   yi,t denote, respectively, the average (residualized)
consumption and income of households in income group j in period t; Ij,t is the set of house-
holds in income group j ; nj,t is the number of households in this group;  is the peak of
output during the episode; and h is the time interval of the output peak and trough in the
episode.6
       In Appendices D and E we also analyze other statistics, including the marginal propen-
sity to consume and elasticities computed with fixed income groups across time­for countries
with available panel data. As we show in those sections, we focus on consumption-income
elasticities based on averages across income groups because it is a particularly useful statistic
to distinguish between macro theories of consumption.
   6
    For each of the five episodes, we measure consumption-income elasticity in the window from the peak
to trough of the aggregate detrended income constructed from survey data. The resulting dates are 2006
to 2014 for the Italian Euro Crisis; 2008 to 2013 for the Spanish Euro crisis; 1994 to 1996 for the Mexican
Tequila crisis; 2006 to 2010 for the Mexican GFC; and 2007 to 2010 for the Peruvian GFC. These dates are
also aligned with the evolution of aggregate output from national accounts, with the caveat that the survey
from Mexico is available biennially.




                                                           16
3.2. Consumption Adjustment Across the Income Distribution

Panel (a) of Table 1 provides summary statistics of the adjustments in income, consump-
tion, and the consumption-income elasticity, comparing the average across all income deciles
with those of the top income decile. In all crisis episodes, income and consumption ex-
hibits an average negative adjustment. The average elasticity across episodes ranges from
0.73 to 1.19, with a mean across episodes of 0.91. This implies large adjustments of con-
sumption relative to income in these episodes, consistent with the behavior reported in the
macro data. The main takeaway from this table is that income-rich households exhibit high
consumption-income elasticities, which are close to the average consumption-income elastic-
ity across all households. These range from 0.78 to 1.15, with a mean across episodes of
0.98. Therefore, income-rich households exhibit little consumption smoothing­a finding that
appears to challenge the FF view of crises presented in Section 2, in which the consumption
income-elasticity of income-rich households is lower than the average elasticity. However,
the reported adjustment of income-rich households is consistent with the PI view of crises,
in which their consumption-income elasticity is the same as the average.




                                            17
    Table 1: Consumption-Income Elasticities: Average and Top-Income Households
                                     Euro Crises                 Emerging-Market Crises
                                  Italy       Spain        Mexico `94   Mexico `08   Peru `08   Average
 All Households
                    Average       -0.15       -0.15          -0.38        -0.16        -0.09     -0.19
    log Y
                    Top-Income    -0.08       -0.12          -0.42        -0.19        -0.13     -0.19
                    Average       -0.18       -0.15          -0.29        -0.11        -0.08     -0.16
    log C
                    Top-Income    -0.08       -0.14          -0.33        -0.17        -0.14     -0.17
                    Average       1.19        0.97            0.77         0.73        0.90      0.91
   Elasticity
                    Top-Income    1.00        1.15            0.78         0.89        1.10      0.98

 Households with Liquid Assets
                    Average       -0.11       -0.13          -0.40        -0.12        -0.30     -0.21
    log Y
                    Top-Income    -0.12       -0.11          -0.43        -0.18        -0.21     -0.21
                    Average       -0.13       -0.13          -0.33        -0.07        -0.20     -0.17
    log C
                    Top-Income    -0.12       -0.16          -0.35        -0.14        -0.19     -0.19
                    Average       1.15        1.00            0.83         0.65        0.68      0.86
   Elasticity
                    Top-Income    1.00        1.51            0.81         0.81        0.87      1.00

   N Observations                 7,060      21,802          13,138       27,105      21,170    90,275

Notes : Income (Y) is defined as monetary after-tax nonfinancial income. Consumption (C) is defined as
consumption of nondurable goods and services. Both variables are deflated by the CPI and residualized
from households' observable characteristics and time trends (see empirical model (8) in Appendix B for
details). Elasticities are calculated as the ratio of the log change in consumption to the log change in
income. Top-Income households are those in the highest decile of residualized income. Households with
liquid assets are those with liquid assets greater than a country-specific threshold. Further details in
Appendix B. Data sources: SHIW-BI Italy, EPF-INE Spain, ENIGH-INEGI Mexico, ENAHO-INEI Peru.


     Figure 3 complements this analysis by showing the consumption-income elasticity for
different income deciles during the different crisis episodes. Panel (a) shows that Italy and
Spain, during the Euro crisis, exhibit a flat pattern for consumption-income elasticity across
the income distribution: For all deciles, consumption-income elasticities are close to one.
This pattern of consumption-income elasticity is remarkably aligned with the prediction of
the PI-view, derived analytically in Proposition 1 and studied quantitatively in the next
section. Panel (b) shows the patterns of adjustments during emerging-market sudden stops.
In these cases, the consumption-income elasticity is increasing in the income level. In Section
4.3, we show that the differential pattern of emerging markets can be explained in the context
of the PI view of crises, if we extend the model to non-homothetic preferences and account for
the share of households that are close to subsistence levels of consumption in these economies.



                                                      18
             Figure 3: Consumption-Income Elasticities Across the Income Distribution

                                                 (a) Euro Crises
                           Italy                                                     Spain
   2




                                                               2
   1.5




                                                               1.5
   1




                                                               1
   .5




                                                               .5
   0




                                                               0
         1    2   3   4     5      6   7     8   9   10              1   2   3   4    5      6   7   8   9   10

                                           (b) Emerging-Market Crises
                          Mexico                                                     Peru
   2




                                                               2
   1.5




                                                               1.5
   1




                                                               1
   .5




                                                               .5
   0




                                                               0




         1    2   3   4     5      6   7     8   9   10              1   2   3   4    5      6   7   8   9   10


Notes : This figure shows the consumption-income elasticities for different deciles of residualized income on
the horizontal axis. Income is defined as monetary after-tax nonfinancial income. Consumption is defined
as consumption of nondurable goods and services. Income and consumption are deflated by the CPI and
residualized from households' observable characteristics and time trends (see empirical model (8) in
Appendix B for details). Dots correspond to observed elasticities, and the solid line is the locally weighted
smoothing of observed elasticities. Elasticities are calculated as the ratio of the log change in consumption
to the log change in income. Elasticities for Mexico are the simple average of its two episodes in the sample
(1994 and 2008). Further details in Appendix B. Data sources: SHIW-BI Italy, EPF-INE Spain,
ENIGH-INEGI Mexico, ENAHO-INEI Peru.


         Appendix Tables D.1 and D.2 show that the results presented so far are robust to sev-
eral variants in the baseline measurement of the variables of interest. Panel (a) of Table
D.1 extends the baseline measures of elasticities for households in the top 5% of the income
distribution. Panel (b) of Table D.1 reports the elasticities without residualizing consump-

                                                          19
tion and income (as described before, our baseline measurement residualizes consumption
and income from households' observable characteristics, following Blundell et al. (2008)).
Panel (b) of Table D.2 reports elasticities when we include all of the monetary components
of consumption and income (our baseline measure excludes durable consumption and finan-
cial income). Finally, Panel (c) of Table D.2 reports elasticities when all monetary and
nonmonetary components of consumption and income are included (our baseline excludes
nonmonetary components). In all of these variants we find results similar to those in the
baseline, with income-rich households exhibiting high consumption-income elasticities similar
to the average elasticity across income deciles.


3.3. Additional Empirical Results

Liquid assets The challenge our empirical results raise for the FF view of crises is that
income-rich households, who in principle could smooth consumption, seem to choose not
to do so. We further strengthen this point by analyzing the consumption adjustment of
households with substantial amounts of liquid assets. In the spirit of Kaplan, Violante
and Weidner (2014), we identify high-liquidity households as those with liquid assets that
exceed 2 weeks of their income. For details on the method used to identify high-liquidity
households in each country, see Appendix B. Panel (b) of Table 1 shows that income-rich
income households with liquid assets exhibit a consumption-income elasticity of one, and
close to average elasticity. This corroborates the claim that our results are not driven by the
behavior of the "wealthy hand-to-mouth."
    Another important point linked to asset holdings, is that if households have sufficiently
high levels of wealth, their consumption adjustment during crises could reflect changes in
the returns on wealth. Appendix Table D.3 shows that the elasticity of households with
low income-to-wealth ratios, whose primary source of income is arguably not the returns on
wealth, also exhibit elasticities close to one.


Consumption baskets So far our analysis has focused on aggregate measures of non-
durable consumption for all households. Motivated by the fact that households with dif-


                                                  20
ferent levels of income have different consumption baskets, we analyze consumption-income
elasticities for narrower and more comparable consumption baskets. In particular, Tables
D.4 and D.5 report the elasticities for durable and non-durable, luxury and non-luxury
and tradable and non-tradable goods. Appendix B.2 provides a definition of each of the con-
sumption categories. Although results indicate heterogeneous elasticities across consumption
categories­e.g., luxury goods have larger elasticities than non-luxury goods­overall we do not
find consistently different elasticities between income-rich households and average elasticity.
    Another dimension that heterogeneous consumption baskets introduce is the differential
price dynamics that these baskets may have during crises, as documented by Cravino and
Levchenko (2017). Table D.6 reports consumption-income elasticities using deflators specific
to each income decile, and shows results similar to the baseline with high consumption-
income elasticities for income-rich households.


Permanent heterogeneity Large consumption adjustments of the income-rich could
partly reflect unobserved differences in preferences. For example, if income-rich households
are less-risk averse than the average household, this could partly explain their large con-
sumption adjustments.
    We account for the role of permanent heterogeneity by analyzing the consumption re-
sponses during the crisis episodes of households that are more similar in their permanent
consumption-income elasticities. We focus in the case of Italy and Peru, which have avail-
able panel data and estimate household-specific consumption-income elasticities over the
entire samples. We then separate our sample of households into those with high and low
elasticities, and then compute the consumption-income elasticities during the crisis episodes
for the average and the top-income households. Table D.7 shows that within each group of
households, the elasticities of the top-income households are similar to the average. This sug-
gests that the main results persist even once we compare households with similar permanent
unobserved heterogeneity.




                                              21
Where are the smoothers? Given the lack of consumption smoothing for the top-income
households documented in previous subsections, we now ask more broadly whether there
exists any type of household in the data that exhibits the consumption-smoothing behavior
that a model with transitory aggregate shocks would predict. Tables 2 report consumption-
income elasticities for households with different levels of education, age, sector, geographic
location, and business ownership. We find high consumption-income elasticities for young,
middle-aged, and old households; for households with low and high levels of education; for
households that are non­business owners and for those that are; for households working in
all economic activities; and for households living in all geographic regions of the countries
we analyze. We conclude the empirical section by asking the question: If macro crises of
aggregate consumption adjustment are driven by transitory shocks, where are the households'
smoothers these models predict?




                                             22
Table 2: Where Are the Smoothers?
Consumption-Income Elasticities by Household Characteristics
                               Euro Crises                   Emerging-Market Crises
                            Italy        Spain         Mexico `94   Mexico `08   Peru `08    Average
 Age Group
    35                       1.22        0.79             0.71         0.70        1.05        0.87
   35 > and  50              1.30        0.96             0.82         0.76        0.93        0.96
   > 50                      0.96        1.19             0.77         0.69        0.69        0.87

 Education Level
   Low                       1.31        0.91             0.77         0.70        1.32        1.00
   High                      1.10        1.02             0.70         0.75        0.76        0.87

 Firm Ownership
   Yes                       1.49        1.74             0.69         0.96        1.32        1.24
   No                        1.13        0.93             0.79         0.59        0.83        0.86

 Home Ownership
   Yes                       1.41        1.05             0.80         0.70        0.87        0.97
   No                        0.92        0.80             0.65         0.76        0.80        0.79

 Geographic Location
   Large Population          1.43        0.87             0.82         0.78        0.81        0.94
   Low Population            0.95        1.10             0.68         0.59        0.98        0.86

 Sector
   Primary                   1.10        0.92             0.71         0.68        0.77        0.87
   Industry                  1.13        0.92             0.75         0.68        0.79        0.85
   Services                  1.19        1.03             0.80         0.75        0.97        0.99

   N Observations           7,060       21,802           13,138       27,105      21,170      90,275

Notes : This table shows consumption-income elasticities by age, education, ownership, geography, and
sector. Income is defined as monetary after-tax nonfinancial income. Consumption is defined as
consumption of nondurable goods and services. Both variables are deflated by the CPI and residualized
from households' observable characteristics and time trends (see empirical model (8) in Appendix B for
details). Elasticities are calculated as the ratio of the log change in consumption to the log change in
income. Age, education, and sector are for the household head. Categories are constructed such that they
are comparable across countries. Industry is composed of manufacturing and construction sectors. Further
details in Appendix B. Data sources: SHIW-BI Italy, EPF-INE Spain, ENIGH-INEGI Mexico,
ENAHO-INEI Peru.




4. Quantitative Analysis
So far, our comparison of two views of crises has been qualitative. In this section, we perform
a quantitative analysis of the model and contrast its predictions with observed data. We
show that the permanent income view of crises can account for the observed patterns of

                                                  23
consumption adjustment, and this is robust to various model extensions.


4.1. Quantitative Strategy

Our quantitative strategy proceeds in two steps. We first calibrate the steady state of the
model described in Section 2, to match key features of the micro data. Second, we introduce
aggregate shocks that capture the macro dynamics in each of the two views of crises. We
focus on unexpected aggregate shocks that hit the same economy in the steady state, which
facilitates comparison of two views of crises. In Appendix E, we show that similar results
are obtained if we analyze economies with aggregate risk. Our main calibration is for Italy,
which is the country in our sample with the richest micro data. In Section 4.3 we also
perform the quantitative analysis for an emerging economy.


Steady-state calibration A period is a year. For functional forms, we pick a CRRA,
period utility u(c) = c1- /(1 -  ), and an autoregresive idiosyncratic income in logs

                                                                     µ
                 ln µit = µ ln µit-1 + µ it ,        it   N   -             ,1 .
                                                                  2(1 + µ )

In the steady state, since there are no aggregate shocks, we normalize f (Yss ) = 1. Our
model then features six parameters, {, , r , , µ , µ }, whose values are detailed in Table
3. In the calibration, we fix the coefficient of relative risk aversion to  = 2 and the annual
risk-free rate to r = 0.01, which are standard values used in the literature. We estimate the
parameters that drive the idiosyncratic income process, µ and µ , using micro-level data
and obtaining values of µ = 0.94 and  = 0.18. We then calibrate the discount factor 
and the fixed borrowing limit  to target key moments in the data: The average wealth-to-
income ratio, the proportion of hand-to-mouth (HtM) consumers, and the Gini coefficient
of wealth. Values for these data moments are detailed in Table 4. The model approximates
these moments fairly well with  = 0.93,  = 0.25.




                                                24
                                     Table 3: Model Parameters

                        Parameter                                         Value
                        Dicount factor                                     0.93
                        Risk-aversion coefficient                          2.00
                        Risk-free interest rate              r             0.01
                        Persistence of idiosyncratic process µ             0.94
                        Volatility of idiosyncratic process  µ             0.18
                        Financial constraints                              0.25

Notes : This table shows the parameter values of the model calibration for Italy. The frequency of the
calibration is annual. Y is normalized to 1.


     We assess the model's ability to reproduce certain untargeted moments related to the
distribution of liquid wealth and income. Table 4 reports a set of moments in the data,
which are well approximated in the model.

                           Table 4: Targeted and Untargeted Moments

                            Variable                        Model     Data
                            Targeted
                            Wealth-to-income ratio           0.91      0.92
                            Hand-to-mouth share              0.34      0.36
                            Gini index income                0.31      0.34
                            Gini index wealth                0.61      0.72
                            Non-Targeted
                            Wealth share bottom 75           -0.01     0.17
                            Wealth share top 10              0.71      0.63
                            Wealth share top 5               0.49      0.49
                            Income share bottom 75           0.48      0.56
                            Income share top 10              0.25      0.23
                            Income share top 5               0.16      0.13

Notes : This table compares model-simulated moments with those observed in the data. Wealth-to-income
ratio refers to the average ratio of liquid wealth to annual income. Hand-to-mouth share refers to the share
of households with liquid assets that are less than 2 weeks of income. Data source: SHIW-BI Italy.



Crisis experiments We perform two experiments that capture the two views of crises
described in the theory section, each as an unexpected aggregate shock. We design both ex-
periments to mimic the same macro dynamics of the crises and study the implied untargeted


                                                    25
micro-level responses. In both experiments, the economy at t = 0 experiences a contraction
in aggregate income of the same magnitude,           Y,   which we calibrate to match the contraction
of income during the crisis. The two experiments differ in the expected persistence of this
shock, and in how it affects individuals' access to credit markets.
     In the PI view of crises, the shock to aggregate income is expected to be of a permanent
nature and borrowing constraints are unaffected. This experiment is close to that consid-
ered in Barro (2006) to explain consumption disasters and asset prices, and in Aguiar and
Gopinath (2007) to explain the excess sensitivity of consumption in emerging economies.
In particular, in this economy the expected evolution of aggregate income follows log Yt =
log Yt-1 + t
           g   Y.   This means that the original shock is akin to a persistent shock to the growth
rate, as in Aguiar and Gopinath (2007), and we calibrate its persistence, g , to match the
aggregate consumption-income elasticity. Panel (a) of Figure E.2 shows how the persistence
of the growth shock is identified by the aggregate consumption-income elasticity. The cali-
                       g
brated values are      0   = -0.2 and g = 0.22. Panel (a) of Figure E.9 shows the dynamics of
aggregate income in this experiment.
     In the FF view of crises, the shock to aggregate income is expected to be transitory
but borrowing constraints are tightened as a consequence of the shock. In particular, in this
experiment the expected evolution of aggregate income follows log Yt = t
                                                                       Y               Y,   with Y = 0.9,
the average persistence of output in the economy.7 We parameterize the evolution of the
borrowing constraint by f (Yt ) = Yt . This parameterization captures theories of endogenous
borrowing constraints that are at the heart of the financial-frictions view of crises, as in
(Mendoza, 2002, 2010). We calibrate the sensitivity of the borrowing constraint to income,
 = 5, to match the aggregate consumption-income elasticity. Panel (b) of Figure E.2
shows how the income elasticity of the borrowing constraint is identified by the aggregate
consumption-income elasticity. Panel (b) Figure E.9 shows the evolution of income and the
borrowing constraint in this experiment.
     It is worth pointing out that the focus on unexpected aggregate shocks is aimed at facil-
  7
    This persistence is estimated following the standard procedure in the business cycle literature of esti-
mating an autoregressive process on detrended output at an annual frequency.



                                                    26
itating the comparison between the two views of crises by analyzing different perturbations
of an economy that has the same micro-structure. In Appendix E, we extend our analysis
to economies with aggregate risk.


4.2. The Micro-Anatomy of Consumption Responses: Model and Data

We now analyze the cross-sectional implications for the behavior of consumption in each
of the crisis experiments and compare them with the data. We replicate the same data
statistics in the model-simulated data by computing consumption-income elasticities for
different deciles in the initial period of the aggregate shock. We provide further details on
these computations in Appendix E, and report the model's predictions for alternative ways
to compute the consumption-income elasticities and obtain results similar to those reported
in this section. We also report model's predictions for marginal propensities to consume­
which, we argue, are not as informative as the elasticities for distinguishing between the
different views of aggregate consumption crises.
    Figure 4 shows how the crisis experiments significantly differ in their cross-sectional
predictions. In the PI-view experiment, the elasticities are close to 1 for all income deciles,
because the aggregate shock is permanent and affects the permanent income of all house-
holds. These elasticities are in line with those predicted in Proposition 1, even after relaxing
the assumptions made for tractability. In the FF-view experiment, consumption-income
elasticity is decreasing in households' income. This is because the tightening of borrowing
constraints that occurs during the crisis is more likely to affect the consumption allocation
of income-poor households, which were closer to the constraint before the shock. By con-
trast, income-rich households can smooth their consumption in response to their transitory
negative income shock by using their assets or borrowing.




                                              27
                  Figure 4: Consumption-Income Elasticities: Model Analysis

              (a) PI-view Experiment                                   (b) FF-view Experiment




Notes : This figure shows the consumption-income elasticities for different income deciles in the Italian
crisis (described in Section 3) and in the crisis experiments of the model calibrated for Italy (described in
Section 4). Panel (a) shows the permanent-income-view experiment and Panel (b) the
financial-frictions-view experiment. Elasticities are computed using average income and consumption by
decile, and are defined as the ratio of the log change in consumption to the log change in income. The
dashed line corresponds to the locally weighted smoothed data. Further details in Appendix B. Data
sources: SHIW-BI Italy.


     Figure 4 also compares the model predictions with the data. The PI-view experiment
is remarkably close to the data, particularly in its ability to predict the large consumption-
income elasticities of income-rich households. In this dimension, the FF-view experiment
faces a challenge in explaining the micro-level patterns. In the remainder of this section, we
show that this challenge persists in alternative specifications of the model environment, which
include accounting for liquid and iliquid wealth valuations, allowing for alternative income
processes and alternative preferences, and studying alternative aggregate shocks. We show
that in these extensions, the predictions of the PI-view are still aligned with observed data.
We conclude that the PI view can go a long way toward explaining the micro- and macro-level
patterns of consumption during crises.


4.3. Model Extensions

Accounting for asset valuations One simplifying feature of our model is the availability
of a riskless bond with which agents can save or borrow. While this can be a reasonable


                                                     28
representation of a large share of households in the economy, it is less so for households
at the top of the income distribution. Income-rich households invest part of their financial
assets invested in equities and risky bonds. During economic crises the prices of these assets
tend to suffer significant contractions, causing negative wealth revaluations for the income-
rich households. This, in turn, can potentially lead to large consumption-income elasticities
among those households.
    We include asset revaluations as an unexpected shock that affects households hetero-
geneously, depending on their portfolio of financial assets. In particular, we now introduce
wealth revaluation into each of the crisis experiments. In addition to the aggregate negative
income shock and tightening of borrowing constraint (the later in the FF-view experiment)
we now assume that households' wealth drops by pit ait , where we estimate pit and ait
from observed data.
    We take the level of initial financial wealth from the observed data. To estimate
household-specific asset price changes, we first measure the portfolio of financial assets and
separate assets into bank deposits, fixed income and mutual funds, and equity. We then
compute the dynamics of the prices of these three asset classes. Given that the income-rich
households have a larger incidence of equity in their wealth, they suffer larger wealth reval-
uations. We then impose the estimated wealth revaluations as an unexpected drop in assets
for each household, and compute consumption-income elasticities.
    Panel (a) and (b) of Figure 5 shows the model-implied consumption-income elastici-
ties for households in different income deciles, after we incorporate asset valuations. The
estimated drop in wealth valuation precipitates larger elasticities. However, the effects are
quantitatively small. Only for households in the top income decile do we observe significantly
larger elasticities compared with those predicted by the model without revaluation effects.
The reason is that financial wealth is small relative to income. The average stock of financial
wealth ranges between 20% and 30% of annual income for households in different income
deciles . This, combined with the fact that households optimally choose to consume a flow
out of their wealth, implies that the consumption effect of wealth revaluations is small, in
spite of the revaluations being large. These exercises indicate that our main conclusions


                                              29
regarding the ability of the two views of macro crises to account for micro-level patterns is
not affected by asset revaluations.


Alternative income processes As shown in Table 1, different income deciles had het-
erogeneous drops in income during the Italian crisis episode. In this section, we assess how
our main results change once we allow for heterogeneous loadings to the aggregate shock. In
particular, we now assume that households' income is given by

                                                   (µit )
                                       yit = µit Yt         ,                              (6)


where (µit ) is a non-parametric function that depends on the idiosyncratic component of
income. This process allows for heterogeneous impacts of the aggregate shock, and also
nests our baseline model when (µit ) = 0 for all µit . Appendix E describes how we estimate
the function (µit ) using data on the income dynamics of each income-decile. We estimate
higher loadings on the aggregate shock for income-poor households.
    Panels (c) and (d) of Figure 5 shows the cross-sectional consumption-income elasticities
that result from performing the two crisis experiments in this model extension. In this model,
income-poor households suffer a shock that is proportionally larger than that suffered by
income-rich households. The elasticities are similar to those of the baseline model for both
crisis experiments. This reflects the fact that the magnitude of the shock is not a relevant
driver of the elasticities. We conclude that our main results are invariant to considering
alternative income processes.


Emerging markets and the role of non-homotheticities So far, our quantitative ex-
ercises have focused on the case of Italy. In this section, we study the extent to which our
conclusions on the two views of crises extend to emerging markets. The case of emerging
markets is interesting, because our empirical evidence regarding consumption-income elas-
ticities along the income distribution, shown in Figure 3, indicate an increasing pattern, with
rich income households adjusting more than the mean. Although in principle these patterns
would be challenging for both models, we show that a simple extension that incorporates

                                              30
           Figure 5: Consumption-Income Elasticities in Model Extensions: Italy

        (a) PI-Crisis: Wealth Revaluations                        (b) FF-Crisis: Wealth Revaluations




 (c) PI-Crisis: Heterogeneous Income Processes             (d) FF-Crisis: Heterogeneous Income Processes




        (e) PI-Crisis: Non-Homotheticities                        (f) FF-Crisis: Non-Homotheticities




Notes : This figure shows the consumption-income elasticities for different income deciles in the Italian
crisis (described in Section 3) and in the crisis experiments of the model calibrated for Italy (described in
Section 4). All left panels show the permanent-income-view experiment and all right panels the
financial-frictions-view experiment. Panels (a) and (b) show the elasticities in the model extended with
asset revaluations. Panels (c) and (d) show the elasticities in the model extended to include heterogeneous
income process. Panels (e) and (f) show the elasticities in the model extended to non-homothetic
preferences. Elasticities are computed using the average income and consumption by decile, and defined as
the ratio of the log change in consumption to the log31 change in income. The dashed line corresponds to the
locally weighted smoothed data. Further details in Appendix B. Data sources: SHIW-BI Italy.
the non-hometicities can account for both the flat pattern in developed economies and the
increasing pattern in emerging economies.
       Our extended model with non-homoteticities features Stone­Geary preferences given by

                                                    (cit - c)1-
                                        u(cit ) =               ,
                                                        1-

where c is a subsistence level of consumption. This source of non-homotheticities introduces
a strong desire to smooth consumption for households with close-to-subsistence levels of con-
sumption, and has therefore a chance of explaining why low-income households can exhibit
low consumption-income elasticities. Moreover, this mechanism can be particularly relevant
in emerging economies, in which there is a large share of households close to the subsistence
level.
       We perform two calibrations of the extended model with non-homoteticities, one for
Italy and the other for Mexico. In both calibrations we parameterize c to target the share
of households that are close to the consumption subsistence level. We focus on a moment
that we can measure similarly in the model and the data. In the data, countries report a
share of households with income below its indigence level. In the model we set the value of
c to the threshold of income that has the same share of households with income below that
threshold. For Italy, we recalibrate the parameters of the model, ,  to match the same
statistics in our baseline calibration. For Mexico, we follow the same calibration strategy
with details presented in Appendix E.
       We then reproduce both crisis experiments in the two calibrated economies with non-
homotheticities.8 The results, shown in panels (e) and (f) of Figure 5 for Italy and panels (a)
and (b) of Figure 6 for Mexico, indicate that the model-predicted elasticities in the PI-view
with those observed in the data for both countries. Figure 6 shows that non-homotheticties
are particularly relevant in the case of Mexico to account for the increasing patterns observed
in the data. In Italy, since the share of poor households is small (1% compared to 16% in
   8
    Following the baseline calibration strategy, in both economies we recalibrate the aggregate shocks to
match the same targeted moments, namely, the aggregate consumption-income elasticity and the drop in
aggregate income.



                                                    32
Mexico, according to our measure), the results of the model with non-homotheticities are
close to the baseline model.
       We conclude that the introduction of non-homotheticities can help explain the distri-
bution of consumption responses to shocks to permanent income, as previously emphasized
by Straub (2018).


Alternative aggregate shocks Episodes of consumption are often accompanied by in-
creases in interest rates. In this section we assess the effects of including shocks to the interest
rate as part of the crisis experiments. Figure E.3 shows that interest rates exhibited differen-
tial behavior in the Italian and Mexican crisis episodes: They remained roughly unchanged
during the Italian crisis episode, and increased during the Mexican crisis episodes.
       We focus on the case of Mexico, which had increases in interest rates, and analyze the
effects of including in both crisis experiments an additional shock that increases the interest
rate by the same magnitude as the one observed in the data.9 Panels (c) and (d) of Figure
6 shows the consumption-income elasticities along the income distribution for each crisis
experiment that now include an increase in the interest rate, jointly with the contraction in
income and the tightening of borrowing constraint (the latter only in the case of the FF-view
experiment). The consumption-income elasticities are similar to those in the baseline model
and slightly larger for income-poor households. Thus, our main conclusions still hold even
after accounting for the dynamics of interest rates.
       In Appendix E, we also consider alternative specifications for the FF-view experiment,
by analyzing different combinations of persistent and transitory joint shocks to income and
the borrowing constraint. A common result to this analysis is that under all these variants,
the FF-view of crisis still faces a challenge in explaining why income-rich households adjust
as much as the average.
   9
    We recreate the same interest rate dynamics as that observed in the data by introducing an asymmetric
interest rate shock for households that are saving and borrowing, with each interest rate increasing by the
same magnitude as in the data. Quantitative results do not change significantly if we introduce a symmetric
interest rate shock that replicates the increase in the average between the saving and borrowing interest
rates.




                                                    33
         Figure 6: Consumption-Income Elasticities in Model Extensions: Mexico

       (a) PI-Crisis: Non-homotheticities                     (b) FF-Crisis: Non-homotheticities




       (c) PI-Crisis: Interest Rate Shock                     (d) FF-Crisis: Interest Rate Shock




Notes : This figure shows the average consumption-income elasticities for different income deciles in the
Mexican crises (described in Section 3) and in the crisis experiments of the model calibrated for Mexico
(described in Section 4). All left panels show the permanent-income-view experiment and all right panels
the financial-frictions-view experiment. Panels (a) and (b) show the elasticities in the baseline model and
in the model extended with non-homothetic preferences. Panels (c) and (d) show the elasticities in the
baseline model and in the model that includes interest rate shocks in both crisis experiments. The interest
rate shock is simulated such that it replicates the interest rate dynamics in Figure E.3 for Mexico.
Elasticities are computed using the average income and consumption by decile, and are defined as the ratio
of the log change in consumption to the log change in income. The dashed line corresponds to the locally
weighted smoothed data. Further details in Appendix B Data sources: ENIGH-INEGI Mexico.




                                                    34
5. Policy Implications
In this section we assess the effects of stabilization policies through fiscal transfers under each
of the crisis experiments. We consider the effects of a one-time transfer T0 to households
during the crisis period, financed with external public debt, and assume that after the crisis
period the government levies a flat lump-sum tax on all households to repay the interest
on public debt, i.e., Tt = -T0 r for all t > 0. In Appendix F, we provide more details on
agents' optimization problems under these policies and show that our results are robust to
alternative transfer schemes with different degrees of progressivity.
       We study the response of households' consumption to this policy under the PI-view
experiment and the FF-view experiment, and compare their effects to the effect this policy
would have, starting from the steady state. The logic of this comparison is to analyze whether
"stabilization policies," defined as policies that are conducted during crises, have a larger
effect on consumption than they would during normal times. Figure 7 shows responses to the
transfer for different households in the income distribution.10 In all policy experiments, the
consumption response is decreasing in the level of households' income, because the response
is governed by the proximity of households to the borrowing constraint. In the PI-view, the
response during crises is similar to the steady-state response. In the FF-view, the response
during crises is larger than the steady-state response because the aggregate shock tightens the
constraint. Overall, these results show remarkable differences in how effective stabilization
policies are depending on the nature of crises, which highlights the relevance of distinguishing
between the two views of crises for policy design.
  10
    We define the consumption response as the percent difference in consumption with and without the
policy.




                                                35
           Figure 7: Policy Analysis: Consumption Responses to Fiscal Transfers




Notes : This figure shows the marginal propensity to consume (MPC) from a one-time transfer across the
income distribution. The blue dashed line corresponds to MPCs when the policy is conducted in the steady
state, the solid orange line to MPCs when the policy is conducted during the PI-view crisis experiment,
and the gray marked line when the policy is conducted during the FF-view crisis experiment.




6. Conclusion
In this paper, we studied the micro-level anatomy of crisis episodes characterized by large
adjustments of aggregate consumption, including the recent Euro debt crisis and emerging-
market sudden stops. These episodes have received wide attention in both policy and aca-
demic circles due to their lack of consumption smoothing, which is in sharp contrast to the
predictions of canonical business-cycle theories.
     Our starting point is the two main theories that have emerged from this fruitful but
far from settled debate: One theory argues that negative income shocks are followed by
tightening of financial frictions, which hamper these economies' consumption smoothing in
bad times. The other theory argues that crises are characterized by large and persistent
fluctuations in permanent income, which cause households to optimally adjust consumption
even in the absence of a tightening of financial conditions. Constructing a heterogeneous-


                                                  36
agent version of these theories, we show that, while the two are similar in their aggregate
patterns, they differ substantially in their microlevel cross-sectional predictions. We then
use household micro-level data during several crisis episodes and find that, consistent with
the permanent-income view, households with high income and liquid wealth severely adjust
their consumption. Our findings do not imply that financial frictions are not relevant for
crisis dynamics. Rather, they suggest that their importance can primarily come through
how they persistently affect income, since the dynamics of consumption at the micro and
macro levels can be understood a long way through the permanent-income view of crises.
     Finally, although the current Covid-19 crisis is outside the scope of our paper, our
findings present interesting similarities to those that document the heterogeneous impacts
of the crisis on households (see, for example, Chetty et al., 2020; Cox, Ganong, Noel, Vavra,
Wong, Farrell and Greig, 2020). In particular, related to our findings, Chetty et al. (2020)
documents large adjustments of consumption for income-rich households. Our evidence
shows that this pattern of consumption adjustment is also observed in other crises around
the world and in different historical contexts. Therefore, our results suggest that analyzing
the role of permanent income driving consumption in the current crisis can be a promising
avenue for future research, and a useful input for policymakers designing strategies for the
crisis.




                                             37
References
Aguiar, M. and Bils, M. (2015). Has consumption inequality mirrored income inequality? Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 105 (9), 2725­56.
-- and Gopinath, G. (2007). Emerging market business cycles: The cycle is the trend. Journal
  of political Economy, 115 (1), 69­102.
-- and Hurst, E. (2007). Measuring trends in leisure: The allocation of time over five decades.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122 (3), 969­1006.
Aguiar, M. A., Bils, M. and Boar, C. (2020). Who Are the Hand-to-Mouth. Tech. rep., National
  Bureau of Economic Research.
Attanasio, O., Battistin, E. and Ichimura, H. (2004). What really happened to consumption
  inequality in the US? Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Backus, D. K., Kehoe, P. J. and Kydland, F. E. (1992). International real business cycles.
  Journal of political Economy, 100 (4), 745­775.
Barro, R. J. (2006). Rare disasters and asset markets in the twentieth century. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 121 (3), 823­866.
-- and Ursua, J. F. (2008). Consumption disasters in the twentieth century. American Economic
  Review, 98 (2), 58­63.
Berger, D. W., Bocola, L. and Dovis, A. (2019). Imperfect Risk-Sharing and the Business
  Cycle. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bernanke, B. S., Gertler, M. and Gilchrist, S. (1999). The Financial Accelerator in a
  Quantitative Business Cycle Framework. Handbook of Macroeconomics, 1, 1341­1393.
Bils, M. and Klenow, P. J. (2004). Some evidence on the importance of sticky prices. Journal
  of political economy, 112 (5), 947­985.
Blundell, R., Pistaferri, L. and Preston, I. (2008). Consumption inequality and partial
  insurance. American Economic Review, 98 (5), 1887­1921.
-- and Preston, I. (1998). Consumption inequality and income uncertainty. The Quarterly Jour-
  nal of Economics, 113 (2), 603­640.
Calvo, G. A. (1998). Capital flows and capital-market crises: the simple economics of sudden
  stops. Journal of applied Economics, 1 (1), 35­54.
-- (2005). Emerging Capital Markets in Turmoil: Bad Luck or Bad Policy? MIT Press.
-- and Ottonello, P. (2016). Systemic sudden stops: Crises and recoveries in emerging markets.
  In Macroeconomics in times of liquidity crises: Searching for economic essentials, MIT Press.
Campbell, J. and Deaton, A. (1989). Why is consumption so smooth? The Review of Economic
  Studies, 56 (3), 357­373.
Carroll, C. D. (1997). Buffer-stock saving and the life cycle/permanent income hypothesis. The
  Quarterly journal of economics, 112 (1), 1­55.
Chetty, R., Friedman, J. N., Hendren, N., Stepner, M. et al. (2020). How did covid-19 and
  stabilization policies affect spending and employment? a new real-time economic tracker based
  on private sector data. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Chodorow-Reich, G., Karabarbounis, L. and Kekre, R. (2019). The macroeconomics of the
  Greek Depression. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Cochrane, J. H. (1994). Permanent and transitory components of gnp and stock prices. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109 (1), 241­265.


                                              38
Cox, N., Ganong, P., Noel, P., Vavra, J., Wong, A., Farrell, D. and Greig, F. (2020).
  Initial impacts of the pandemic on consumer behavior: Evidence from linked income, spending,
  and savings data. University of Chicago, Becker Friedman Institute for Economics Working
  Paper, (2020-82).
Cravino, J. and Levchenko, A. A. (2017). The distributional consequences of large devaluations.
  American Economic Review, 107 (11), 3477­3509.
Eggertsson, G. B. and Krugman, P. (2012). Debt, deleveraging, and the liquidity trap: A
  fisher-minsky-koo approach. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127 (3), 1469­1513.
Fernandez-Villaverde, J. and Krueger, D. (2007). Consumption over the life cycle: Facts
  from consumer expenditure survey data. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 89 (3), 552­
  565.
Garc´ ia-Cicco, J., Pancrazi, R. and Uribe, M. (2010). Real Business Cycles in Emerging
  Countries? The American Economic Review, 100 (5), 2510­2531.
                           ¨
Gopinath, G., Kalemli-Ozcan,       ¸ ., Karabarbounis, L. and Villegas-Sanchez, C. (2017).
                                   S
  Capital allocation and productivity in south europe. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  132 (4), 1915­1967.
-- and Neiman, B. (2014). Trade Adjustment and Productivity in Large Crises. The American
  Economic Review, 104 (3), 793­831.
Gourinchas, P.-O. and Parker, J. A. (2002). Consumption over the life cycle. Econometrica,
  70 (1), 47­89.
--, Philippon, T. and Vayanos, D. (2017). The analytics of the greek crisis. NBER macroeco-
  nomics Annual, 31 (1), 1­81.
-- and Rey, H. (2007). International financial adjustment. Journal of political economy, 115 (4),
  665­703.
Guerrieri, V. and Lorenzoni, G. (2017). Credit crises, precautionary savings, and the liquidity
  trap. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132 (3), 1427­1467.
Guvenen, F. and Smith, A. A. (2014). Inferring labor income risk and partial insurance from
  economic choices. Econometrica, 82 (6), 2085­2129.
Huggett, M. (1996). Wealth distribution in life-cycle economies. Journal of Monetary Economics,
  38 (3), 469­494.
Jappelli, T. and Pistaferri, L. (2010). Does consumption inequality track income inequality in
  italy? Review of Economic Dynamics, 13 (1), 133­153.
-- and -- (2011). Financial integration and consumption smoothing. The Economic Journal,
  121 (553), 678­706.
-- and -- (2017). The economics of consumption: theory and evidence. Oxford University Press.
Kaplan, G. and Violante, G. L. (2014). A model of the consumption response to fiscal stimulus
  payments. Econometrica, 82 (4), 1199­1239.
-- and -- (2018). Microeconomic heterogeneity and macroeconomic shocks. Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 32 (3), 167­94.
--, -- and Weidner, J. (2014). The wealthy hand-to-mouth. Brookings Papers on Economic
  Activity, pp. 139­153.
Kehoe, T. J. and Prescott, E. C. (2007). Great depressions of the twentieth century. Citeseer.
Kiyotaki, N. and Moore, J. (1997). Credit Cycles. Journal of Political Economy, 105 (2),
  211­248.


                                               39
Krueger, D. and Perri, F. (2006). Does income inequality lead to consumption inequality?
  evidence and theory. The Review of Economic Studies, 73 (1), 163­193.
Mendoza, E. G. (2002). Credit, prices, and crashes: Business cycles with a sudden stop. In
  Preventing currency crises in Emerging markets, University of Chicago Press, pp. 335­392.
-- (2010). Sudden stops, financial crises, and leverage. American Economic Review, 100 (5), 1941­
  66.
Nakamura, E. and Steinsson, J. (2018). Identification in macroeconomics. Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 32 (3), 59­86.
Neumeyer, P. A. and Perri, F. (2005). Business Cycles in Emerging Economies: the Role of
  Interest Rates. Journal of Monetary Economics, 52 (2), 345­380.
Petev, I., Pistaferri, L. and Saporta, I. (2012). Consumption in the great recession. The
  Russell Sage Foundation and the Stanford Center on Poverty and Inequality, pp. 2­3.
Quadrini, V. and R´   ios-Rull, J.-V. (2015). Inequality in macroeconomics. In Handbook of Income
  Distribution, vol. 2, Elsevier, pp. 1229­1302.
Reinhart, C. M. and Rogoff, K. (2009). This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial
  Folly. Princeton University Press.
Straub, L. (2018). Consumption, savings, and the distribution of permanent income. Unpublished
  manuscript, Harvard University.
Werning, I. (2015). Incomplete markets and aggregate demand. Tech. rep., National Bureau of
  Economic Research.




                                               40
                                           Appendices


A. Omitted Proofs and Results

A.1. Proof of Proposition 1

Since  is sufficiently large, the borrowing constraint never binds, which implies that (5) simplifies
to

                                                          
                                                r              Et [µit+s ] Yt+s
                                   cit =rait +                                  .                 (7)
                                               1+r                (1 + r)s
                                                         s=0


The consumption-income elasticity in response to an aggregate shock is given by

                                                    cit
                                                    Yt    yit
                                                    yit
                                                              .
                                                          cit
                                                    Yt


The marginal propensity to consume is given by

                                        cit         r      Et [µit+s ]
                                        Yt         1+r    s=0 (1+r)s
                                        yit
                                               =                           ,
                                                              µit
                                        Yt


where we use the assumption that Yt+s = Yt for all s  0. This implies that the elasticity is given
by

                    cit            r     Et [µit+s ]
                    Yt    yit     1+r   s=0 (1+r)s                        µit Yt
                    yit
                              =                                                               .
                          cit            µit              rait +     r      Et [µit+s ]Yt+s
                    Yt                                              1+r    s=0  (1+r)s


Taking limits when r  0 and again using the assumption that Yt+s = Yt for s  1 yields cy = 1.


A.2. Proof of Proposition 2

We start by showing the first result. Consider the consumption of a constrained household, which
is given by


                                    cit = µit Yt + (1 + r)ait + f (Yt ).


                                                         41
The marginal propensity to consume of this household is given by

                                               cit
                                               Yt        µit + f (Yt )
                                               yit
                                                     =                 .
                                                              µit
                                               Yt


The consumption-income elasticity is given by

                             cit
                             Yt    yit   µit + f (Yt )             µit Yt
                             yit
                                       =                                             ,
                                   cit        µit      µit Yt + (1 + r)ait + f (Yt )
                             Yt
                                              yit
                                            f (Yt ) + f Y
                                      =   yit +(1+r)ait
                                                                .
                                              f (Yt )   +   1

It follows that the elasticity is an increasing function of f Y , since the denominator is positive.
Additionally, by evaluating the elasticity at ait = f (Yt ) and taking the limits when r  0, we
obtain

                                                                    f (Yt )
                                      cy |ait =f (Yt ) = 1 +                f Y  0.
                                                                     yit

       We now show the second result. The elasticity of permanently unconstrained households is
given by

               cit            r      s Et [µit+s ]
               Yt    yit     1+r    s=0 (1+r)s                            µit Yt
               yit
                         =                                                                    ,
                     cit               µit            rait +         r      Et [µit+s ]Yt+s
               Yt                                                   1+r    s=0  (1+r)s
                              r      s Et [µit+s ]
                             1+r    s=0 (1+r)s                                     µit Yt
                        =                                                                                   ,
                                       µit                           r      Et [µit+s ](s Yt +(1-s )Yss )
                                                      rait +        1+r    s=0          (1+r)s


where in the second line we use the assumption that Yt+h = Yt + (1 - )Yss for h  1. Taking the
limits when r  0, we obtain that cy < 1 and cy  0 when   0.

       Finally, we show that if µit is mean-reverting, households with high enough µit are permanently
unconstrained. For this, it suffices to show that there exists a large enough µit such that the
households never hit the borrowing constraint, even if they receive the lowest possible endowment
in all periods going forward. Recall that the level of unconstrained consumption cunc
                                                                                  it  is given by
(7). It can be verified that if µit is mean-reverting (i.e., Et [µit+1 ] = µ µit + (1 - µ )µ), then
cunc
 it
µit     1. Denote the minimum level of income as y . Then there exist a cutoff level of income such


                                                            42
that if current income is larger than this value, the household can ensure the level of unrestricted
consumption. This level of income is given by

                                                              
                                                                    cunc
                                                                     it - y
                              y
                              ~it =   cunc
                                       it    - (1 + r)ait +                  .
                                                                    (1 + r)s
                                                              s=0


If follows that if µit is large enough, then income is larger than this cutoff value and, hence, the
household is unconstrained.



B. Data Description

B.1. Macrolevel Data

In the analysis involving aggregate data, we use real per capita GDP to measure aggregate income
and real per capita personal consumption expenditure (PCE) and nondurable PCE, including
services, to measure aggregate consumption. The data are from the following sources:


   1. Italy and Spain. National accounts data and annual population estimates are from the OECD.
      National accounts data are quarterly and seasonally adjusted. To compute per capita income
      and consumption, we linearly interpolate annual population.

   2. Mexico. National accounts data are from the OECD and annual population estimates from
      FRED. Quarterly GDP series are available with seasonal adjustment from the OECD. We
      seasonally adjust quarterly PCE and nondurable PCE using the X-12 ARIMA method. To
      compute per capita income and consumption, we linearly interpolate annual population.

   3. Peru. National accounts and population data are from Instituto Nacional de Estadistica
      e Informatica de Peru (INEI-Peru). National accounts data are quarterly and seasonally
      adjusted. To compute per capita income and consumption, we linearly interpolate annual
      population.


     In Figure 2, we use these data to document the macro dynamics in the crisis episodes of our
sample. The data is log-linearly detrended, using as the detrending period for each country the
same window for which the micro-level data is available.


                                                     43
B.2. Microlevel Data

In this section we describe the data sources, sample selection criteria, and variable definitions for our
empirical analysis in Section 3. Our sample selection criteria and income/consumption definitions
are as homogeneous as possible across countries and databases, and follow standard practices in
the literature (e.g., Blundell et al., 2008; Aguiar et al., 2020). As notes in Section 3, our empirical
results are robust to several variants of the baseline measurement.


B.2.1. Italy

The source of household-level data for Italy is the Survey on Household Income and Wealth (SHIW),
conducted by the Bank of Italy. The SHIW is representative of the Italian resident population, and
contains detailed cross-sectional and panel data on households' income, consumption, wealth, and
demographics. We use data for the period 1995 to 2016. In this period, the survey was conducted
on a biennial basis (except for the period 1995 to 1998, with a three-year interval). Jappelli and
Pistaferri (2010) provide a detailed description of the survey design and analysis of the quality of
these data. Following their approach, Panel (a) of Figure B.1 compares the dynamics of per capita
disposable income and total consumption from the microlevel data with their counterparts from
National Accounts for our period of analysis.
     The original sample of the SHIW includes 86,729 units observed during the period 1995 to
2016 with available data on consumption, income, and demographics. From this, our sample
selection adopts standard practices in the literature using consumption household-level data. First,
we exclude observations corresponding to households in small locations (with fewer than 5,000
residents). Second, we only include in the sample units in which the household head's age is between
25 and 60 years old. Third, we exclude observations with negative income or with income-to-
consumption ratio in the top 0.5% or bottom 0.5% of the distribution to ensure that our results are
not driven by outliers. Table B.1 details the observations dropped from each of these filters, which
results in a sample of 42,286. Our analysis of consumption-income elasticities uses observations
from consumption and income data during the peak and trough of the 2006-2014 crisis, involving
7,060 observations. We compute moments with these data using sample weights provided by the
SHIW unless otherwise noted.
     Our baseline measures of consumption and income used to compute consumption-income elas-

                                                   44
              Figure B.1: Microlevel Data and National Accounts: Euro Economies

                                                                                  (a) Italy ­ SHIW
                                                 Income                                                                                      Consumption




                                                                                                                       0
                    0
          log-base = 0 in 2006




                                                                                                             log-base = 0 in 2006
                                                                                                                    -.1
                 -.1




                                                       National accounts
                                                       HH survey
                    -.2




                                                                                                                       -.2
                                 1995   2000          2005                 2010               2015                                  1995   2000          2005        2010   2015
                                                        date                                                                                               date



                                                                             (b) Spain ­ EPF-INE
                                                 Income                                                                                      Consumption
                                                                                                                       0
                    0
          log-base = 0 in 2008




                                                                                                             log-base = 0 in 2008
                                                                                                                   -.1
              -.1




                                                                                  National accounts
                                                                                  HH survey
                    -.2




                                                                                                                       -.2




                                 2005          2010                   2015                       2020                               2005          2010            2015         2020
                                                        date                                                                                               date




Notes : This figures compares microlevel data on per capita disposable income and total consumption
expenditure consumption from the surveys used in the empirical analysis in Section 3 with National
Accounts data (GDP and PCE). Panel (a) shows the data for Italy, corresponding to the SHIW, and Panel
(b) shows the data for Spain, corresponding to the EPF-INE. These sources are further described in
Sections B.2.1 and B.2.2. Sources for the National Accounts data are described in Section B.1. Moments
from the microlevel data are computed using sample weights.


ticities in Section 3 are, respectively, nondurable monetary consumption ­defined as non durable
expenditure minus payments in kind and imputed rents from owner-occupied housing­ and house-
holds' after-tax monetary nonfinancial income, defined as the sum of labor income (excluding pay-
ments in kind), self-employment income, transfers, pension benefits, and rents from real capital,
minus income taxes. We also provide empirical results when all monetary and nonmonetary com-
ponents of consumption and income are included. As discussed in Section 3, our empirical analysis
of consumption-income elasticities follows standard practices in the consumption literature (see,
for example Blundell et al., 2008; Guvenen and Smith, 2014), and residualizes consumption and



                                                                                                        45
                             Table B.1: Sample Selection SHIW-Italy

                                                            Obs. Dropped        Obs. in Sample
          All units, 1995-2016                                                        86,729
          Excluding residents in small locations                 10,752               75,977
          Excluding age < 25 or > 60                             32,472               43,505
          Excluding outliers                                     1,219                42,286
          Crisis episode (2006 and 2014)                                               7,060

Notes : This table shows the number of observations resulting from our sample selection for the SHIW in
Italy. The first line, All units, shows the original sample of units observed during the period 1995 to 2016.
The following lines detail the set of observations dropped from different filters applied to the sample and
the resulting number of observations. Outliers refer to observations with negative income or with
income-to-consumption ratio in the top 0.5% or bottom 0.5% of the distribution. More details on these
filters can be found in the text. Data source: SHIW Italy.


income using the empirical model


                                    ln (Xit ) = Zit  + tDit  + t + x
                                                                   ^it                                    (8)


where Xit is either the consumption or income of household i at period t, Zit and Dit are vectors
of household demographics, and x
                               ^i,t is the residualized consumption and income of household i in
period t. We include in the vector Zit a quadratic function of the household head's age, gender
of the household's head, an indicator for the household head's education level (elementary school
or less, middle school, high school, bachelor's degree or more), an indicator for the household's
size, and an indicator for the NUTS 2 - Italy regions where the household members reside. The
vector Dit includes the education and gender of the household's head and allows the effects of these
characteristics to vary with time.
     Section 3.3 of our empirical analysis studies consumption-income elasticities for households
with different levels of liquid assets and wealth-to-income ratio. An advantage of the Italian data
for this analysis is that the SHIW contains data on consumption, income, and wealth in the same
dataset. We measure liquid assets using household's financial assets, which include deposits, bonds,
stocks, mutual funds, and investment accounts. Using this definition of liquid assets, we follow
Kaplan et al. (2014) and define hand-to-mouth households as those with less assets worth than 2




                                                     46
weeks of income.11


B.2.2. Spain

The source of household-level data of consumption and income for Spain is the Encuesta de Pre-
supuestos Familiares (EPF), conducted by the Instituto Nacional de Estadistica (INE) of Spain.
The EPF is representative of the Spanish resident population, and contains cross-sectional data
on household's income, consumption, and demographics. The survey is available on an annual
frequency since 1997. We use data for the period 2006-2018, which uses a consistent methodology.
Panel (b) of Figure B.1 compares the dynamics of per capita disposable income and total consump-
tion from the microlevel data with their counterparts from National Accounts for our period of
analysis.
       The original sample of the EPF for the period 2006-2018 contains 282,873 observations. We
adopt a sample selection process similar to that for Italy, excluding observations that correspond
to households in small locations, units in which the household's head age is below 25 or above 60
years old, and observations with negative income or with an income-to-consumption ratio in the
top 0.5% or bottom 0.5% of the distribution to ensure that our results are not driven by outliers.
Table B.2 details the observations dropped from each of these filters, which results in a sample of
137,708. Our analysis of consumption-income elasticities uses observations from consumption and
income data during the peak and trough of the 2008-2013 crisis, involving 21,802 observations. We
compute moments with these data using sample weights provided by the EPF unless otherwise
noted.
  11
    The implicit assumption is that they receive income at a monthly frequency. In addition to the liquid
assets-to-income ratio, Kaplan et al. (2014) also consider the reported credit limit to identify hand-to-mouth
households.




                                                     47
                             Table B.2: Sample Selection EPF-Spain

                                                            Obs. Dropped        Obs. in Sample
          All units, 2006-2018                                                       282,873
          Excluding residents in small locations                 69,794              213,079
          Excluding age < 25 or > 60                             73,050              140,029
          Excluding outliers                                     2,321               137,708
          Crisis episode (2008 and 2013)                                              21,802

Notes : This table shows the number of observations resulting from our sample selection for the EPF-INE
in Spain. The first line, All units, shows the original sample of units observed during the period 2006 to
2018. The following lines detail the set of observations dropped from different filters applied to the sample
and the resulting number of observations. Outliers refer to observations with negative income or with
income-to-consumption ratio in the top 0.5% or bottom 0.5% of the distribution. More details on these
filters can be found in the text. Data source: EPF-INE Spain.


     Our empirical analysis in Section 3 focuses on similar concepts of consumption and income to
those we used for Italy. For the computation of nondurable consumption expenditure, we follow a
criteria close to Fernandez-Villaverde and Krueger (2007), by identifying a four-level good category
nondurable goods, durable goods, and services. The nondurables included are food expenditure
at home and away, drinks, tobacco and narcotics, cleaning products, medication, fuel expenditure,
personal care products, and clothing. Services include entertainment services, educational services,
health services, transportation services, personal care services (e.g., hairdressing), maintenance,
provision of energy and water, and miscellaneous services. Durable consumption includes purchases
of vehicles and their parts, housing maintenance and expansion, furniture, housing rent payments,
household and medical appliances, and other durable goods (e.g., jewelry). On the income side,
one caveat is that the EPF does not provide separate information on after-tax income components.
The survey's definition of after-tax income includes labor and self-employed income, pensions,
unemployment benefits, other social transfers, rents from property, and financial income. Finally,
as in the data for Italy, we residualize consumption and income variables using empirical model 8.
We include in the vector Zit a quadratic function of household head's age, gender of household's
head, an indicator of household head's education level (at most primary, first part of secondary,
second part of secondary, at least some tertiary), an indicator of household size, and an indicator for
the Spanish autonomous community in which household members reside. The vector Dit includes
the education and gender of the household's head and allows the effects of these characteristics to


                                                     48
vary with time.
     For our empirical analysis of Section 3.3, we complement the EPF ­ which, unlike the Italian
SHIW, does not contain data on wealth­ with data from the Survey of Household Finances (EFF),
an official survey undertaken by the Bank of Spain that provides detailed information on the asset
and debt holdings of the Spanish resident population. The EFF provides joint data on wealth and
income, which we use to identify households that are likely to have high levels of liquid assets,
as further described below. The survey starts in 2002 and has a triennial frequency. The EFF
is designed such that it provides a representative cross-sectional sample and a rotating panel. In
addition, it oversamples high-wealth households. On average, the sample has approximately 6,100
observations per survey wave.
     Using the EFF, we define total wealth as assets minus debt, where assets are composed of
financial assets, business equity, and housing and other non financial assets; debt is composed of
housing debt, personal loans, credit card debt, and other debt. We define liquid assets as the sum of
deposits/accounts usable for payments, public equity shares, fixed-income securities, mutual funds
and portfolios under management. From the liquid assets, we subtract credit card debt to compute
net liquid asset holdings. Figure B.2 shows the distribution of net liquid assets relative to monthly
income in Spain. We can observe that the distribution has a mass point of households with less
than 2 weeks of income; this are the hand-to-mouth households under our simple criteria. We
estimate the probability of being a hand-to mouth household based on household's income and
characteristics with the following empirical model:


                                      HtMit = f (Xit t ) + it ,                                  (9)


where HtMit denotes a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 if household i at survey in t is
hand-to-mouth, and Xi,t are characteristics of the household that can be identified in both the
EFF and EPF. The characteristics of the households used for the imputations are ownership of
business, house ownership, household size, household head's age, gender and marital status, and
household's position in the income distribution. We estimate model (9) using EFF data. We then
use the estimated coefficients and the income and characteristics of households in the EPF dataset
to estimate the probability of a household in the EPF of being hand-to-mouth. In our empirical
analysis in Section 3.3 we identify high-liquidity households as those with a predicted probability


                                                 49
smaller than 0.5 of being HtM using the estimated coefficients of model (9).

          Figure B.2: Net Liquid Asset-to-Monthly Income Distribution in Spain
                 1.2
                 .9
                 .6
                 .3
                 0




                       -10   -8    -6      -4    -2   0     2     4        6      8     10
                                        liquid assets/monthly income


Notes: This figure shows the distribution of the ratio of net liquid assets to monthly income in the EFF for
Spain. Net liquid assets includes deposits/accounts usable for payments, public equity shares, fixed-income
securities, mutual funds and portfolios under management, and credit card debt. The vertical line
corresponds to the HtM cutoff of 2 weeks of income (i.e., 0.5 net liquid assets-to-income). Values are
truncated at -10 and 10. Further details in the text. Data source: EFF Spain.



B.2.3. Mexico

The source of household-level data of consumption and income for Mexico is the Encuesta Nacional
de Ingresos y Gastos de los Hogares (ENIGH), conducted by INEGI from Mexico. The ENIGH is
representative of the Mexican resident population, and contains cross-sectional data on household's
income, consumption, and demographics. The survey is available on a biennial frequency with a
uniform methodology from from 1992 to 2014 (except for the period 2004 to 2006, which is available
annually). Panel (a) of Figure B.3 compares the dynamics of per capita disposable income and
total consumption from the microlevel data with their counterparts from National Accounts for our
period of analysis.




                                                    50
        Figure B.3: Microlevel Data and National Accounts: Emerging Economies

                                                               (a) Mexico ­ ENIGH
                                            Income                                                                       Consumption
                     .2




                                                                                                     .2
                     .1




                                                                                                     .1
          log-base = 0 in 2000




                                                                                           log-base = 0 in 2000
                          0




                                                                                                          0
               -.1




                                                                                               -.1
                     -.2




                                                                                                     -.2
                                                                National accounts
                     -.3




                                                                HH survey




                                                                                                     -.3
                                   1990   2000          2010                   2020                               1990    2000          2010   2020
                                                 date                                                                            date



                                                               (b) Peru ­ ENAHO
                                            Income                                                                       Consumption
                     .2




                                                                                                     .2
                               0




                                                                                                              0
          log-base = 0 in 2013




                                                                                           log-base = 0 in 2013
                  -.2




                                                                                              -.2
                     -.4




                                                                                                     -.4




                                                                National accounts
                                                                HH survey
                     -.6




                                   2005   2010          2015                   2020                               2005    2010          2015   2020
                                                 date                                                                            date




Notes : This figure compares the microlevel data on per capita disposable income and total consumption
expenditure from the surveys used in the empirical analysis in Section 3 with National Accounts data
(GDP and PCE). Panel (a) shows the data for Italy, corresponding to the SHIW, and Panel (b) shows the
data for Spain, corresponding to the EPF-INE. These sources are further described in Sections B.2.3 and
B.2.4. Sources for the national accounts data are described in Section B.1. Moments from the microlevel
data are computed using sample weights.


     The original sample of the ENIGH for the period 1992-2014 contains 227,862 observations.
We adopt a sample selection similar to that used for Italy and Spain, and exclude observations
corresponding to households in small locations, units in which the household head's age is below 25
or above 60 years, and observations with negative income or an income-to-consumption ratio in the
top 0.5% or bottom 0.5% of the distribution to ensure that our results are not driven by outliers.
Table B.3 details the observations dropped from each of these filters, as well as excluding units
with missing data on our variables of interest, which results in a sample of 121,162. Our analysis of
consumption-income elasticities uses observations from consumption and income data during the


                                                                                      51
peak and trough of crisis episodes, involving 13,138 observations for the 1992-1994 Tequila crisis
and 27,105 observations for the 2006-2010 GFC crisis. We compute moments with these data using
sample weights provided by the ENIGH unless otherwise noted.

                          Table B.3: Sample Selection ENIGH-Mexico

                                                            Obs. Dropped        Obs. in Sample
          All units, 1992-2014                                                       227,862
          Excluding units with missing data                       3,616              224,246
          Excluding age < 25 or > 60                             56,490              167,756
          Excluding outliers                                     2,238               165,518
          Excluding residents in small locations                 44,356              121,162
          Crisis episode 1 (1992 and 1994)                                            13,138
          Crisis episode 2 (2006 and 2010)                                            27,105

Notes : This table shows the number of observations resulting from our sample selection for the ENIGH in
Mexico. The first line, All units, shows the original sample of units observed during the period 1992 to
2014. The following lines detail the set of observations dropped from different filters applied to the sample
and the resulting number of observations. Outliers refer to observations with negative income or with
income-to-consumption ratio in the top 0.5% or bottom 0.5% of the distribution. More details on these
filters can be found in the text. Data source: ENIGH-INEGI Mexico.


     Our empirical analysis in Section 3 focuses on concepts of consumption and income similar
to those we used for Italy and Spain. For the computation of nondurable consumption expendi-
ture, we also follow criteria close to Fernandez-Villaverde and Krueger (2007). In particular, for
nondurable consumption we include food expenditure at home and away, public transportation
services, clothing, housing services (e.g., water and electricity supply), cleaning products, personal
care products, health services, medication, fuel expenditure, communication services, cultural and
entertainment services (e.g., movies), hotels and accommodation services, and other services (e.g.,
financial or insurance). Durable consumption includes household rent payments, household fur-
niture, equipment and appliances, entertainment and communication equipment (e.g. cameras or
phones), jewelry and art products, and vehicle and vehicle parts purchases. In appendix D we use
alternative definitions such as nontradable (proxy as services) and tradable (proxy as durable and
nondurable goods), or including rent income and durable consumption. On the income side, we
focus on after-tax monetary nonfinancial income. Finally, as in the data for Italy and Spain, we
residualize consumption and income variables using empirical model 8. We include in the vector Zit
a quadratic function of household head's age, gender of household's head, indicator of household's

                                                     52
head education level (low: less than primary completed; medium: at most secondary completed;
high: at least one year of tertiary education), an indicator for each level of household's size, and
controls for the household's region of residence. The vector Dit includes the education and gender
of the household's head and allows the effects of these characteristics to vary with time.
       For our empirical analysis in Section 3.3, we identify households with liquid wealth through
their asset income information. In particular, we define liquid asset holders as households that
receive income or have expenditures from checking and savings accounts, stocks and bonds, and
long-term deposits. Also, we consider households that hold liquid assets as those that retire/make
deposits or change positions in bonds, stocks, or similar financial securities.


B.2.4. Peru

The source of household-level data on consumption and income for Peru is the Encuesta Nacional de
Hogares (ENAHO), conducted by Instituto Nacional de Estadstica e Informatica (INEI) of Peru.
The ENAHO is representative of the Peruvian resident population, and contains cross-sectional
and panel data on household's income, consumption, and demographics. The survey is conducted
annually since 1995, with its quality significantly improving after 2007.12 Since 2007, the sample
is constructed as a rotating panel of approximately 20% of the sample. The design of the survey is
such that both samples, the panel and cross-sectional, are representative. Panel (b) of Figure B.3
compares the dynamics of per capita disposable income and total consumption from the microlevel
data with their counterparts from National Accounts for our period of analysis.
       The original sample of the ENAHO for the period 2004-2018 contains 398,138 observations.
We adopt a sample selection similar to that for Italy, Spain, and Mexico, and exclude observations
corresponding to households in small locations, units in which the household head's age is below 25
or above 60 years old, and observations with negative income or with an income-to-consumption
ratio in the top 0.5% or bottom 0.5% of the distribution to ensure that our results are not driven
by outliers. Table B.4 details the observations dropped from each of these filters, which result in a
sample of 183,102 observations. Our analysis of consumption-income elasticities uses observations
  12
    In particular, from 2007 onward the survey was improved through the MECOVI program, which was
developed to improve statistical measurement in Latin America. The program is directed by the World
Bank, Inter-American Development Bank (IADB), and Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean (CEPAL).



                                                  53
on consumption and income data during the peak and trough of the 2007-2010 crisis, involving
21,170 observations. We compute moments with these data using sample weights provided by the
ENAHO unless otherwise noted.

                           Table B.4: Sample Selection ENAHO-Peru

                                                            Obs. Dropped        Obs. in Sample
          All units, 2004-2018                                                       398,138
          Excluding residents in small locations                 133,580             264,558
          Excluding age < 25 or > 60                              78,631             185,927
          Excluding outliers                                      2,825              183,102
          Crisis episode (2007 and 2010)                                              21,170

Notes : This table shows the number of observations resulting from our sample selection for the ENAHO in
Peru. The first line, All units, shows the original sample of units observed during the period 2004 to 2018.
The following lines details the set of observations dropped by different filters applied to the sample and the
resulting number of observations. Outliers refer to observations with negative income or with an
income-to-consumption ratio in the top 0.5% or bottom 0.5% of the distribution. More details on these
filters can be found in the text. Data source: ENAHO Peru.


     Our empirical analysis in Section 3 focuses on concepts of consumption and income similar
to those we used for Italy, Spain, and Mexico, focusing on nondurable monetary consumption and
after-tax monetary nonfinancial income. The nondurable measure of consumption is computed
by excluding expenditure on housing rent and household equipment (this includes vehicles and
appliances) from the total consumption reported by the survey. The total monetary measure
of income includes transfers (private and public), excludes taxes and rents from property, and
includes labor and self-employed income. Thus, to construct the income measure we subtract from
after-tax total monetary income the income received from rents from property. To compute the
after-tax rents, we assume the same tax rate as the one implied by the after-tax and before-tax
ratio of income reported by the survey. Finally, as in the data for the rest of the countries, we
residualize consumption and income variables using empirical model 8. We include in the vector Zit
a quadratic function of household head's age, gender of household's head, an indicator of household
head's education level (less than primary completed; at most secondary completed; at least one year
of tertiary education), an indicator the household's size, and controls for the household's region of
residence. The vector Dit includes the education and gender of the household's head and allows
the effects of these characteristics to vary with time.


                                                     54
       For our empirical analysis in Section 3.3, as in the case of Mexico, we identify households with
liquid wealth through their asset income information. In particular, we define liquid asset holders
as households that receive interest payments from bank deposits and income from a fixed income
or dividends from direct holdings of stocks.



C. Estimates of Consumption Partial Insurance
In this appendix we apply the procedure of Blundell et al. (2008) to the data on Italy and Peru to
estimate the response of household's consumption to idiosyncratic permanent and transitory income
shocks. We assume that household's residualized income is yi,t = i,t + i,t , where i,t = i,t + i,t
is a random walk process with i,t iid (0, 2 ) and 
                                                  i,t = t + t-1 is an MA(1) process with

i,t iid (0, 2 ). Then income growth is




                                 yi,t = i,t + i,t + ( - 1)i,t-1 - i,t-2 ,                         (10)


and we postulate that consumption growth is


                                         ci,t = i,t + i,t +    i,t ,                              (11)


with     i,t   iid (0,  2 ) non-income-related changes in consumption,  the permanent shock consump-
tion insurance coefficient, and  the temporary shock consumption insurance coefficient.
       In order to estimate the variance of the income shocks and the partial insurance coefficients,
we use a minimum distance estimation between the observed variance and covariance matrices of
income and consumption growth, and their analytical expressions derived from equations (11) and
(10). For the data moments we use our estimations of the residual income and consumption. For
the analytical expressions we use the annual growth moments for Peru and the biennial moments
for Italy.13 The sample periods used for our estimation are 2007-2018 for Peru and 1998-2016 for
Italy.
 13
    In Italy we have annual flows of income and consumption, but the surveys have a biennial frequency.
Thus we derive the analytical moments using two-period differences.




                                                    55
                            Table C.1: Partial Insurance Coefficients

                                                         U.S.    Italy    Peru

                          Persistent shocks              0.642   0.662    0.786
                          Transitory shocks              0.053   0.297    0.204


Notes : Estimates for the U.S. are from Blundell et al. (2008). Estimates for Italy and Peru are our own
computations following the method of Blundell et al. (2008), further described in section C. Data source:
SHIW for Italy and ENAHO for Peru.


     Table C.1 shows the results. We find that the permanent shocks partial insurance coefficient is
large (i.e., more than 0.5) and larger than those of transitory shocks for all countries. The transitory
shocks partial insurance estimate is close to 0 for the U.S. but around 0.2-0.3 for Peru and Italy.




                                                    56
D. Empirical Analysis: Further Results

D.1. Additional Tables


Table D.1: Consumption-Income Elasticities: Average and Top-Income Households, by
Residualized and Non-Residualized Income and Consumption
                                     Euro Crises                 Emerging-Market Crises
                                  Italy       Spain        Mexico `94   Mexico `08   Peru `08   Average
 a. Baseline
                Average           -0.15       -0.15          -0.38        -0.16        -0.09     -0.19
    log Y
                Top 10-Income     -0.08       -0.12          -0.42        -0.19        -0.13     -0.19
                Top 5-Income      -0.07       -0.13          -0.43        -0.22        -0.15     -0.20
                Average           -0.18       -0.15          -0.29        -0.11        -0.08     -0.16
    log C
                Top 10-Income     -0.08       -0.14          -0.33        -0.17        -0.14     -0.17
                Top 5-Income      -0.10       -0.15          -0.30        -0.21        -0.16     -0.19
                Average            1.19       0.97            0.77         0.73        0.90      0.91
   Elasticity
                Top 10-Income      1.00       1.15            0.78         0.89        1.10      0.98
                Top 5-Income       1.53       1.12            0.71         0.96        1.07      1.08

 b. Non-Residualized
                Average           -0.14       -0.18          -0.40        -0.15        -0.12     -0.20
    log Y
                Top 10-Income     -0.11       -0.14          -0.46        -0.20        -0.18     -0.22
                Top 5-Income      -0.10       -0.15          -0.48        -0.21        -0.18     -0.22
                Average           -0.15       -0.21          -0.31        -0.07        -0.10     -0.17
    log C
                Top 10-Income     -0.10       -0.21          -0.40        -0.13        -0.19      0.21
                Top 5-Income      -0.07       -0.25          -0.39        -0.15        -0.18     -0.21
                Average            1.09       1.18            0.77         0.48        0.80      0.87
   Elasticity
                Top 10-Income      0.89       1.54            0.88         0.65        1.08      1.04
                Top 5-Income       0.77       1.60            0.82         0.72        1.04      0.99

   N Observations                 7,060      21,802          13,138       27,105      21,170    90,275

Notes : Income (Y) is defined as monetary after-tax nonfinancial income. Consumption (C) is defined as
consumption of nondurable goods and services. Both variables are deflated by the CPI. Elasticities are
calculated as the ratio of the log change in consumption to the log change in income. Panel (a) shows the
baseline calculations in which income and consumption are residualized from households observable
characteristics and time trends (see empirical model (8) in Appendix B for details). Panel (b) shows the
same calculations without residualizing variables. Top 10-Income (Top 5-Income) household's are those
above the 90th (95th) percentile of income. Further details in Appendix B. Data sources: SHIW-BI Italy,
EPF-INE Spain, ENIGH-INEGI Mexico, ENAHO-INEI Peru.




                                                      57
Table D.2: Consumption-Income Elasticities: Average and Top-Income Households, by
Income and Consumption Definitions
                                       Euro Crises                     Emerging-Market Crises
                                    Italy           Spain        Mexico `94   Mexico `08   Peru `08   Average
 a. Baseline
                Average             -0.15           -0.15          -0.38        -0.16        -0.09     -0.19
    log Y
                Top 10-Income       -0.08           -0.12          -0.42        -0.19        -0.13     -0.19
                Top 5-Income        -0.07           -0.13          -0.43        -0.22        -0.15     -0.20
                Average             -0.18           -0.15          -0.29        -0.11        -0.08     -0.16
    log C
                Top 10-Income       -0.08           -0.14          -0.33        -0.17        -0.14     -0.17
                Top 5-Income        -0.10           -0.15          -0.30        -0.21        -0.16     -0.19
                Average              1.19           0.97            0.77         0.73        0.90      0.91
   Elasticity
                Top 10-Income        1.00           1.15            0.78         0.89        1.10      0.98
                Top 5-Income         1.53           1.12            0.71         0.96        1.07      1.08

 b. Including All Monetary Items
                Average             -0.14           -0.15          -0.37        -0.15        -0.09     -0.18
    log Y
                Top 10-Income       -0.07           -0.12          -0.39        -0.18        -0.15      0.18
                Top 5-Income        -0.06           -0.13          -0.37        -0.21        -0.18     -0.19
                Average             -0.21           -0.18          -0.28        -0.13        -0.08     -0.18
    log C
                Top 10-Income       -0.10           -0.18          -0.26        -0.18        -0.16     -0.18
                Top 5-Income        -0.11           -0.19          -0.23        -0.20        -0.17     -0.18
                Average              1.52           1.18            0.76         0.88        0.86      1.04
   Elasticity
                Top 10-Income        1.46           1.51            0.68         1.01        0.96      1.12
                Top 5-Income         1.90           1.44            0.61         1.00        1.08      1.21

 c. Including All Monetary and Non Monetary Items
                Average             -0.15           -0.13          -0.37        -0.14        -0.09     -0.18
    log Y
                Top 10-Income       -0.08           -0.10          -0.38        -0.18        -0.16     -0.18
                Top 5-Income        -0.08           -0.12          -0.37        -0.21        -0.19     -0.19
                Average             -0.17           -0.16          -0.30        -0.13        -0.08     -0.17
    log C
                Top 10-Income       -0.10           -0.15          -0.27        -0.20        -0.16      0.18
                Top 5-Income        -0.11           -0.14          -0.25        -0.19        -0.19     -0.18
                Average              1.18           1.16            0.81         0.88        0.87      0.98
   Elasticity
                Top 10-Income        1.35           1.41            0.71         1.07        1.01      1.11
                Top 5-Income         1.40           1.18            0.66         0.89        0.98      1.02

   N Observations                   7,060       21,802             13,138       27,105      21,170    90,275

Notes : Income (Y) and Consumption (C) are deflated by the CPI and are residualized from households'
observable characteristics and time trends (see empirical model (8) in Appendix B for details). Elasticities
are calculated as the ratio of the log change in consumption to the log change in income. Panel (a) shows
the baseline calculations, in which Income is defined as monetary after-tax nonfinancial income and
Consumption includes nondurable goods and services. Panel (b) shows the same calculations including all
of the monetary components of consumption and income. Panel (c) shows the same calculations including
all of the monetary and non monetary components of consumption and income. Top 10-Income (Top
5-Income) household's are those above the 90th (95th) percentile of income. Further details in Appendix B.
Data sources: SHIW-BI Italy, EPF-INE Spain, ENIGH-INEGI Mexico, ENAHO-INEI Peru.




                                                            58
Table D.3: Consumption-Income Elasticities for Low and High Liquid Wealth Households

                                                       Euro Crises
                                                  Italy           Spain               Average

                                 Low              0.14              0.10                0.12
     Wealth-to-Income
                                 High             0.99              0.36                0.68
                                 Low             -0.19             -0.12                -0.16
      log Y
                                 High            -0.07             -0.20                -0.14
                                 Low             -0.17             -0.13                -0.15
      log C
                                 High            -0.10             -0.19                -0.15
                                 Low              0.94              1.02                0.98
     Elasticity
                                 High             1.44              0.95                1.20

     N Observations                              4,778            17,984               22,762
Notes : Wealth-to-Income is the median ratio of liquid wealth to annual income. Income (Y) is defined as
monetary after-tax nonfinancial income. Consumption (C) is defined as consumption of nondurable goods
and services. Both variables are deflated by the CPI and residualized from households' observable
characteristics and time trends (see empirical model (8) in Appendix B for details). Elasticities are
calculated as the ratio of the log change in consumption to the log change in income. Low (High)
households are those with below (above) the median. The sample is limited to households with positive
liquid wealth. Data sources: SHIW-BI Italy, EPF-INE Spain, ENIGH-INEGI Mexico, ENAHO-INEI Peru.




                                                  59
      Table D.4: Consumption-Income Elasticities: Durable and Non-durable Goods
                                      Euro Crises                 Emerging-Market Crises
                                                                                                 Average
                                   Italy       Spain        Mexico `94   Mexico `08   Peru `08
                Average            -0.15       -0.15          -0.38        -0.16        -0.09     -0.19
    log Y
                Top 10-Income      -0.08       -0.12          -0.42        -0.19        -0.13     -0.19

 a. Non-Durable
               Average             -0.18       -0.15          -0.29        -0.11        -0.08     -0.16
    log C
               Top 10-Income       -0.08       -0.14          -0.33        -0.17        -0.14     -0.17
                Average            1.19        0.97            0.77         0.73        0.90      0.91
   Elasticity
                Top 10-Income      1.00        1.15            0.78         0.89        1.10      0.98

 b. Durable
                Average            -0.30       -0.18          -0.27        -0.26        -0.19     -0.24
    log C
                Top 10-Income      -0.25       -0.22          -0.23        -0.29        -0.21     -0.24
                Average            2.05        1.21            0.71         1.65        2.12      1.55
   Elasticity
                Top 10-Income      3.27        1.86            0.53         1.53        1.71      1.78

   N Observations                 7,060       21,802          13,138       27,105      21,170    90,275

Notes : This table shows various moments related to households' consumption of non-durable and durable
goods. Income (Y) is defined as monetary after-tax nonfinancial income. In Panel (a) Consumption (C) is
defined as consumption of nondurable goods and services. In Panel (b) it is defined as consumption of
durable goods. Both income and consumption variables are deflated by the CPI and residualized from
households' observable characteristics and time trends (see empirical model (8) in Appendix B for details).
Elasticities are calculated as the ratio of the log change in consumption to the log change in income. Top
10-Income households are those in the highest decile of residualized income. Further details on the
classification of goods in Appendix B. Data sources: SHIW-BI Italy, EPF-INE Spain, ENIGH-INEGI
Mexico, ENAHO-INEI Peru.




                                                       60
Table D.5: Consumption-Income Elasticities: Tradable/Non-tradable and Luxury/Non-
luxury Goods

                                       Euro Crises         Emerging-Market Crises
                                                                                            Average
                                          Spain            Mexico `94    Mexico `08

                  Average                  -0.15              -0.38          -0.16            -0.23
     log Y
                  Top 10-Income            -0.12              -0.42          -0.19            -0.24

  a. Tradable
                  Average                  -0.18              -0.23          -0.06            -0.16
     log C
                  Top 10-Income            -0.14              -0.14          -0.16            -0.15
                  Average                  1.19               0.60           0.41             0.73
    Elasticity
                  Top 10-Income            1.21               0.33           0.81             0.78

  b. Non-Tradable
                  Average                  -0.17              -0.37          -0.26            -0.27
     log C
                  Top 10-Income            -0.21              -0.40          -0.27            -0.29
                  Average                  1.16               0.98           1.66             1.27
    Elasticity
                  Top 10-Income            1.74               0.95           1.38             1.36

  c. Luxury
                  Average                  -0.63              -0.36          -0.31            -0.34
     log C
                  Top 10-Income            -0.62              -0.29          -0.33            -0.31
                  Average                  4.19               0.94           1.97             1.46
    Elasticity
                  Top 10-Income            5.24               0.69           1.73             1.21

  d. Non-Luxury
                  Average                  -0.11              -0.26          -0.05            -0.16
     log C
                  Top 10-Income            -0.10              -0.23          -0.09            -0.16
                  Average                  0.75               0.67           0.34             0.51
    Elasticity
                  Top 10-Income            0.87               0.55           0.48             0.52

    N Observations                        21,802             13,138         27,105           40,243

Notes : This table shows various moments related to households' consumption of tradable and non-tradable
goods, and luxury and non-luxury goods. Income (Y) is defined as monetary after-tax nonfinancial income.
In Panels (a) and (b) Consumption (C) is defined as consumption of tradable and non-tradable goods,
respectively. In Panels (c) and (d) Consumption (C) is defined as consumption of luxury and non-luxury
goods, respectively. Both income and consumption variables are deflated by the CPI and residualized from
households' observable characteristics and time trends (see empirical model (8) in Appendix B for details).
Elasticities are calculated as the ratio of the log change in consumption to the log change in income. Top
10-Income households are those in the highest decile of residualized income. Further details on the
classification of goods in Appendix B. Data sources: EPF-INE Spain, ENIGH-INEGI Mexico.




                                                    61
    Table D.6: Consumption-Income Elasticities Adjusted by Inflation Heterogeneity

                                                        Emerging-Market Crises
                                                Mexico `94      Mexico `08      Peru `08         Average

    Average - Top-Income Inflation                  2.0%           0.9%            1.3%            1.4%
                   Average                          -0.38          -0.16           -0.09           -0.21
     log Y
                   Top-Income                       -0.42          -0.19           -0.13           -0.25
                   Average                          -0.29          -0.11           -0.08           -0.16
     log C
                   Top-Income                       -0.33          -0.20           -0.13           -0.22
                   Average                          0.77            0.73           0.90            0.80
    Elasticity
                   Top-Income                       0.78            1.02           1.05            0.95

    N Observations                                 13,138         27,105          21,170          61,413

Notes : The first row refers to the difference between the average inflation and the inflation of households in
the top income decile. Inflation for both groups is computed using log-differences from the peak (CPI =
100) to trough of each episode. Income (Y) is defined as monetary after-tax nonfinancial income.
Consumption (C) is defined as consumption of nondurable goods and services. Both variables are
residualized from households' observable characteristics and time trends (see empirical model (8) in
Appendix B for details). Income is deflated using baseline CPI and consumption decile-specific CPI
constructed using the decile's consumption basket. Elasticities are calculated as the ratio of the log change
in consumption to the log change in income. Data sources: ENIGH-INEGI Mexico, and ENAHO-INEI
Peru.




                                                      62
                       Table D.7: Robustness: Permanent Heterogeneity

                                                Euro Crises          EM Crises
                                                                                          Average
                                                  Italy               Peru `08
  Low-Elasticity HHs
                             Average                -0.12               -0.14               -0.13
      log Y
                             Top-Income             -0.06               -0.16               -0.11
                             Average                -0.11               -0.09               -0.10
      log C
                             Top-Income             -0.04               -0.12               -0.08
                             Average                0.87                 0.63               0.75
     Elasticity
                             Top-Income             0.61                 0.73               0.67

  High-Elasticity HHs
                             Average                -0.11               -0.12               -0.12
      log Y
                             Top-Income             -0.11               -0.12               -0.12
                             Average                -0.13               -0.17               -0.15
      log C
                             Top-Income             -0.11               -0.19               -0.15
                             Average                1.15                 1.46               1.30
     Elasticity
                             Top-Income             0.98                 1.61               1.30

     N Observations                                 1,463               2,537               4,000

Notes : Income (Y) is defined as monetary after-tax nonfinancial income. Consumption (C) is defined as
consumption of nondurable goods and services. Both variables are deflated by the CPI and residualized
from households' observable characteristics and time trends (see empirical model (8) in Appendix B for
details). Elasticities are calculated as the ratio of the log change in consumption to the log change in
income. Top-Income households are those in the highest decile of residualized income. Households with
high (low) elasticity are those with individual estimated elasticities above (below) the median. Further
details in Appendix B. Data sources: SHIW-BI Italy, ENAHO-INEI Peru.


D.2. Additional measures of consumption adjustment

In this section, we analyze consumption-income elasticities leaving fixed households' groups over
time. We can perform this analysis for the case of Italy and Peru, which are the countries with
available panel data. Table D.8 shows consumption-income elasticities for the average, the top
income, and the households with high-liquid wealth. Elasticities are larger than one and similar
for all groups.




                                                    63
            Table D.8: Robustness: Elasticities with Fixed Households' Groups

                                                  Euro Crises         EM Crises
                                                                                         Average
                                                     Italy             Peru `08

                      Average                         -0.06              -0.07            -0.07
        log Y         Top-Income                      -0.04              -0.09            -0.07
                      High-Liquid Wealth              -0.05              -0.25            -0.15
                      Average                         -0.08              -0.11            -0.10
        log C         Top-Income                      -0.06              -0.16            -0.11
                      High-Liquid Wealth              -0.05              -0.33            -0.19
                      Average                            1.40             1.65             1.53
       Elasticity     Top-Income                         1.34             1.75             1.55
                      High-Liquid Wealth                 1.11             1.32             1.21

       N Observations                                 1,044              2,114            3,158

Notes : Income (Y) is defined as monetary after-tax nonfinancial income. Consumption (C) is defined as
consumption of nondurable goods and services. Both variables are deflated by the CPI and residualized
from households' observable characteristics and time trends (see empirical model (8) in Appendix B for
details). Elasticities are calculated as the ratio of the log change in consumption to the log change in
income. Top-Income households are those with residualized income higher than a country-specific
threshold. High-Liquid Wealth households are those with liquid assets greater than a country-specific
threshold. Further details in Appendix B. Data sources: SHIW-BI Italy, ENAHO-INEI Peru.




                                                    64
E. Quantitative Analysis: Further Results

E.1. Additional Figures


                      Figure E.1: Crisis Experiments: Aggregate Shocks

              (a) Aggregate Income                                  (b) Borrowing Constraint




Notes : This figure shows the path of aggregate income and borrowing constraints under each of the crisis
experiments. The horizontal axis refers to years. For details on each experiment, see Section 4.


                Figure E.2: Model Analysis: Identification of Key Parameters

               (a) PI - Experiment                                   (b) FF - Experiment
        Persistence of Growth Shock (g )                   Elasticity Financial Constraint-to-Y ( )




Notes : This figure shows the consumption-income elasticities in the calibrated model presented in Section
4 for different parameterizations of g and  . From darker to lighter blue, the parameters grow larger.


                                                    65
                           Figure E.3: Interest Rates during Crises Episodes

                          (a) Italy                                                         (b) Mexico
       .15




                                                                   .15
                                 lending rate                                                    lending rate
                                 deposit rate                                                    deposit rate
       .1




                                                                   .1
       .05




                                                                   .05
       0




                                                                   0
       -.05




                                                                   -.05
          2006   2008     2010         2012     2014   2016               0            1           2            3   4

Notes : Panel (a) shows the deposit and lending real rate to the private sector in Italy during the Euro
Crisis episode. Panel (b) shows the deposit and lending real rate to the private sector in Mexico for the
average of the Tequila and Global Financial Crises. Interest rates are in real terms, and calculated deflating
by ex post inflation. Dotted lines indicate the crisis period, and dashed lines the pre-crisis and crisis
average yields. Further details in Appendix B. Data sources: World Bank, IFS, Bank of Italy, and FRED.


E.2. Model with Aggregate Risk

In this appendix we extend our baseline model to allow for aggregate shocks. We assume the
aggregate endowment is subject to both trend and transitory shocks. In particular, we follow
Aguiar and Gopinath (2007)14 and assume that Yt = Zt t , where Zt is the transitory component
that follows the stochastic process



                                                                                         z
                           ln Zt = z ln Zt-1 + z z
                                                 t,
                                                                   z
                                                                   t      N       -             ,1 ,                (12)
                                                                                      2(1 + z )

and t = egt t-1 is a stochastic trend subject to shocks to the growth rate gt that follow

                                                                              g               g
                        gt = (1 - g )g + g gt-1 + g t ,                       t   N    -             ,1 .           (13)
                                                                                           2(1 + g )

         Finally, we parameterize the borrowing constraint function as f (Yt ) = Yt , with  > 0. The
next section shows the detrended version of the household's recursive problem with aggregate risk.

         We parameterize the model following two main calibrations of the Italian economy. The first
  14
    In their case, the exogenous processes are productivity shocks, whereas in our model the exogenous
processes correspond to endowments, given our focus on consumption behavior.


                                                              66
calibration, which we label PI, assumes f (Yt ) = 1 and targets the same moments as in our baseline
calibration by calibrating the relative relevance of aggregate permanent and transitory shocks.
The second calibration, labeled FF, focuses on the economy with aggregate transitory shocks and
calibrates the borrowing constraint to target the same aggregate moments. We deliberately do not
target individual consumption responses to a crisis, and leave this behavior as a means to test the
validity of both theories in explaining the micro-anatomy of consumption adjustments.


E.2.1. Detrended Recursive Problem

                                                                                               x
This section derives the detrended version of the household's recursive problem. Denote x
                                                                                        ^=     -1
                                                                 -
                                                   b, µ; z, g )1
for any variable x. Guess V (b, µ; z, g, -1 ) = v (^           -1 . Then


                                 -       1- c^1-
                   b, µ; z, g )1
                v (^           -1 = max -1               b , µ ; z , g )1-
                                                 +  E v (^                                    (14)
                                      b      1-
                                             ^1-
                                           - c                -
                                   = max 1
                                         -1      + e(1- )g 1            ^
                                                             -1 E v (b , µ ; z , g )          (15)
                                      b      1-

which confirms our guess of the objective function. Now we derive the relevant budget set


                                           ^ -1 + q -1 eg ^
                                  ^-1 = eµ Y
                                  c                       b - -1^
                                                                b,

                                -1 eg ^     ^ -1 ,
                                      b  eµ Y
                                 ^ -1 = ez -1 eg ,
                                 Y

                                      g = (1 - g )µg + g g + g g ,

                                      z = z z +  z z ,

                                     µ = µ µ +  µ µ .


Therefore, the detrended recursive problem becomes

                                              ^1-
                                              c
                        v (^
                           b, µ; z, g ) = max     + e(1- )g E v (^
                                                                 b ,µ ;z ,g )                 (16)
                                           b  1-




                                                  67
subject to


                                       ^ = eµ ez eg + qeg ^
                                       c                  b -^
                                                             b,
                                      ^
                                      b  eµ ez ,

                                      g = (1 - g )g + g g + g g ,

                                      z = z z + z z ,

                                      µ = µ µ + µ µ .


E.3. Alternative Measures of Aggregate Responses

In this section we analyze different measures of response to the aggregate shocks. We compute the
elasticities using simulated data from the model with aggregate and without aggregate risk. Figure
E.4 shows similar results to the baseline model.

         Figure E.4: Consumption-Income Elasticities: Model with Aggregate Risk

              (a) PI-view Experiment                                  (b) FF-view Experiment




Notes : This figure shows the consumption-income elasticities for different income deciles in the Italian
crisis (described in Section 3) and in the crisis experiments of the model calibrated for Italy (described in
Section 4). Panel (a) shows the permanent-income-view experiment and Panel (b) the
financial-frictions-view experiment. Each panel shows the experiments from the baseline model, presented
in Figure 4 (labeled baseline ), and those from the model with aggregate risk (labeled aggregate risk ),
described in Appendix E. Elasticities are computed using the average income and consumption by decile,
and are defined as the ratio of the log change in consumption to the log change in income. The dashed line
corresponds to locally weighted smoothed data. Further details in Appendix B. Data sources: SHIW-BI
Italy.


     In addition, we compute the theoretical elasticity by calcuating changes in the policy function

                                                     68
of consumption across the income distribution at the steady-state level of assets. Figure E.5 shows
that the shape of the response is robust for both views under any of these measures.

             Figure E.5: Consumption-Income Elasticities: Alternative Exercises

              (a) PI-view Experiment                                  (b) FF-view Experiment




Notes : This figure shows the consumption-income elasticities for different income deciles in the Italian
crisis (described in Section 3) and in the crisis experiments of the model calibrated for Italy (described in
Section 4). Panel (a) shows the permanent-income-view experiment and Panel (b) the
financial-frictions-view experiment. Each panel shows the elasticities from the baseline experiments,
presented in Figure 4 (labeled baseline ), and the elasticities computed directly from the policy function of
consumption evaluated at the steady-state asset level and different levels of the idiosyncratic shock (labeled
theoretical ). Elasticities are computed using the average income and consumption by decile, and are defined
as the ratio of the log change in consumption to the log change in income. The dashed line corresponds to
locally weighted smoothed data. Further details in Appendix B. Data sources: SHIW-BI Italy.


     Moreover, we compute the marginal propensity to consume (MPC) from the aggregate shocks
instead of the C-to-Y elasticity. As shown in Figure E.6, both experiments exhibit a decreasing
shape across the income distribution; hence the MPC measure is arguably less useful to distinguish
between views. Also, Figure E.6 shows that the model is able to correctly fit the shape and level
of the MPC in the PI-experiment.




                                                     69
                               Figure E.6: MPCs: Model Analysis

             (a) PI-view Experiment                                 (b) FF-view Experiment




Notes : This figure shows the marginal propensities to consume (MPCs) for different income deciles in the
Italian crisis (described in Section 3), and in the crisis experiments of the model calibrated for Italy
(described in Section 4). Panel (a) shows the permanent-income-view experiment and Panel (b) the
financial-frictions-view experiment. MPCs are computed using the average income and consumption by
decile, and are defined as the ratio of the change in consumption to the change in income. The dashed line
corresponds to the locally weighted smoothed data. Further details in Appendix B. Data sources:
SHIW-BI Italy.



E.4. Additional calibrations


                Table E.1: Model with Nonhomotheticities: Italy and Mexico

                   Parameter                                             Value
                                                                    Italy   Mexico
                   Common
                   Risk-aversion coefficient                        2.00      2.00
                   Risk-free interest rate                     r    0.01      0.01
                   Financial constraints                            0.25      0.25
                   Country-Specific
                   Dicount factor                                   0.93      0.90
                   Persistence of idiosyncratic process       µ     0.94      0.98
                   Volatility of idiosyncratic process        µ     0.18      0.18
                   Subsistence level of consumption           c     0.04      0.26




                                                   70
Figure E.7: Model Extensions: Income Distribution and Subsistence Level of Consumption

                      (a) Italy                                              (b) Mexico




Notes : This figure shows the distribution of log income in the calibrated model for Italy and Mexico.
Shaded areas indicate the population with an income below the indigence level. We define the indigence
level using the World Bank 5.5 USD/day PPP 2011 poverty line. For Mexico, the average poverty level is
15.7% from 1992 to 2018, and for Italy the average is 1.4% from 1995-2014. The distribution of income is
approximated using a log-normal distribution that matches the model's steady-state income distribution.
Further details in Appendix B. Data source: World Bank.


E.5. Alternative income processes

This section provides details on how we estimate the function (µit ), which governs the hetero-
geneity in loadings to the aggregate income shock. We proceed in two steps. First, we estimate the
following regression for each income decile:


                         ln(yd,t+1 ) - ln(yd,t ) = d (ln(Yt+1 ) - ln(Yt )) + d,t+1                   (17)


where d indexes income deciles. Second, we estimate a locally weighted smoothing function using
the estimates d as inputs. Panel (a) of Figure E.8 shows that the estimated function (µit ) is
decreasing, with higher loadings on the aggregate shock estimated for income-poor households.
     Panels (b) and (c) of Figure E.8 show the dynamics of income for different income deciles
under both crisis experiments. Income-poor households suffer a larger contraction in income in
response to the aggregate shock.




                                                    71
                 Figure E.8: Loadings to Aggregate Income and Simulations

                             (a) Loadings to Aggregate Income by Decile




                               2
                               1.5
                               1
                               .5
                               0




                                     1   2   3   4    5   6    7    8    9    10

        (b) PI-Experiment Y Simulation                         (c) FF-Experiment Y Simulation




Notes : Panel (a) shows the estimates of the function beta(µ) across the income distribution using equation
17. The dots are point estimates, the line a locally weighted smoother, and the shadow the 95% confidence
interval. The horizontal axis refers to income deciles. Panels (b) and (c) show the simulation of the
aggregate income process for the PI-Experiment and FF-Experiment, respectively. The darker lines
indicate a lower income level. The horizontal axis refers to years. For details on each experiment, see
Section 4. Data sources: SHIW-Italy.




                                                     72
E.6. Alternative aggregate shocks


                     Figure E.9: Alternative Income and Financial Shock

        (a) Y transitory and  transitory                       (b) Y transitory and  permanent




       (c) Y permanent and  transitory                         (d) Y permanent and  permanent




Notes : This figure shows the consumption-income elasticities for different income deciles for our baseline
calibration for Italy. We simulate four shocks: Panel (a) aggregate income drops temporarily and the
borrowing constraint tightens temporarily; panel (b) aggregate income drops temporarily and the
borrowing constraint tightens permanently; panel (c) aggregate income drops permanently and the
borrowing constraint tightens temporarily; panel (d) aggregate income drops temporarily and the
borrowing constraint tightens temporarily. Elasticities are computed using average income and
consumption by decile, and are as the ratio of the log change in consumption to the log change in income.
The dashed line corresponds to the locally weighted smoothed data. Further details in Appendix B. Data
sources: SHIW-BI Italy.




                                                    73
F. Policy Experiments: Further Results

F.1. Policies with Different Progressivity

We now study the effects of the stabilization policies analyzed in Section 5, which differ in the
degree of progressivity. In particular, we consider an initial transfer that takes the form


                                             T0 (µit ) = Xe µit ,


where the subindex 0 indicates the crisis period, X controls the scale of the program, and 
controls the progressivity. When  < 0, the transfer is regressive (i.e., larger transfers to income-
rich households); when  > 0 it is progressive; and when  = 0 it corresponds to the flat lump-sum
transfer analyzed in Section 5 (see Panel (a) of Figure F.1). Since we are interested in comparing
programs with the same scale and varying progressivity, we set X            e- µ d(µ) =  , where (µ) is
the cdf of idiosyncratic income.

           Figure F.1: Policy Analysis: Fiscal Policies with Varying Progressivity

      (a) Initial Transfers by Progressivity                 (b) Aggregate Response by Progressivity




Notes : Panel (a) the income transfer each that households in different income deciles receieve for different
policies that differ in their degree of progressivity  . Panel (b) shows the ratio of the change in aggregate
consumption to the aggregate fiscal transfers, for different degrees of progressivity. The blue dashed line
corresponds to the MPCs when the policy is conducted in the steady state, the solid orange line
corresponds to the MPCs when the policy is conducted during the PI-view crisis experiment, and the grey
marked line when it is conducted during the FF-view crisis experiment.



                                                     74
     Panel (b) of Figure F.1 depicts the response of aggregate consumption for fiscal programs that
have the same scale but differ in their progressivity, and shows similar than our baseline experiment.
In all policies, a highier progressivity leads to a larger effect on aggregate consumption because it
implies redistribution from low- to high-MPC households. In the PI-view crisis experiment, the
effects are still similar to those in the steady state. However, in the FF-view crisis experiment,
as the aggregate shock leads to a tightening of the borrowing constraint that is more relevant for
low-income households, the effects of increasing progressivity on aggregate consumption are larger.




                                                 75
