                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 DESIGNING AN INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORDER:
                             A RESEARCH AGENDA

                                         Renee Bowen
                                       J. Lawrence Broz

                                      Working Paper 27914
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27914


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2020




We thank participants at the Princeton University IR Faculty Colloquium, the 13th annual
conference on the Political Economy of International Organization, Simon Fraser University, and
the Political Science Friday Speaker Series at the University of Colorado-Boulder for their
helpful comments. We are particularly grateful to Duane Layton, Andrew Moravcsik, Krzysztof
Pelc, Peter Rosendorff, Christina Schneider, David Steinberg, and Adalbert Winkler for their
generous and constructive advice. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Renee Bowen and J. Lawrence Broz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Designing an International Economic Order: A Research Agenda
Renee Bowen and J. Lawrence Broz
NBER Working Paper No. 27914
October 2020
JEL No. A11,F02,F13,F5,F51,F52,F53,F55,F6,H1,H4,K12,K33

                                           ABSTRACT

The institutions that have sustained global economic cooperation for the past 75 years are under
threat. Despite admonitions that global peace and prosperity are at risk, policymakers in
important countries have ignored the rules of the multilateral order and moved down the path of
unilateralism and economic nationalism. What role can social scientists play in redesigning the
international economic order? We offer a research agenda for contributing to the reform and
improvement of global institutions. The research agenda is guided by three themes: threats,
solutions, and leadership. Threats refer to the deep causes of the crisis in global institutions, not
the symptoms or expressions of those problems. Solutions refers to institutional reforms required
to address deep threats to the global order. Leadership addresses the challenge of coordinating
efforts to supply international institutions, which can be thought of as global public goods. We
demonstrate the value of this research agenda by applying it to the World Trade Organization.


Renee Bowen
Department of Economics and
School of Global Policy and Strategy
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Dr. #0519
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519
and NBER
trbowen@ucsd.edu

J. Lawrence Broz
Department of Political Science
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Dr. #0521
La Jolla, CA 92093-0521
jlbroz@ucsd.edu
1    Introduction

The international organizations that have sustained global economic cooperation since 1944 are
under threat. The World Trade Organization (WTO) is in danger of losing legitimacy as impor-
tant member countries ignore its rules and move down the path of unilateralism and economic
nationalism (Bown and Irwin, 2019). The International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World
Bank have been weakened by divisions among members over governance and conditionality,
leading China to launch its own global institutions, including the Asian Infrastructure Invest-
ment Bank (AIIB). Despite admonitions that global peace and prosperity are at risk, scholars
of international organization have not defined a clear research agenda for responding to the
mounting challenges that face the international economic order. While there has been substan-
tial scholarship about various aspects of international institutions, a coherent body of research
does not yet exist pointing to how international organizations might be reformed and coordi-
nated in order to maintain and enhance global economic cooperation. In this paper, we develop
a research agenda to fill this gap.

    Prima facie, such an agenda appears to be a daunting task, but we present an approach that
we believe is tractable. We begin by identifying significant threats to globalization that have
presented themselves in recent history. For example, populism and the emergence of new eco-
nomic powers are threats to the current liberal international economic order (Frieden, 2019;
Nye, 2017). For each salient threat, solutions may have been proposed in popular discourse,
policy circles or the academic literature (Bacchetta et al., 2019; Scheve and Slaughter, 2018).
The second step is thus to identify proposed solutions to each threat and determine the degree
of academic consensus on the efficacy of the solution, if any such consensus exists. Finally, in
the absence of a benevolent social planner to act on behalf of the community of nations, the
question of implementation of solutions becomes salient. Who should implement these solu-
tions and how? This raises the question of leadership in international economic relations and
the role it plays in building consensus for reforms at both the domestic and international levels.
Redesigning globalization is a tall order. But modifying existing institutions is possible. This
simple framework--threats, solutions, and leadership--is designed to help organize research
on international economic order.

    Economic globalization rests on a foundation of international and regional institutions con-
structed in the aftermath of the second World War. Pressures have been building within these
institutions for a long time--before populist politicians and political parties gained ascendance


                                                1
in the United States and Europe. Indeed, the current crisis of globalization, can be understood
as the consequence of the failure to respond to weaknesses and tensions in global institutions,
not the cause of such tensions.

   To illustrate, consider the WTO crisis centered on the Appellate Body. Countries currently
have the right to appeal to the WTO's Appellate Body if they disagree with a preliminary panel
ruling. But the United States has refused to allow the appointment of new Appellate Body mem-
bers as old members' terms expire. The Appellate Body now does not have enough members
to issue rulings on appeals. This could end the WTO's system of resolving disputes and lead to
rampant unilateralism and protectionism (Bown, 2019).

   The reason the current U.S. administration is blocking the appointment of judges to the
Appellate Body is that the United States (and some other WTO members) believe that the Ap-
pellate Body oversteps its authority (United States Trade Representative, 2018; Payosova et al.,
2018). This long-standing complaint about judicial overreach is, in turn, rooted in the failure
of WTO members to negotiate updates to WTO rules in areas that were left vague, as with the
Anti-Dumping Agreement. In other words, the crisis at the WTO is not driven by the disruptive
policy actions of a single administration, as it may seem. Nor is it a problem with the WTO's
dispute settlement mechanism, which has earned a reputation as the "crown jewel" of the global
trading system for successfully resolving hundreds of trade disputes. Rather, the crisis reflects
the failure of members to clarify existing rules on trade remedies (see below), and to negotiate
new rules for members with state capitalist economies, like China. Clearer rules are needed
on trade remedies, and new rules are needed for China. But members have not been able to
find consensus in these areas since the WTO agreement went into effect in 1995. By conse-
quence, the Appellate Body has been left to render its decisions based on a set of ambiguous
and incomplete rules, which provokes controversy.

   We suggest that the crisis over appointment of Appellate Body judges is a symptom of
the failure to modernize WTO agreements over the past 25 years. The 2018 U.S.-China trade
war is also a symptom of the failure of systematic WTO reform. Frustrated by years of fruit-
less efforts to modernize WTO rules through negotiation, the U.S. imposed $50 billion of new
tariffs on steel and aluminum imports on national security grounds in 2018, claiming that the
action did not require WTO review or approval (Bown, 2019). Then the U.S. retaliated against
China without going through the WTO's dispute resolution process, imposing tariffs of $250
billion on Chinese imports. While these unilateral actions contravened WTO rules that require
a member to win a dispute before acting against another member (and then, within strict limits,


                                               2
and only if the member refuses to change its policies), the U.S. claimed that it had run out of
WTO-consistent options, citing problems with Appellate Body overreach (United States Trade
Representative, 2018).

    The U.S. complaint that the Appellate Body is creating law rather than enforcing established
rights and obligations stems from a long history of Appellate Body decisions challenging U.S.
"trade remedies" --anti-dumping, subsidy, and safeguard measures that protect domestic in-
dustries from import competition. Since 1995, the Appellate Body has issued numerous rulings
condemning U.S. trade remedies, including safeguards on imported steel. In anti-dumping,
the U.S. has lost dozens of WTO cases involving "zeroing," an approach to calculating anti-
dumping tariffs that is strongly biased in favor of more and higher anti-dumping duties (Bown
and Prusa, 2011).

    The Appellate Body also affirmed a panel ruling that outlawed a U.S. policy, known as
the "Byrd Amendment," that transferred tax revenues from anti-dumping duties directly to the
domestic firms that had petitioned for relief. The U.S. was aggrieved because "no provision
in the WTO Agreement limits how a WTO Member might choose to make use of the funds
collected through anti-dumping and countervailing duties"(United States Trade Representative,
2018, 24). The broader U.S. concern is that Appellate Body rulings routinely constrain its ability
to use the agreement's "escape clause" (trade remedies) to protect politically sensitive domestic
industries and jobs that the U.S. deems important. This issue became even more prominent with
China's accession into the WTO in 2001 (United States Trade Representative, 2018).

    The current trade war, as well as the stalemate over the appointment of new judges to the
Appellate Body, are symptoms of deeper problems in the international economic order. If global
capitalism is in trouble, the trouble lies with international institutions and the deeper threats that
they face. For the remainder of the paper we cover the three themes and identify the areas of
research we see as critical.



2    Threats

Threats are the deeper problems in global institutions, not the symptoms or expressions of
those problems. The purpose of an initial diagnosis is to establish a relationship between the
underlying threat and its outward expression as a current crisis. In this note, we suggest that
the three major threats to the current international economic order are: (1) populism; (2) state-

                                                  3
controlled economies; and (3) national security. For illustration, we focus on the populism
threat.

       Populist politicians appeal to disaffected voters by posing a stark trade-off between interna-
tional institutions and national sovereignty. For example, "Take Back Control" was the alluring
slogan of the Brexit campaign to leave the European Union while in Italy, Luigi Di Maio of
the Five Star Movement spoke of "continuous attacks... from Eurocrats."1 In the case of the
United States, President Donald Trump vowed before the United Nations General Assembly
that "We will never surrender America's sovereignty to an unaccountable, unelected global bu-
reaucracy. . . We reject the ideology of globalism."2

       Two decades ago, economist Dani Rodrik recognized that international economic integra-
tion and national sovereignty are two elements of an irreconcilable "political trilemma of the
world economy" (Rodrik, 2000, 180). The third element is democracy, which Rodrik referred
to as "mass politics." According to Rodrik, governments can combine any two of these three
elements but can never have all three simultaneously. By "international economic integration"
Rodrik was referring to reductions in national barriers to trade and capital flows, and the interna-
tional rules and institutions that help countries sustain these reductions. His term "nation-state"
referred to the independent sovereign authority of states to make and administer laws within
their territories, while "mass politics" directs attention to democratic political systems in which
the franchise is unrestricted, societal actors are highly mobilized, and politicians and political
institutions are responsive to mobilized groups (Rodrik, 2000, 180-81).

       Rodrik's insight--which can serve as a useful heuristic for analyzing the populist threat to
international institutions--is that global economic integration, national sovereignty and democ-
racy are not attainable simultaneously. Nations can combine any two of these elements but must
sacrifice the third. For example, when nation-states pursue deep international economic inte-
gration, they face a trade-off. They can retain their national sovereignty and make the pursuit of
global economic integration their overriding policy objective. But this choice is incompatible
with mass politics because democracies must be responsive to pressures from the workers and
the firms that are harmed by globalization. The other alternative is for nation-states to pool their
   1
      The "Take Back Control" campaign website is at http://www.voteleavetakecontrol.org. Luigi Di Maio was
quoted in "Italy's Populists aim to Challenge EU on Debt and Migrants." 16 May 2018. BBC News. Available at
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-44136218
    2
      "Remarks by President Trump to the 73rd Session of the United Nations General Assembly." 25 Septem-
ber 2018. Available at https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefings-statements/remarks-president-trump-73rd-session-
united-nations-general-assembly-new-york-ny/.


                                                     4
sovereignty in a "global federation" that tailors mass politics to the needs of global markets.
With this choice, as approximated in the Eurozone, mass politics is retained at the level of the
federation, but the powers of nation-states are severely circumscribed by supranational rules
and authorities.

   We take Rodrik's trilemma as our point of departure for studying the populist threat to
international economic institutions. However, we do not conceptualize the trilemma as a stark
choice of picking only two elements and none of the third. In geometric terms, that would mean
selecting a point in a triangle, and forcing that point to be on the edge of the triangle. Instead,
we emphasize that the point can be in the interior of the triangle, giving some weight (but not
full weight) to all three elements. This allows us to conceptualize populism as a movement that
seeks to re-weight the elements of the trilemma.

   Figure 1 presents a stylized version of the trilemma weights for the European Union, the
United States, and China at various points in time. The box on the right identifies three insti-
tutional developments that altered the weights of the elements in the trilemma, and the arrows
suggest the direction of the change in weights implied by these institutional developments.

                       International Economic Integration


                                                          Democracy constraint


                                                                     1986 - Single European Act
                                                                     1995 - WTO Appellate Body
               China (2001)
                                                                     2001 - China enters WTO
                               US (1995)

                                            EU (1986)
National Sovereignty                                           Democracy

Figure 1: Global institutions, Rodrik's "trilemma of the world economy", and the democracy
constraint

   The Single European Act of 1986 (SEA)--which combined comprehensive liberalization of
the European market with institutional reforms to streamline decision-making, such as qualified
majority voting--accelerated economic integration and shifted sovereignty from nation-states
to European decision-making institutions (Moravcsik, 1991). As noted in Figure 1 by the trajec-
tory of the EU arrow, the SEA increased the weight on economic integration, decreased national

                                                5
sovereignty, but retained democracy at the European level.

   For the U.S., the Uruguay Round Agreement extended trade liberalization to new areas and
established the WTO and its powerful Appellate Body in 1995. These changes contributed to a
substantial increase in U.S. integration with the world economy as illustrated in Figure 1. But
deeper integration came at the cost of a moderate loss of sovereignty (through the establish-
ment of Appellate Body) and, a loss of democracy (by inadequately responding to losers of
integration). Consequently, U.S. politicians faced a backlash from voters and organized groups
that were harmed by global integration. This is denoted by the U.S. arrow approaching the
"democratic constraint."

   In contrast to the U.S., where low-skilled workers and protectionists mounted challenges to
global economic integration (Broz et al., 2020), and western Europe, where populists attacked
the EU for eroding the power of nation-states (Norris and Inglehart, 2019), China saw little
domestic reaction to its embrace of globalization after it entered the WTO in 2001. As Figure
1 illustrates, China is less constrained by "mass politics" due to its single-party authoritarian
political system than is the U.S. and the EU. For example, there was hardly any domestic back-
lash to the sweeping commitments China made to open its economy in negotiations with the
U.S. over WTO membership. There were, however, concerns that rising unemployment in sec-
tors that shrank due to international competition might trigger greater government repression
(Halverson, 2004).

   If populism (or mass politics) is understood as an effort to reduce the weight on interna-
tional economic integration, then it suggests that there is a limit to how far governments can
move toward this node of the trilemma without triggering a political backlash. We call this
limit the "democracy constraint" as illustrated in Figure 1. As nations engage in even deeper
forms of economic integration beyond trade--to finance, and domestic regulations of various
kinds--these adjustment costs rise, increasing the likelihood that exposed citizens and groups
will mobilize against integration. Thus, in democracies, there is a limit to how high these ad-
justment costs can go before triggering a backlash against international economic integration.

   Solutions to the threat of populism will thus involve institutional changes that either: 1)
address the distribution of adjustment costs; 2) relax the democracy constraint; or 3) moderate
the move towards integration. If the level of economic integration is kept below the "democracy
constraint," then a moderate form of economic integration should be politically and socially
sustainable. In other words, it may be possible to redesign global institutions with intermediate


                                               6
solutions that address the limited and specific grievances of populists. For example, current
western European populists are not attacking the WTO; their grievances are with the EU.

   To this end we ask, which specific areas of U.S. policymaking do populists want to claw back
from the WTO and why? National sovereignty is the rallying cry of American populists, but
precisely which WTO decisions and policies are causing this grievance, and which mobilized
groups within the U.S. are behind the challenge? Relatedly, why do similar WTO decisions
evoke different responses from different WTO members? For example, in the 1990s, the Euro-
pean Community used zeroing to calculate antidumping duties but ended the practice with little
apparent controversy after the Appellate Body ruled that it was inconsistent with WTO rules.
More generally, why are some WTO members more willing to delegate sovereignty to the WTO
than others?

   While there are detailed literatures on populism and on the WTO, they remain, for the most
part, separate literatures. Scholars of trade policy explore how interest group and voter pressures
are aggregated through domestic political institutions to shape trade policy outcomes (Grossman
and Helpman, 1994; Rodrik, 1995). But they neglect how WTO commitments and dispute
settlement decisions constrain these outcomes. For their part, WTO experts explore interactions
and among member states but neglect how those interactions are shaped and constrained by
domestic political pressures within member countries.

   We consider that this is an instance of the level-of-analysis problem in research on inter-
national institutions. Researchers use "tractability" as the justification to focus on one level
of analysis to the exclusion of the other, which makes sense from a research design perspec-
tive. We submit, however, that responding to current threats to global economic institutions
requires scholars to bring the two levels into a common analytical framework. To continue to
do otherwise is to risk irrelevance.



2.1    Populism in the United States as a threat to the WTO

We ask if populism is a threat to global economic cooperation, why might it manifest itself
as an attack on the Appellate Body? To do this, we must first understand the WTO's dispute
settlement mechanism.

   The WTO's dispute settlement process begins when a member mounts a Complaint against
another member for violating WTO rules. Next, the parties enter a Consultations phase where

                                                7
they try to negotiate a mutually acceptable resolution of their dispute. About 60% of all disputes
are settled via consultations­an obvious benefit since this avoids costly litigation. In the roughly
40% of cases that remain unresolved, the dispute goes to a Panel of Inquiry, where independent
experts, who can't be from a country involved in the dispute, review evidence and then issue
a ruling. If either side disagrees with the panel's ruling, they can request Appellate Review.
Each appeal is heard by three members of a seven-member Appellate Body. Members of the
Appellate Body have four-year terms and broadly represent the range of WTO members. The
ruling they issue can uphold, modify or reverse a panel's findings; these Appellate Body reports
are final and can only be blocked if all WTO members vote against them (as with panel rulings).
The next phase involves implementation of the Appellate Body Report, which aims to bring the
"losing" side's policies into conformity. The Appellate Body monitors and reviews compliance
and, in the event of non-compliance, allows the complainant to impose retaliatory tariffs against
the respondent that has failed to implement.

       In the 2016 presidential campaign, candidate Donald Trump described the WTO as a "disas-
ter" and threatened to pull the U.S. out of the organization if it interfered with his plan to impose
penalties on U.S. companies that moved jobs offshore.3 Once elected, President Trump began
blocking the appointment of new Appellate Body members.4 Figure 2 illustrates the WTO dis-
pute settlement process, and the point at which the Trump administration has intervened. This
action has crippled the WTO's system for enforcing its rules and opened the door to tit-for-tat
trade wars (Hillman, 2018).

       As of December 2019, for the first time, the Appellate Body did not have enough members
to hear appeals. The absence of the Appellate Body means that members can now block dispute
settlement proceedings by appealing panel reports "into the void." WTO panels will continue to
function as normal. But if either party to a dispute requests an appeal, the panel's report cannot
be adopted, and the dispute will hang in legal limbo, effectively providing the loser with a veto.
This rolls back dispute settlement to the era of the GATT, when any member could block a panel
ruling by refusing to consent to it.

       Scholars seeking to contribute to forging a new consensus on international institutions might
try to understand why the United States is so frustrated with the WTO and the Appellate Body
in particular.
   3
     Meet the Press, July 24, 2016, available at https://www.nbcnews.com/meet-the-press/meet-press-july-24-
2016-n615706.
   4
     Only Congress has the authority to pull the U.S. out of the WTO.



                                                    8
Figure 1: The WTO Dispute Settlement Process




Figure 2: The WTO Dispute Settlement Process. Source: The World Trade Organization, pro-
cess abridged by Bloomberg



2.2       Is the WTO unfair to the United States?

Figure 2: the
We assess  The  WTO in
              rhetorical   Crisis
                         claim that the WTO is unfair to the United States. Figure 3 reports the
"win-loss" record of the United States in WTO disputes between 1995 and 2016, as reported by
the USTR.5 The U.S. was the complainant in 108 disputes during this period, and it lost on the
core issues only four times (4%), while winning on the core issues 46 times (42%) in litigation,
and resolving to its satisfaction in consultations 29 times (27%). If we consider only the 79 U.S.
complaints that were completed by the end of 2015, the U.S. has prevailed (in litigation and in
consultations) 75 times (95%). By contrast, when the U.S. is the respondent, it loses most of the
time. The U.S. was the respondent in 124 disputes to the end of 2015, and 97 of these disputes
had worked their way through the dispute settlement process. Of these 97 completed disputes,
the U.S. lost on the core issues 57 times (59%). So, it is inaccurate to say that the WTO is unfair
to the United States. By the USTR's own scorekeeping, the U.S. almost always wins the cases
it brings against other WTO members, but it loses most of the cases that other members bring
against it.

       In most of the cases where the U.S. is the respondent, "trade remedies" are involved (Schott
and Jung, 2019). Trade remedies are WTO-legal domestic policy tools that allow governments
to impose tariffs on imports that are causing material injury to a domestic industry. They provide
   5
     Compiled from data provided by the USTR`s "Snapshot of WTO Cases Involving the United States." Decem-
ber 9, 2015. Available at https://ustr.gov/issue-areas/enforcement/overview-dispute-settlement-matters.



                                                    9
                                                                                                             45
             Figure 3: United States "Win-Loss" Record in WTO Disputes, 1995-2016
                                                     .

an element of flexibility in trade agreements and serve as an "escape clause" so that members
can be responsive to politically important constituencies when they need to be without abrogat-
ing their overall commitment to trade liberalization (Rosendorff and Milner, 2001; Pelc, 2016).

       Figure 4 presents data on the 126 disputes where the U.S. was a respondent between 1995
and May 2016.6 Trade remedies were the source of 74 (59%) of these WTO disputes, with
   6
    Compiled from Hoekman, Bernard, Henrik Horn, Louise Johannesson and Petros C. Mavroidis. 2016. The
WTO Dispute Settlement Data Set, 1995-2016. Available at: https://globalgovernanceprogramme.eui.eu/research-
project/wto-case-law-project/


                                                    10
complaints about U.S. anti-dumping policies driving nearly half (49%) of all trade remedy
disputes. Why are there so many U.S. trade remedy disputes at the WTO?




                                                                                          CVD (22)
                                         Trade Remedies               Anti-Dumping (36)
                         Other (52)
                                               (74)

                                                                                  Safeguards (16)




               Notes: Compiled from Hoekman, Bernard, Henrik Horn, Louise Johannesson and Petros C.
               Mavroidis. 2016.Figure
                                 The WTO 4: U.S.Settlement
                                          Dispute WTO Disputes         as Respondent
                                                            Data Set, 1995-2016. Available at:
               https://globalgovernanceprogramme.eui.eu/research-project/wto-case-law-project/


       The U.S. has long insisted on its right to use trade remedies when it negotiates trade agree-
ments with other nations. In the Uruguay Round negotiations, the U.S. fought to insulate its
trade remedies from challenges by the WTO's Dispute Settlement Body (DSB), obtaining a
standard of review (Article 17.6) that imposes constraints on the DSB's ability to override mem-
ber governments' interpretations of the facts in trade remedy cases. The U.S. also successfully
prevented a strict prohibition on the practice of "zeroing" in calculating duties in anti-dumping
proceedings, but the resulting compromise was vague, and left the door open to many subse-
quent WTO disputes about zeroing. According to Thomas Prusa, "zeroing has been the single
most disputed issue at the WTO."7

       We argue that the main reason the United States has crippled the WTO is because the Ap-
                                                                                                      47
pellate Body has consistently ruled against the U.S. for abusing trade remedies. These rulings
affect a relatively small number of import-competing industries in the United States and less
than one percent of all U.S. imports.8 The research questions are thus: Why are the interests
   7
     Thomas Prusa interviewed by Chad P. Bown and Soumaya Keynes. 2018. "Zeroing: The Biggest WTO Threat
You've Never Heard Of." Trade Talks podcast Episode 45, July 2. According to Prusa, there have been 30 WTO
disputes involving zeroing, and 28 of these disputes involve the U.S. as a respondent.
   8
     Chad P. Bown and Soumaya Keynes. 2018. "Zeroing: The Biggest WTO Threat You've Never Heard Of."


                                                          11
of a narrow set of import-competing industries driving U.S. policy toward the WTO? And, why
has the U.S. undermined dispute settlement when it wins more disputes than it loses? To address
these questions, we encourage scholars to study the impact of WTO decision on politics within
the United States. One salient topic, as we discuss below, is whether WTO rulings against the
United States contributed to the election of Donald Trump.



2.3     Digging deeper: Zeroing and the United States discontent

Zeroing refers to a way of calculating anti-dumping duties that assigns a "zero" to all instances
in which the export price of a product is higher than its price in the home market. Since dump-
ing is defined as selling a product abroad for less than it sells for at home, zeroing virtually
guarantees that U.S. administrative authorities find evidence of dumping, and impose higher
AD duties when they do. Thus, zeroing increases trade protection. Since the U.S. uses zeroing
on all its AD determinations, trade protection is higher than it would otherwise be. According
to the best available evidence, "were the United States to stop zeroing, perhaps as much as half
of all U.S. anti-dumping measures would be removed and the duties in the other cases would
fall significantly" (Bown and Prusa, 2011, 360). For this reason, other WTO members that ex-
port to the U.S. have repeatedly challenged the U.S. for zeroing, and the Appellate Body has
repeatedly ruled in their favor.

    Trade remedies--and the esoteric issue of zeroing--appear to be the most important reason
why the U.S. has crippled the WTO.9 Using language that echoes Rodrik's trilemma, the admin-
istration announced that "defending U.S. national sovereignty over trade policy" and "strictly
enforcing U.S. trade laws" are its two top trade policy priorities.10 The concern with "national
sovereignty" refers specifically to Appellate Body rulings on zeroing--the U.S. position is that,
since there is no explicit prohibition against zeroing, Appellate Body rulings against the prac-
Trade Talks podcast Episode 45, July 2.
     9
       According to Thomas Prusa, zeroing "is the single biggest reason behind the US's current position toward
slowing Appellate Body decisions." Quoted in Chad P. Bown and Soumaya Keynes. 2018. "Zeroing: The Biggest
WTO Threat You've Never Heard Of." Trade Talks podcast Episode 45, July 2. This U.S. frustration has been
around for years, but it took on greater urgency after China entered the WTO in 2001, as noted by the Trump ad-
ministration in the President's Trade Policy Agenda of 2017, prepared by the office of the U.S. Trade Representa-
tive (USTR). Available at https://ustr.gov/about-us/policy-offices/press-office/reports-and-publications/2017/2017-
trade-policy-agenda-and-2016.
    10
       President's Trade Policy Agenda of 2017, pp. 2-3. Available at https://ustr.gov/about-us/policy-offices/press-
office/reports-and-publications/2017/2017-trade-policy-agenda-and-2016.


                                                        12
tice infringe on its sovereignty.11 Indeed, the President's trade policy agenda is unambiguous
about the importance of trade remedies: "Trade remedies are a foundation to the implementa-
tion of the WTO agreement...it is critical that WTO members fully recognize their centrality to
the international trading system."12

       Rodrik (2011, 252-59) proposed reforming the multilateral trade regime to provide nations
with more policy space to accomplish their domestic objectives. This is broadly what recent
U.S. administrations hope to accomplish by pressing the case for more flexibility on trade reme-
dies. The key question for scholars is, why are trade remedies and zeroing so important to the
United States?

       We suggest two approaches to answering this question, each of which connects WTO deci-
sions to U.S. domestic politics.: (1) the interest group approach, and (2) the electoral approach.
The interest group approach is the mainstay of political economy research on redistributive
trade policy, so we begin with it. But the electoral approach is also relevant since it emphasizes
the impact of trade on election outcomes. If WTO constraints on trade remedies contributed to
the election of Donald Trump, then perhaps there is an electoral basis for the priority the U.S.
attaches to trade remedies.


2.3.1     The Interest Group Approach to Trade Remedies


The central insight of the interest group approach is that the relative political influence of the
winners and losers of trade protection largely determines trade policy outcomes (see Rodrik
(1995) for a review). Interest group influence can take the form of campaign contributions, lob-
bying, or votes. If the beneficiaries of trade protection can organize to generate these resources
more efficiently than the losers, then trade policy will be biased in their favor. Theoretical
research supports the finding that the protection received by an industry is higher when it is
organized--a function of the number and concentration of firms in the industry--and when its
output is high relative to competing imports (Grossman and Helpman, 1994).

       The challenge for the interest group approach is to explain why the import-competing bene-
  11
       Stephen Vaughn, former general counsel to the USTR, presents a clear statement of the Trump administration's
trade policy agenda in Chad P. Bown and Soumaya Keynes. 2018. "Trade Policy Under Trump." Trade Talks
podcast Episode 111, November 25. See also (Rushford 2018).
    12
       President's Trade Policy Agenda of 2017, pp. 2-3. Available at https://ustr.gov/about-us/policy-offices/press-
office/reports-and-publications/2017/2017-trade-policy-agenda-and-2016


                                                        13
ficiaries of trade remedies are now so influential that the U.S. is willing to mount an existential
challenge to the WTO. The lobbies that back trade remedies--notably, the steel industry--have
had disproportionate influence over U.S. trade policy in the past (Blustein, 2009, 114-17). What
has changed? Are existing users of trade remedies applying more influence than they used to,
or are opponents of trade remedies applying less countervailing pressure? Have new indus-
tries joined the fray and put their resources behind trade remedies? More fundamentally, what
was the underlying shock that upset the domestic political balance on remedies? Did the rush of
imports from China cause the relative influence of the domestic trade remedy lobby to increase?

       These questions are amenable to theoretical and empirical research. Data are available to
identify which industries utilize trade remedies and which industries do not, and how the dis-
tribution of industries changes over time (Bown, 2012). The instrumented "China Shock" mea-
sure provides good identification on the industries that were exposed to import competition
from China (Autor et al., 2016). Granular data on campaign contributions and lobbying expen-
ditures are readily available to measure the relative political influence of pro- and anti-remedy
interest groups in the United States.13 And legislative proposals in the U.S. Congress to amend
U.S. trade remedy statutes provide opportunities for researchers to evaluate the interest group
politics of trade remedies at the congressional level.14

       Congressional proposals on trade remedies have occurred frequently over the years, largely
in response to industry concerns that remedy procedures are not meeting their needs. Usually,
these proposals aim to amend the criteria for determining injury to make it more likely that
determinations will be made in favor of the petitioning industry.15 Congress also focuses on
trade remedy laws during trade agreement negotiations, and when it is considering extending
Trade Promotion Authority (TPA) to the president. In these instances, members of Congress
make observable choices--co-sponsorship of proposals, roll-call voting on final passage--that
indicate their support or opposition to trade remedies. We encourage research on interest group
influences on congressional behavior regarding trade remedy legislation.
  13
     The Center for Responsive Politics at https://www.opensecrets.org/ provides campaign contributions data. See
(Kim, 2018) and (Bonica, 2016) for lobbying data.
  14
     See, for example, (Cooper, 2002).
  15
     See, for example, H.R.2523--The American Trade Enforcement Effectiveness Act--was supported by 46
co-sponsors in the 114th Congress (2015-2016) and incorporated into H.R.644, the Trade Facilitation and Trade
Enforcement Act of 2015 (Public Law No: 114-125)




                                                       14
2.3.2   The Electoral Approach to Trade Remedies


Trade remedies provide WTO members with an escape clause to protect industries from sudden
down-turns. Seen in this light, Appellate Body decisions against U.S. trade remedies may
have reduced the ability of the U.S. to insulate politically important constituencies from import
competition.

   The research we propose complements the literature that links international trade to populist
election outcomes in the United States and Europe (Autor et al., 2017a,b; Feigenbaum and Hall,
2015; Colantone and Stanig, 2018a,b; Becker et al., 2017; Malgouyres, 2017). This literature
establishes that voters in areas harmed by import competition from China were more likely to
vote for Donald Trump, right-wing extremist parties in Europe, and Brexit.

   Our extension incorporates the WTO as a separate and distinct influence on populist vot-
ing. The flood of imports from China caused economic harm to communities where import-
competing manufacturers are located. The WTO, in turn, limited the capacity of the U.S.
government to cushion the shock. By constraining trade remedies when--and where--they
were needed most, voters in exposed regions of the country may have been more likely to be
persuaded by Trump's economic nationalism. Trump won Michigan by 10,000 votes (0.23%
margin), Pennsylvania by 67,000 votes (0.72%), and Wisconsin by 22,000 votes (0.77%). He
also railed against China and the WTO when campaigning in these states. Given the spatial
concentration of manufacturing in these states, our conjecture is that by taking away the escape
clause, the WTO magnified the pressures of the China Shock, leaving voters in affected regions
vulnerable to Trump's nationalist rhetoric.

   To investigate this conjecture, scholars should identify the products and industries that are
affected by WTO rulings on trade remedies and then measure the regional exposure to these
rulings across the United States. Given the tendency of industries to cluster in specific areas
of the country, regional exposure to WTO rulings will vary, and can be measured by way of
employment shares in the affected industries. Following Autor, Dorn and Hanson (2016), the
expectation is that adverse WTO rulings will reverberate across the local labor market, affect-
ing aggregate employment, wages, and labor market participation rates. These broader effects
are important because they implicate voters in exposed regions, not just the directly affected
industries and their lobbies.

   We don't expect adverse WTO rulings to have large aggregate effects on the 2016 presiden-


                                               15
tial election. But we do expect WTO rulings to matter in regions suffering from high exposure to
the China Shock. In other words, our conjecture is conditioned by regional exposure to import-
competition from China. Furthermore, our electoral approach to trade remedies need not imply
that the interest group approach to remedies is irrelevant--both forces may have contributed to
current U.S. antagonism toward the WTO. Therefore, we encourage both types of research.



3    Solutions

Solutions refers to the institutional reforms that are needed to address threats to the liberal
international order. For example, many solutions have been proposed to address the threat
of populism--from investing in education, to reducing inequality, to providing a guaranteed
minimum income to all citizens. But few solutions have been directed toward the international
organizations that sustain global economic cooperation. This is a glaring omission.

    The motivation for targeting reforms at international institutions is captured in the following
syllogism: if populism is a threat to the global economic order, and if populism is at least in
part a consequence of the free trade policies of the WTO, then reform of the WTO must be
part of the solution to populism. Rodrik (2011, 252) noted that the major defect of the multilat-
eral trade regime is its "lack of widespread support among ordinary people." But few scholars
have linked solutions to populism to reforms of the WTO. This is surprising because scholars
fundamentally agree that the rapid expansion of international trade between developed and de-
veloping countries in recent decades would not have been possible without the WTO (Helpman
et al., 2008; Subramanian and Wei, 2007; Tomz et al., 2007). They also agree that populist
voting in developed countries is a reaction, in part, to the expansion of trade with developing
countries (Autor et al., 2017a,b; Feigenbaum and Hall, 2015; Colantone and Stanig, 2018a,b;
Becker et al., 2017; Malgouyres, 2017). Trade competition from low-wage developing coun-
tries, most notably China, has combined with technological change to devastate many OECD
industries, with turbulent effects on local labor markets (Acemoglu et al., 2016; Autor et al.,
2016; Krugman, 2008).

    It is increasingly clear that the current backlash against globalization is driven by economic
grievances that implicate the WTO. We identify proposed solutions to the current WTO crisis
and then suggest research questions that address the political economy of WTO reform.




                                                16
3.1   Solutions to the Crisis at the WTO

To gain traction on the issues, we treat the WTO agreement of 1994 as an incomplete contract
that bound negotiated tariffs and quotas but left significant discretion over trade remedies to
national governments (e.g. Horn et al., 2010). The contract was incomplete for two reasons:
First, at the time the WTO agreements were negotiated, members could not agree on how much
discretion they should have with respect to trade remedies, so these provisions were vaguely
worded. For its part, the U.S. explicitly refused to agree to negotiating proposals that would
have prohibited zeroing. The resulting vagueness left room for the WTO adjudicating bodies
to determine the actual degree of discretion which is why the U.S. is at loggerheads with the
Appellate Body today. Second, the agreement was incomplete because it did not (and could
not) anticipate China's entry into the WTO in 2001, and the subsequent import surge that deci-
mated manufacturing industries and local labor markets in the United States (Autor et al., 2016;
Acemoglu et al., 2016). The link to trade remedies is that, previously, the U.S. had designated
China a "non-market economy," which allowed it to use alternative methodologies -- not re-
liant on data provided by China -- to assess its countervailing and anti-dumping duties. These
alternative methodologies are the equivalent of zeroing: they allowed the U.S. higher protection
against imports from China. But in 2011, the Appellate Body reversed an earlier panel ruling
that supported the U.S. position that Chinese state-owned enterprises are "public bodies" that
potentially provide subsidies to downstream Chinese firms (Stewart and Drake, 2017). The de-
cision alarmed U.S. trade officials because they wanted to use countervailing duties to defend
against subsidized imports from China (United States Trade Representative, 2018).

   In combination, this incompleteness lies behind the Trump administration's attack on the
WTO. One the one hand, the U.S. charges the Appellate Body with judicial "overreach" for
constraining U.S. discretion on trade remedies -- a grievance that intensified with the China
Shock. On the other, the U.S. charges other WTO members with "underreach" for failing to
agree on new rules regarding state-capitalist members like China.

   Current WTO decision-making rules make it difficult to address these complaints. The
"overreach" complaint targets the adjudication wing of the WTO, which operates by reverse
consensus rule. This means that all 164 WTO members must agree in order to block a panel or
Appellate Body ruling. This rule gives the adjudication wing of the WTO extraordinary power
-- it is the source of U.S. frustrations with the Appellate Body. The "underreach" complaint tar-
gets the negotiating wing of WTO, which operates by normal consensus: to go into effect, new
agreements, or modification of the existing rules, must obtain the support of all 164 members.

                                               17
The consensus rule hamstrings effort to modernize the rules, address unforeseen contingences,
and resolve conflicts.

       Unanimity decision rules in both wings of the WTO complicate the process of resolving
today's crisis, because they inherently favor the status quo. The U.S. wants to negotiate new
rules on China, and new rules for digital commerce; it also wants to clarify existing rules on
trade remedies. But if any single member country can frustrate consensus, negotiations will
stall. The Appellate Body wants members to clarify existing voids and address new issues
but feels compelled to exercise its powers when negotiations stall, inducing charges of judicial
overreach. In short, unanimity decision-making is one reason the WTO is on the verge of
collapse.

       Scholars of the WTO have been proposing reforms since the founding of the institution.16
But there is little agreement on what can or should be done to get past the prolonged impasse
in negotiations. One proposal is to permit agreements between some, but not all, members
(Lawrence, 2006; Levy, 2006). Another proposal is to relax the requirement of consensus,
adopting some form qualified majority voting.17 While there are many variations on these
themes, research on reforming the WTO has not yet incorporated the current context of the
Trump administration's policy toward the WTO.

       Solutions to the crisis at the WTO should be grounded in an understating of the main threat.
As discussed above, the core reason the United States has provoked a crisis at the WTO is that
it has lost a series of trade remedy cases at the Appellate Body -- rulings that overturned U.S.
anti-dumping, anti-subsidy and safeguard measures. The Appellate Body has repeatedly out-
lawed the practice of zeroing in the calculation of anti-dumping margins; it has also interpreted
the WTO's Safeguards Agreement to mean that safeguards can only be imposed if there is ev-
idence that an import surge occurred as a result of "unforeseen developments." As for U.S.
countervailing duties on China, the Appellate Body ruled that majority government ownership
alone was insufficient to establish that such firms operated like government entities and thus
were capable of conferring subsidies. In short, "the decisions that are at the heart of the United
States' substantive concerns are those in the trade remedy arena" (Hillman, 2018, 5).

       By blocking appointments to the Appellate Body, the U.S. signaled that trade remedies
are important to it. In terms of Rodrik's "trilemma," the U.S. wants more room to opt out of
  16
    See (Hoekman, 2012) for a review and synthesis.
  17
    Voting on some issues is already allowed in WTO rules, but has never been used in practice. See (Ehlermann
and Ehring, 2005).


                                                     18
its obligations, expanding its policy space to accomplish domestic objectives. In the previous
section, we outlined a research agenda that seeks to explain why the U.S. is jeopardizing the
WTO over this issue when the economic impact of trade remedies is small. While the amount
of trade implicated is probably insignificant, remedies are of great political importance in the
United States (either for interest group or electoral reasons). This combination of high political
salience in the U.S. and low economic impact suggests that a solution to the crisis is possible.

         The logic here is that it was not worth sacrificing the whole system for the sake of issues
of marginal economic importance. Other members might potentially be open to solutions that
address specific U.S. concerns about trade remedies -- including conceding on the zeroing issue
-- if this is enough to ensure continued U.S. participation and good behavior in the WTO, as
well to restore the dispute settlement mechanism and end the costly trade wars. In principle, a
targeted solution to the crisis is possible, given the outsized concern the U.S. places on trade
remedies.

         Conceding on zeroing is just one option of many, and we encourage scholarship along these
lines.18 Disputes involving trade remedies could be handled differently than other disputes.
For example, trade remedies disputes could be resolved by non-adjudicative process, or by
a temporary moratorium on appeals of trade remedy panel reports. Since the U.S grievance is
about Appellate Body rulings that overturn panel findings on remedies, a temporary moratorium
might not be enough to induce U.S. agreement. In that event, members could amend the rules
to make panel decisions on trade remedy matters final, thereby eliminating the threat of judicial
overreach on these cases. In any case, we encourage the study of solutions that create "A
Separate System for Trade Remedies" (Hillman, 2018, 4).



4         Leadership

The final part of our research agenda is Leadership. Leadership refers to the most challenging
aspect of international organization: building domestic and international consensus for creating
and, when necessary, reforming global institutions. Global institutions are public goods, which
means they are faced with free-riding problems both within and among countries. In the past,
the U.S. government provided global leadership, and this leadership was sustained by a broad
consensus within the United States in support of an open world economy (Ruggie, 1982). Today,
    18
         See (Hillman, 2018) for other targeted solutions on trade remedies.


                                                           19
the potential for consensus-building and leadership is in doubt. Research that explores the
leadership problem at both levels of analysis is needed.

       Problems of international organization require actors willing to expend resources advancing
solutions. Previous research has linked support for free trade and international organizations
within the United States to constituencies that gain from globalization (Milner and Tingley,
2011; Broz and Hawes, 2006). For example, service-sector firms and manufacturers with global
supply chains tend to agglomerate in large prosperous cities (Moretti, 2012), and the congres-
sional legislators that represent these prosperous regions tend to vote in favor of free trade agree-
ments (Jensen et al., 2017). Lobbying by global firms also has been linked to pro-globalization
voting in Congress (Osgood, 2018; Kim, 2017). By contrast, legislators representing decaying
manufacturing regions with import-competing industries in their districts tend to vote against
free trade agreements (Feigenbaum and Hall, 2015). While this research can help us understand
patterns of support and opposition to globalization, it does little to inform our understanding of
leadership.

       We make the case that scholarship on leadership needs to focus more attention on the U.S.
Congress rather than the U.S. presidency. Just as scholarship on populism has largely ignored
the WTO and other international organizations, research on leadership tends to downplay the
role of Congress. This is an important omission since Congress has the constitutional authority
to set U.S. trade policy objectives and procedures, while the president is limited to carrying out
the will of Congress. Scholars have acknowledged that legislative changes in this principal-
agent relationship helped paved the way for U.S. leadership on international trade, with almost
all research focused on the Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act of 1934 (RTAA).19 With this
landmark legislation, Congress delegated (within strict limits) its constitutional authority to set
trade policy to the executive branch, and required the president to negotiate reciprocal (equal in
value) tariff-reducing trade agreements with other nations. Ever since, presidents have provided
global trade leadership, regardless of their partisan affiliations, often building consensus by
joining ranks with members of the opposition party to pass free trade legislation (Karol 2000).
But Congress has remained deeply involved in U.S. trade leadership, repeatedly modifying the
terms of its delegation to the president and adding new procedures and requirements to the
trade policymaking framework. We recommend that scholars should move beyond the RTAA
to study all the institutional procedures that Congress uses to build and sustain consensus for
international trade agreements.
  19
    See, for example, Bailey et al. (1997), Gilligan (1997), Lohmann and O'Halloran (1997), Irwin and Kroszner
(1999), and Karol (2000).


                                                     20
4.1      Leadership and the World Trade Organization

In this section, we identify a research agenda on the domestic sources of U.S. global lead-
ership. We focus on trade policymaking institutions within the United States because these
institutions--which were created by laws such as the Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act of
1934 (RTAA), "Fast-Track," and Trade Promotion Authority (TPA)--affect the levels of sup-
port and opposition to U.S. trade leadership.20 Scholars have studied these institutions before,
but not as dependent variables related to the concept of leadership. We conceptualize U.S. trade
policymaking institutions as outcomes that affect the level of support for international trade
agreements in the United States. We encourage scholars to explain changes in these institu-
tions.

       To provide guidance, we distinguish between policymaking institutions that generate sup-
port for international trade agreements from institutions that reduce opposition to trade agree-
ments. Two institutional procedures that increase support for free trade agreements are: (1)
Delegation and (2) Reciprocity. Three institutions that reduce opposition to trade agreements
are: (1) The Escape Clause; (2) Notification and Consultation; and (3) Compensation. We
summarize these in Figure 5 and provide details below.


4.1.1     Delegation


Delegation increases domestic support for tariff-cutting trade agreements because the president
is elected by a nationwide constituency and therefore considers the aggregate societal bene-
fits of freer trade. By contrast, members of the House and Senate are beholden to organized
interest groups located in their subnational districts and they do not internalize the costs of pro-
tectionism on other districts. Because presidents internalize these costs, they have incentives
to move trade policy toward the societal optimum even if voters/consumers are not organized
and lobbying for free trade. Delegation leads to what has been called "Presidential Liberalism"
(Lohmann and O'Halloran, 1997; Bailey et al., 1997; Gilligan, 1997; Karol, 2000). Delegation
also facilitates global leadership because it allows the United States to speak with a single voice
  20
    Fast Track was enacted under the Trade Act of 1974. It was used to pass the Tokyo Round Agreements Act of
1979 (P.L. 96-39), which implemented agreements negotiated under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(GATT), the predecessor to WTO. Fast Track has been renewed five times--1979, 1988, 1993, 2002, and 2015--
and was renamed Trade Promotion Authority in 2002. But similar institutions, described below, go back to the
RTAA.



                                                     21
                                1. Delegation: Congress transfers authority to make trade agreements to
                                   the President. Since presidents are elected by a nationwide
                                   constituency, they are more likely to support free trade agreements
                                   than legislators.
   Inducing Support             2. Reciprocity: Congress requires the president to negotiate trade
                                   agreements that elicit reciprocal (equivalent in value) tariff reductions
                                   from other countries. Reciprocity incentivizes U.S. exporting firms to
                                   support free trade agreements.
                                3. The Escape Clause: Congress requires a mechanism by which the nation
                                   can temporarily suspend or modify its obligations in trade agreements
                                   when a domestic industry is "materially injured" by import competition.
                                   The escape clause reduces opposition to trade agreements from
                                   organized protectionist interest groups.
 Reducing Opposition
                                4. Notification and Consultation: Congress requires the president to notify
                                   and consult with legislators and private-sector stakeholders when
                                   negotiating trade agreements, reducing opposition to U.S. leadership.
                                5. Compensation: Congress redistributes the gains from trade as
                                   compensation to trade-displaced workers, reducing opposition to trade
                                   agreements.
                                                                                                              1

                              Figure 5: Consensus-Building Institutions



in trade negotiations with other nations.21


4.1.2   Reciprocity


"Reciprocity" refers to the procedural requirement that the president negotiate trade agreements
that elicit reciprocal (equivalent in value) tariff reductions from other countries. Before reci-
procity, Congress set tariffs unilaterally and export interests did not have strong incentives to
organize to influence trade policy. Import-competing producers were the main mobilized lobby
group on trade legislation because they reaped concentrated benefits from high tariffs while
the costs were dispersed (Irwin, 2017, 432). Although exporters have a general preference for
lower domestic tariffs, the cost to an exporter of a particular tariff is small, so exporters did
not organize in opposition to protectionism. However, by institutionalizing reciprocity into the
policymaking process, exporters had a concentrated stake in tariff-reducing trade agreements
and this shifted the political balance of power toward export interests: "By directly tying lower
foreign tariffs to lower domestic tariffs, the RTAA fostered the development of exporters as an
organized group opposed to high tariffs and supporting international trade agreements" (Irwin,
  21
    The bilateral tariff-reducing agreements that the president negotiated under RTAA went into effect without
obtaining Congressional approval, but the RTAA itself required renewal every 1 to 4 years. This renewal feature
ensured that presidents remained attentive to Congressional political imperatives.



                                                      22
2017, 432).22

       After World War II, the United States "multilaterlized" the reciprocal method of generating
support for trade agreements by incorporating it into the GATT (Irwin, 2017, 455-508). Reci-
procity remains the cornerstone of multilateral trade cooperation today. In the WTO, just as
with the RTAA, countries negotiate bilaterally on a product-by-product basis with the principal
supplier of the good in question. Then they generalize the resulting reciprocal tariff cuts to other
members via the most-favored nation clause (MFN).


4.1.3      Escape


Just as delegation and reciprocity help build domestic support for trade agreements, the escape
clause serves the function of reducing domestic opposition to trade agreements. The escape
clause refers to trade remedies--antidumping and countervailing duty statutes that provide
import-competing industries with the means to redress "unfair" foreign trade practices--and
safeguards. Trade remedies permit temporary tariffs on imports that are deemed to be unfairly
traded and cause, or threaten to cause, serious injury to a domestic industry. Safeguards protect
domestic industries from import surges. As a consensus-building device, the role of the escape
clause is to reduce political opposition to trade agreements.

       The escape clause has a long history in U.S. law and has evolved significantly since it was
first included in the U.S.-Mexican Trade Agreement of 1943 (Jackson, 1997, 179). In 1947,
during negotiations on the GATT, President Truman signed an executive order requiring an
escape clause to be included in every agreement negotiated under RTAA authority. In the RTAA
Extension Act of 1951, Congress itself mandated that all new trade agreements must include
the escape clause. The same year, the escape clause text from U.S. law was incorporated into
the GATT, as Article XIX, suggesting that the GATT escape clause was a "direct descendant of
the U.S.-Mexican Trade Agreement of 1943" (Ibid). Over the years, Congress has added many
new features to the U.S. escape clause, and these changes provide an observable barometer
of opposition to the trade agreements program. Authors in economics have studied escape
extensively (Bagwell and Staiger, 1990; Rosendorff and Milner, 2001, among others), however,
since the political purpose of escape is to mollify opponents of international trade agreements,
it would be useful to dig deeper into the domestic political economy factors that drive changes
in the escape clause.
  22
       For evidence, see Bailey et al. (1997) and Irwin and Kroszner (1999).


                                                         23
4.1.4     Notification and Consultation


Another means of assuaging opponents is to institutionalize notification and consultation pro-
cedures to ensure that Congress and the private sector play a greater role in shaping trade agree-
ments before they go into effect.23 While the escape clause applies to industries that have
already been exposed to tariff cuts, notification and consultation procedures serve to prevent
bargains from taking place that would expose politically-sensitive industries to greater import
competition. Since the Trade Act of 1974, Congress has required the executive branch to consult
with Congress and private-sector stakeholders prior to and during trade negotiations, as well as
upon signing trade agreements.

       To ensure that mobilized interest groups have a role in trade negotiations, the Trade Act
of 1974 set up a three-tiered system of private-sector consultation. At the top of the system
is the 30-member Advisory Committee for Trade Policy and Negotiations (ACTPN) consist-
ing of presidentially-appointed representatives from a broad range of U.S. industries and labor
groups.24 The second tier is composed of advisory committees in specific policy areas: Agri-
culture, Labor, Trade and Environment, Intergovernmental Policy, and Africa. The third tier
consists of 17 sector-specific committees to provide policy advice--one agricultural and 16 in-
dustrial sectors. In addition to consultations with the advisory committees, the USTR solicits
the views of private actors through Federal Register notices and hearings. These procedures
allow trade negotiators to learn which industries are too sensitive to expose to reciprocal tar-
iff reductions; they also allow exporters and global corporations to convey their priorities to
U.S. trade negotiators. In combination, consultation and notification requirements facilitate
coalition-building on international trade agreements.


4.1.5     Compensation


The final procedure that ameliorates opposition to trade agreements is compensation. The argu-
ment for compensation is that economic policies like free trade improve aggregate social wel-
fare but also have significant distributional effects. In such circumstances, a Pareto improvement
is possible if the winners from free trade can compensate the losers, leaving both winners and
  23
      Notification and consultation requirements also help build support for trade agreements by giving export in-
terests the ability to influence trade negotiations.
   24
      For the current membership, see https://ustr.gov/about-us/advisory-committees/advisory-committee-trade-
policy-and-negotiations-actpn


                                                       24
losers better off. In the U.S., there has been a long-standing effort to use compensation to reduce
opposition to trade agreements. The Trade Expansion Act of 1962 established "adjustment as-
sistance" and placed the program under the authority on the Tariff Commission (Alden, 2017).
The program redistributed the gains from trade as compensation to trade-displaced workers,
in the form of extended unemployment benefits and retraining and relocation assistance. The
Trade Act of 1974 renamed the program "Trade Adjustment Assistance" (TAA), expanded its
benefits, and placed it under the Department of Labor, to increase the number of accepted claims
(Ibid, 120).

       Since 1974, expansions and extensions of TAA have been a regular feature of the renewal
of TPA, to appease opposition to trade agreements. As part of the 2002 TPA reauthorization,
Congress enlarged the scope of TAA benefits. In 2009 and 2011 Congress again expanded TAA,
allowing benefits to service-sector workers for the first time. For decades trade agreements
(TPA) and trade adjustment assistance (TAA) were a package deal. But in the 2015, the deal
fell apart as organized labor turned against the TPA-TAA package.25 President Obama had been
negotiating the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), which labor leaders intensely opposed, ending
the bargain.

       Delegation, reciprocity, the escape clause, notification and consultation, and compensation
are the underlying sources of U.S. global leadership. While reciprocity and the escape clause
are inventions of Congress, they have been incorporated into the multilateral trading system
and thereby help other nations generate internal support for trade cooperation as well. All five
institutions have changed in many ways since their genesis. If scholars want to understand how
the United States builds and maintains consensus for U.S. leadership in international trade, they
need to analyze the factors that drive Congress to change these institutions.

       We analyze congressional trade legislation from the 1890s to the present for evidence of
change in these institutions. We also develop a methodology for coding the intensity of these
changes. Figure 6 displays how each of the five leadership institutions have varied in intensity
from 1890 to 2020. Intensity here is defined over a five-point scale from 1 (least intense) to 5
(most intense).26 The data is drawn from the wording of the specific U.S. trade legislation or
  25
      Russell Berman, "A Big Win for Big Labor," The Atlantic, June 12, 2015.                           Available at
https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2015/06/a-big-win-for-big-labor/395699.
   26
      During time periods where we could find no evidence of the existence of an institution, the interval is left
empty. The scale for each leadership institution is calculated relative to the extremes in the set of cases over the
time period, rather than from an objective rubric. For example, the lowest level of Delegation occurs during the
McKinley Tariff of 1890 so the time period for which it was active is coded as 1. This tariff was the first to include


                                                         25
the GATT/WTO resolutions.




                                     Figure 6: U.S. Trade Institutions


    The next step is to test hypotheses about the emergence and evolution of these consensus-
building institutions. Congress has the prerogative to establish trade policymaking procedures
that generate support and reduce opposition to U.S. trade leadership. Our data set will stand
as an observable record of these consensus-building efforts over time. As dependent variables,
the theoretical challenge is to explain why these institutions change, and how they relate to one
another. Are they complements or substitutes? For example, if imports rise dramatically and
domestic opposition increases (as with the China Shock), does this lead Congress to reduce
delegation or increase compensation, or some combination of the two? Since there are five in-
stitutional procedures for reducing opposition and increasing support for trade agreements, why
is one institution preferred over the others, and why is any single institutional response superior
provisions which provided the President some leeway in negotiating trade deals, but the ultimate trade authority
remained with Congress. On the high end of the Delegation spectrum is the Trade Act of 1974 which established
the "Fast Track Authority." This may have increased the President's power to pursue an independent trade agenda
and therefore we code it as a 5 to signify this maximum intensity. For the Compensation category, official reports
by the U.S. Department of Labor were used to establish various levels of adjustment assistance. (Irwin 2017) and
(Baldwin 2012) served as broader references to get a sense for how these leadership institutions changed over time.

                                                       26
to changes in two or more of the others? Are these institutions complements or substitutes?
This research is critical to understanding U.S. leadership in global trade cooperation.



5    Discussion

We have outlined a research agenda for contributing to the reform and improvement of global
institutions using the WTO as a guiding example. Our agenda is organized around three themes:
threats, solutions, and leadership. Threats refer to the underlying cause of a crisis in a global
institution, not symptoms like refusing to allow the appointment of Appellate Body judges.
Solutions refers to institutional reforms required to address threats to global institutions, and
leadership addresses the challenge of coordinating efforts to supply international institutions
that have public good characteristics.

    What we observed about the WTO crisis is that the threat underlying the Trump Administra-
tion's rhetoric and actions is the failure of the members to fill in gaps in the WTO Agreement,
especially in the area of the escape clause (i.e., trade remedies). This failure has led the Ap-
pellate Body to "overreach" its judicial mandate and infringe on U.S. "national sovereignty" by
ruling against methods the U.S. uses to calculate antidumping, countervailing duty, and safe-
guard duties on imports from China and other nations. In short, the WTO crisis is centered
on vagueness in the escape clause and the willingness of the United States to bring dispute
settlement to a halt in order to clarify trade remedy rules.

    Having identified the threat, we then outlined a research plan to explain why the Trump
Administration feels so strongly about trade remedies (which are of little economic importance).
We argued that answering this question requires examining the impact of WTO decisions on
politics within the United States. In other words, we advocate scholarship on the WTO crisis
that crosses the international and the domestic levels of analysis.

    We suggested two approaches for linking WTO actions to U.S. domestic politics: the in-
terest group approach and the electoral approach. The interest group approach recognizes that
Appellate Body decisions affect specific industries and firms within the U.S. The electoral ap-
proach also recognizes that WTO decisions affect domestic politics, but the channel is through
voters and elections, not interest groups (these channels may not be mutually exclusive). Our
hypothesis is that Appellate Body decisions against U.S. trade remedies may have contributed
to the anti-globalization backlash and the election of Donald Trump by taking away the escape

                                                27
clause just when and where it was most needed. One way to test this hypothesis is to see if the
industries affected by Appellate Body rulings are spatially concentrated in the industrial swing
states that Donald Trump won by narrow margins.

   As for solutions to the crisis, our preliminary analysis suggests that scholars should be
focusing on narrower reforms that address U.S. concerns about trade remedies, rather than
grand bargains that would be difficult to get past the unanimity constraint. Trade remedies
are politically important to the U.S., but they don't have much economic significance relative to
what is at stake. If keeping the United States in the WTO and restoring the dispute settlement
mechanism are more valuable to other members than conceding to the U.S. on remedies, then
there is room for a narrower solution that carves out a special process for handling trade remedy
disputes.

   Our analysis of leadership identified five domestic consensus-building institutions; two that
generate support (delegation and reciprocity), and three that reduce opposition (the escape
clause, notification and consultation, and compensation). Over time, Congress has repeatedly
changed these institutions, both individually and in combination. We suggest research that mea-
sures and explains these changes. We need to understand the forces that drive change in these
institutions because Congressional policymaking procedures directly influence U.S. leadership
at the global level. Given the paucity of existing research on these institutions, this is the most
challenging part of our research agenda. In terms of the current WTO crisis, it is also the most
pressing since, absent a domestic consensus, the U.S cannot provide leadership on reforming
the WTO.

   Our framework--threats, solutions, leadership--can guide research on crises in other inter-
national organizations. For example, the U.S. withdrawal from the Paris Climate Agreement is a
symptom of a deeper threat, located in U.S domestic politics, that needs to be identified and an-
alyzed. Solutions tailored to the threat can then be assessed on their merits and in terms of their
political feasibility. Finally, scholars could contribute by examining how the structure of Federal
climate change policymaking encourages global leadership. As with international trade, U.S.
leadership efforts on climate change are undertaken under laws approved by Congress. While
climate change amelioration improves aggregate social welfare, it also imposes costs on certain
industries, occupations, and regions. Climate change touches on a wide array of interests, as
with trade. The stakes vary from industry to industry and region to region, but an effective so-
lution requires a balancing of those interests, which typically is achieved through the legislative
process.


                                                28
References
Acemoglu, D., D. H. Autor, D. Dorn, G. Hanson, and B. Price (2016). Import Competition and
  the Great US Employment Sag of the 2000s. Journal of Labor Economics 34(S1), S141­
  S198.

Alden, E. (2017). Failure to Adjust: How Americans Got Left Behind in the Global Economy.
  New York: Rowman and Littlefield.

Autor, D. H., D. Dorn, and G. H. Hanson (2016). The China Shock: Learning from Labor
  Market Adjustment to Large Changes in Trade. Annual Review of Economics 8(1), 205­240.

Autor, D. H., D. Dorn, G. H. Hanson, and K. Majlesi (2017a). A Note on the Effect of Rising
  Trade Exposure on the Presidential Election. Working paper 2016.

Autor, D. H., D. Dorn, G. H. Hanson, and K. Majlesi (2017b). Importing Political Polarization?
  The Electoral Consequences of Rising Trade Exposure. NBER (22637).

Bacchetta, M., E. Milet, and J.-A. Monteiro (Eds.) (2019). Making Globalization More Inclu-
  sive: Lessons from Experience with Adjustment Policies. Geneva: World Trade Organization.

Bagwell, K. and R. Staiger (1990). A Theory of Managed Trade. The American Economic
  Review 4, 779­795.

Bailey, M. A., J. Goldstein, and B. R. Weingast (1997). The Institutional Roots of American
  Trade Policy. World Politics 49(3), 309­38.

Becker, S. O., T. Fetzer, and D. Novy (2017). Who Voted for Brexit? A Comprehensive District-
  Level Analysis. Economic Policy 32(92), 601­650.

Blustein, P. (2009). Misadventures of the Most Favored Nations. New York: Public Affairs.

Bonica, A. (2016). Database on Ideology, Money in Politics, and Elections: Public version 2.0
  [Computer file]. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Libraries.

Bown, C. P. (2012). Temporary Trade Barriers Database.

Bown, C. P. (2019). The 2018 Trade War and the End of Dispute Settlement as we knew it.
  In M. A. Crowley (Ed.), Trade War: The Clash of Economic Systems Endangering Global
  Prosperity, pp. 21­32. CEPR Press.

Bown, C. P. and D. A. Irwin (2019). Trump's Assault on the Global Trading System. Foreign
  Affairs.




                                             29
Bown, C. P. and T. J. Prusa (2011). US Anti-Dumping: Much Ado about Zeroing. In W. J.
  Martin and A. M. A. Mattoo (Eds.), Unfinished Business? The WTO's Doha Agenda, pp.
  355­392. London: CEPR and the World Bank.

Broz, J. L., J. Frieden, and S. Weymouth (2020). Populism in place: The economic geography
  of the globalization backlash. International Organization, forthcoming.

Broz, J. L. and M. B. Hawes (2006). Congressional Politics of Financing the International
  Monetary Fund. International Organization 60(2), 367­399.

Colantone, I. and P. Stanig (2018a). Global Competition and Brexit. American Political Science
  Review 2(112), 201­218.

Colantone, I. and P. Stanig (2018b). The Trade Origins of Economic Nationalism: Import Com-
  petition and Voting Behavior in Western Europe. American Political Science Review 2(112),
  201­218.

Cooper, R. H. (2002). Trade Remedy Law Reform in the 107th Congress. In T. L. of Congress
  (Ed.), Congressional Research Service. CRS Report for Congress.

Ehlermann, C.-D. and L. Ehring (2005). Decision-Making in the World Trade Organization: Is
  the Consensus Practice of the World Trade Organization Adequate for Making Revising and
  Implementing Rules on International Trade? Journal of International Economic Law 8(1),
  51­75.

Feigenbaum, J. and A. Hall (2015). How Legislators Respond to Localized Economic Shocks:
  Evidence from Chinese Import Competition. The Journal of Politics 77 (4), 1012­1030.

Frieden, J. (2019). The Backlash Against Globalization and the Future of the International
  Economic Order. In P. Diamond (Ed.), The Crisis of Globalization: Democracy, Capitalism,
  and Inequality in the Twenty-First Century, pp. 43­52. London: I.B. Tauris.

Gilligan, M. J. (1997). Empowering Exporters: Reciprocity, Delegation, and Collective Action
  in American Trade Policy. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

Grossman, G. M. and E. Helpman (1994). Protection for Sale. The American Economic Re-
  view 84(4), 833­850.

Halverson, K. (2004). China's WTO Accession: Economic, Legal, and Political Implications.
  Boston College International and Comparative Law Review 27, 319­70.

Helpman, E., M. Melitz, and Y. Rubinstein (2008). Estimating Trade Flows: Trading Partners
  and Trading Volumes. Quarterly Journal of Economics 123(2), 441­487.



                                             30
Hillman, J. (2018). Three Approaches to Fixing the World Trade Organization's Appellate
  Body: The Good, the Bad and the Ugly? IIEL Issue Briefs.

Hoekman, B. (2012). Proposals for WTO Reform: A Synthesis and Assessment. In M. Daunton,
  A. Narlikar, R. M. Stern, and B. Hoekman (Eds.), The Oxford Handbook on The World Trade
  Organization. Oxford University Press.

Horn, H., G. Maggi, and R. W. Staiger (2010). Trade Agreements as Endogenously Incomplete
  Contracts. The American Economic Review 100(1), 394­419.

Irwin, D. and R. Kroszner (1999). Interests, Institutions, and Ideology in Securing Policy
  Change: The Republican Conversion to Trade Liberalization After Smoot-Hawley. Journal
  of Law and Economics 42, 643­73.

Irwin, D. A. (2017). Clashing over Commerce: A History of US Trade Policy. Chicago: Uni-
  versity of Chicago Press.

Jackson, J. H. (1997). The World Trading System: Law and Policy of International Economic
  Relations. MIT Press.

Jensen, J. B., D. P. Quinn, and S. Weymouth (2017). International Trade: The Effects on U.S.
  Presidential Voting. International Organization 71(3), 423­457.

Karol, D. (2000). Divided Government and U.S. Trade Policy: Much Ado about Nothing?
  International Organization 54(4), 825­844.

Kim, I. S. (2017). Political Cleavages within Industry: Firm-level Lobbying for Trade Liberal-
  ization. American Political Science Review 111(1).

Kim, I. S. (2018). LobbyView: Firm-level Lobbying and Congressional Bills Database. Work-
  ing paper.

Krugman, P. (2008). Trade and Wages, Reconsidered. Brookings Papers on Economic Activ-
  ity 1, 103­154.

Lawrence, R. Z. (2006). Rulemaking Amidst Growing Diversity: A Club-of-Clubs Approach
  to WTO Reform and New Issue Selection. Journal of International Economic Law 9(4),
  823­835.

Levy, P. I. (2006). Do We Need an Undertaker for the Single Undertaking? Considering the
  Angles of Variable Geometry. In S. J. Evenett and B. M. Hoekman (Eds.), Economic Devel-
  opment and Multilateral Trade Cooperation, pp. 419­37. New York: Palgrave MacMillan.

Lohmann, S. and S. O'Halloran (1997). Divided Government and U.S. Trade Policy: Theory
  and Evidence. Intenrational Organization 48(4), 595­632.

                                             31
Malgouyres, C. (2017). Trade Shocks and Far-Right Voting: Evidence from French Presidential
 Elections. Technical report, RSCAS Working Papers 2017/21, European University Institute.

Milner, H. and D. H. Tingley (2011). Who Supports Global Economic Engagement? The
 Sources of Preferences in American Foreign Economic Policy. International Organiza-
 tion 65, 37­68.

Moravcsik, A. (1991). Negotiating the Single European Act: National Interests and Conven-
 tional Statecraft in the European Community. International Organization 45(1), 19­56.

Moretti, E. (2012). The New Geography of Jobs. New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.

Norris, P. and R. Inglehart (2019). Cultural Backlash: Trump, Brexit, and Authoritarian Pop-
  ulism. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Nye, J. S. (2017). Will the Liberal Order Survive? The History of an Idea. Foreign Affairs.

Osgood, I. (2018). Globalizing the Supply Chain: Firm and Industrial Support for US Trade
  Agreements. International Organization 72(2), 455­484.

Payosova, T., G. C. Hufbauer, and J. J. Schott (2018). The Dispute Settlement Crisis in the
  World Trade Organization: Causes and Cures. Petersen Institute for International Economics
  Policy Brief (18-5), 1­14.

Pelc, K. J. (2016). Making and Bending International Rules: The Design of Exceptions and
  Escape Clauses in Trade Law. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Rodrik, D. (1995). The Political Economy of Trade Policy. In E. Grossman and K. Rogoff
  (Eds.), Handbook of International Economics, Volume 3, pp. 1457­1494. Amsterdam: Else-
  vier Science.

Rodrik, D. (2000). How Far Will International Economic Integration Go? Journal of Economic
  Perspectives 14(1), 177­186.

Rosendorff, B. P. and H. V. Milner (2001). The Optimal Design of International Trade Institu-
  tions: Uncertainty and Escape. International Organization 55(4), 829­857.

Ruggie, J. G. (1982). International Regimes, Transactions, and Change: Embedded Liberalism
  in the Postwar Economic Order. International Organization 36(2), 195­231.

Scheve, K. F. and M. J. Slaughter (2018). How to Save Globalization: Rebuilding America's
  Ladder of Opportunity. Foreign Affairs 97 (6), 98­108.

Schott, J. J. and E. Jung (2019). The WTO's Existential Crisis: How to Salvage Its Ability to
  Settle Trade Disputes. PIIE Policy Brief Washington, DC: Peterson Institute for International
  Economics, 1­19.

                                              32
Stewart, T. P. and E. J. Drake (2017). How the WTO Undermines U.S. Trade Remedy Enforce-
  ment. Alliance for American Manufacturing.

Subramanian, A. and S.-J. Wei (2007). The WTO Promotes Trade Strongly but Unevenly.
  Journal of International Economics 72(1), 151­175.

Tomz, M., J. L. Goldstein, and D. Rivers (2007). Do We Really Know That the WTO Increases
  Trade? Comment. American Economic Review 97 (5), 2005­2018.

United States Trade Representative (2018). The President's 2018 Trade Policy Agenda. Office
  of the United States Trade Representative.




                                            33
