                 DOMINANT CURRENCIES:
HOW FIRMS CHOOSE CURRENCY INVOICING AND WHY IT MATTERS
                       Mary Amiti
                      Oleg Itskhoki
                      Jozef Konings
                 WORKING PAPER 27926
                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         DOMINANT CURRENCIES:
        HOW FIRMS CHOOSE CURRENCY INVOICING AND WHY IT MATTERS

                                          Mary Amiti
                                         Oleg Itskhoki
                                         Jozef Konings

                                      Working Paper 27926
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27926


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2020




We thank our discussants Ariel Burstein, Andres Drenik and Philip Saure, as well as Andy
Atkeson, Emmanuel Dhyne, Linda Goldberg, Dima Mukhin, Jesse Schreger and seminar/
conference participants for comments, and Joris Hoste for excellent research assistance. We thank
the National Bank of Belgium for providing access to their data and research facilities. Financial
support from the Methusalem program of KU Leuven is gratefully acknowledged. The views
expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System, the National Bank of
Belgium, or the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Mary Amiti, Oleg Itskhoki, and Jozef Konings. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Dominant Currencies: How Firms Choose Currency Invoicing and Why it Matters
Mary Amiti, Oleg Itskhoki, and Jozef Konings
NBER Working Paper No. 27926
October 2020
JEL No. E31,F31,F41

                                         ABSTRACT

Using new data on currency invoicing for Belgian firms, we analyze how firms make their
currency choice, for both exports and imports, and the implications of this choice for exchange
rate pass-through into prices and quantities. We derive our estimating equations from a
theoretical framework featuring variable markups, international input sourcing, and staggered
price setting with endogenous currency choice. Our structural specification provides a new test of
the allocative consequences of nominal rigidities, by estimating the treatment effect of foreign-
currency price stickiness on the dynamic response of prices and quantities, controlling for the
endogeneity of the firm's currency choice. We show that flexible-price determinants of exchange
rate pass-through are also the key firm characteristics that determine currency choice. In
particular, small non-importing firms tend to price their exports in euros (producer currency) and
exhibit complete exchange-rate pass-through into destination prices at all horizons. In contrast,
large import-intensive firms tend to denominate their exports in foreign currencies, especially in
the US dollar, exhibiting a lower pass-through of the euro-destination exchange rate and a
pronounced sensitivity to the dollar-destination exchange rate. The effects of foreign-currency
price stickiness are still significant beyond the one-year horizon, but gradually dissipate in the
long run.

Mary Amiti                                      Jozef Konings
Microeconomic Studies Function                  University of Liverpool
Federal Reserve Bank of New York                Management School
33 Liberty St                                   Economics group
New York, NY 10045                              Chatham Street
and CEPR                                        Liverpool L69 7ZH
mary.amiti@gmail.com                            United Kingdom
                                                and KU Leuven
Oleg Itskhoki                                   Joep.Konings@econ.kuleuven.be
Department of Economics
University of California, Los Angeles
Bunche Hall, 315 Portola Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
itskhoki@econ.ucla.edu
1        Introduction
The currency of invoicing used in price setting is central for the international transmission of shocks,
as well as for macroeconomic policies in an open economy. Not only does it matter for the size of the
international spillovers, but also for their direction. If rms price their exports in the producer currency,
a depreciation of their currency leads to a terms of trade improvement for the foreign country, whereas
pricing in the destination currency has the opposite e ect, with the terms of trade improvement for the
home country (Obstfeld and Rogo 2000). To further complicate matters, if rms were to price their
exports in dollars, a third currency, then the depreciation of the home currency has no e ect on export
prices, while a depreciation of the dollar against the destination currency results in a terms-of-trade
deterioration for the home country (Gopinath 2016). This matters enormously for macroeconomic
policy, as movements in terms of trade shape expenditure switching between domestic and foreign
products, and are thus key factors in policy decisions to optimally peg or oat the exchange rate (see
Friedman 1953, and the literature that followed).1
        In this paper, we analyze -- both theoretically and empirically -- how rms choose the currency of
invoicing, in both their exports and imports, and the implications of this choice for exchange rate pass-
through into prices and quantities, at di erent time horizons. We start by identifying two new stylized
facts. First, the currency choice is an active rm-level decision, yet with substantial persistence over
time. Using a new data set on Belgium rms, which combines information on the choice of currency
invoicing at the rm-product-country-month level, we nd that rm-destination characteristics explain
85% of currency-use variation, signi cantly more than the industry-destination or even the highly-
detailed product-destination determinants. This motivates our focus on identifying the speci c rm
characteristics that have explanatory power for the currency choice. It is generally di cult to obtain
trade data that specify the currency of invoicing, and those that are available typically lack information
on rm characteristics, which we show are central for understanding the currency choice, consistent
with theory. Therefore, the Belgian rm-product-country-level trade data with information on values,
quantities, and currency of invoicing, merged with domestic census data on general rm characteristics,
is uniquely suitable for this analysis.
        The second new stylized fact to emerge from this dataset is that the euro is a dominant currency,
at least as important as the US dollar, for both Belgian imports and exports outside of the European
Union. The combined share of the two currencies accounts for about 90% of all ex-EU trade ows.
Consequently, producer (source) currency pricing, known as PCP, is uncommon for Belgian imports
and local (destination) currency pricing, known as LCP, is uncommon for Belgian exports. Thus, the
invoicing patterns in the data are at odds with conventional international macro models that assume
exogenously either PCP or LCP pricing, and instead are consistent with a framework that allows for
endogenously emerging dominant currencies (DCP) -- namely, the dollar as the established global dom-
inant currency and the euro as the emerging regional dominant currency. Furthermore, the Belgian data
    1
    The use of the US dollar in international trade invoicing and as the nominal anchor for pegging the exchange rates in
many countries are two of the complimentary and interrelated forces in the emergence of the dollar as the global dominant
currency, as emphasized recently by Gourinchas (2019).



                                                           1
features substantial variation in the use of the two dominant currencies -- both across country-sectors
and across rms within detailed industry-destinations -- another rare feature necessary for the analysis
of endogenous currency choice at the rm level.
       We derive our estimating equations building on a theoretical framework, which combines heteroge-
neous rms with variable markups (as in Amiti, Itskhoki, and Konings 2019), endogenous international
input sourcing (as in Amiti, Itskhoki, and Konings 2014) and staggered price setting with endogenous
currency choice (as in Gopinath, Itskhoki, and Rigobon 2010), allowing additionally for the DCP option.
This framework predicts that the desired ( exible-price) exchange rate pass-through (ERPT) is shaped
by the import intensity of the rm and its strategic complementarities in price setting with other rms
in the market. The currency choice, in turn, is determined by the desired ERPT of the rm during the
period of price non-adjustment. Since the currency choice directly determines the short-run ERPT of
the rm, it feeds back, via strategic complementarities in pricing, into the currency choice and price
adjustment decisions of other rms, a ecting the equilibrium exchange rate pass-through at the indus-
try level. Thus, changes in the equilibrium environment -- in particular related to the prevalence in
the use of di erent currencies -- can result in profound shifts in the overall patterns of exchange rate
pass-through into export prices and the international transmission of shocks.
       We analyze the rm's currency choice in exporting and importing within this framework, initially
as a binary choice between euros and other currencies, and then as the choice between the destina-
tion currency and the dollar.2 As predicted by the theory, we nd that rm size, proxying for strategic
complementarities with local competitors, and the cost share of imported inputs are the two key de-
terminants of currency choice, with larger, more import-intensive rms more likely to deviate from
producer currency pricing and choose non-euros for pricing their exports. The currency in which the
imported inputs are invoiced is positively associated with the export currency choice, providing real
hedging. Furthermore, the rms that rely more on imported intermediate inputs, in particular those
invoiced in non-euros and speci cally in dollars, are more likely to adopt the dollar to price their ex-
ports, while larger rms, other things equal, are more likely to adopt the destination currency (LCP).
Firm participation in global value chains, proxied by cross-border ownership and FDI, also increases
the likelihood of foreign-currency -- and speci cally dollar -- use in exports. We also nd evidence of
strategic complementarities in currency choice, whereby the currency choice of the rm's competitors
within its industry-destination has a strong impact on the rm's own currency choice. This mechanism
can propagate the currency choice equilibrium over time, resulting in inertia and resistance to change.
       For currency choice in imports, we also observe strong strategic complementarities with other rms
importing the same products from the same source countries. However, unlike for exports, the other
 rm characteristics, and in particular rm size, are uncorrelated with the rm's importing currency
choice. This lack of correlation with currency use in imports suggests that currency choice is a less
active rm-level decision for importing than for exporting. This nding is in line with the baseline
model of currency choice, in which the supplier makes the currency and price-setting decisions, while
the downstream rms choose quantities given the realized prices.
   2
     Note that the analysis of the choice between the destination currency and the dollar requires us to focus on the subset
of destination countries that do not peg their currency to the dollar, as we further explain below.


                                                             2
    Our results show that the rm's currency choice is, in turn, a key determinant of the exchange
rate pass-through into prices and quantities. In our empirical pass-through speci cations, we control
for both exible-price determinants of ERPT ( rm size and import intensity), as well as the currency
choice, which shapes the short-run response of prices to the movements in both the euro-destination
and the dollar-destination exchange rates. This structural speci cation o ers a new test of the allocative
e ects of price stickiness, by estimating the treatment e ect of invoicing currency on the dynamic
responses of prices and quantities to exchange rate changes, beyond what is predicted by the exible-
price determinants of ERPT.
    Speci cally, we nd that small Belgian exporters with no exposure to foreign inputs that price their
exports in euros exhibit complete pass-through of the euro-destination exchange rate into destination
prices at all horizons, and are insensitive to the dollar-destination exchange rate. By contrast, large
 rms with high foreign-input intensity have a signi cantly lower pass-through of the euro exchange
rate, and a positive pass-through of the dollar exchange rate into the destination prices. These e ects are
present after controlling for the currency choice of the rms, and their magnitude gradually builds up
over time, consistent with a greater role of the exible-price determinants of pass-through over longer
horizons. Firms that instead price their exports in local or dominant currency exhibit a much lower
pass-through of the euro-destination exchange rate, especially in the short run, with the gap slowly
decreasing over time. In addition, the rms that price in dollars exhibit signi cant pass-through of the
dollar exchange rate into destination prices, especially in the short run and also gradually decaying
over time. At the one year horizon, the di erential pass-through of the PCP rms relative to LCP rms
is around 33%, and similarly for the DCP rms on the dollar-destination exchange rate, in both cases
after controlling for the exible-price ERPT determinants.
    We show that the estimated dynamics of ERPT into prices are consistent with a simple Calvo model
of staggered price setting in di erent currencies, with roughly a 13% monthly probability of price ad-
justment, or in other words with an average duration of price setting of 8.3 months.3 The cross-currency
di erential pass-through into prices translates into consistent di erences in the response of quantities,
with an estimated negative export quantity elasticity of around 1.5 at the annual horizon. The quan-
tities, however, take time to adjust, with the e ects becoming signi cant only about a year after the
shock, suggesting a role for quantity adjustment frictions in addition to price stickiness.
    One drawback of our dataset is that we only observe unit values instead of the transaction-level
individual price changes, and hence cannot condition our analysis on a price change (as in Gopinath,
Itskhoki, and Rigobon 2010). However, the ability to observe rm characteristics, combined with the
currency invoicing, is a major novel bene t of these data. This enables us to address the selection
of rms into di erent currencies of pricing, and thereby establish the direct causal e ects of foreign-
currency price stickiness on the dynamics of export prices and quantities. Our data allows us to estimate
this non-parametrically at various horizons, e ectively comparing the response of treated subsets of
   3
     This estimate is broadly consistent with somewhat higher direct estimates in the literature (see Gopinath and Rigobon
2008, Nakamura and Steinsson 2008), which are based on nominal price durations that we do not observe in our dataset.
Our estimate is, instead, obtained from the dynamic response of prices to exchange rates, which we show has allocative
expenditure-switching consequences.



                                                            3
 rms -- pricing in dollars and in the destination currency -- relative to the control group pricing in euros,
while holding xed rm characteristics that shape the desired pass-through of the rms conditional on
price adjustment. As a result, we are able to provide new evidence of gradual convergence of pass-
through across currency groups of rms, consistent with the theoretical predictions.
    There are two further noteworthy features of our analysis. First, we focus on the within-industry-
destination heterogenous response across rms to the same exchange rate shocks. In other words,
our analysis includes highly disaggregated industry-destination-time xed e ects, and our inference
is based on the di erential behavior of rms within the same general equilibrium environment, thus
excluding confounding macroeconomic factors. Second, our analysis relies on a structural estimat-
ing equation, which emphasizes the importance of including both the euro-destination and the dollar-
destination exchange rates interacted with rm characteristics. We show that conventional exchange
rate speci cations, which fail to include the interactions terms with the dominant-currency exchange
rate result in estimates biased towards zero.
    We discuss the related literature next, and the rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2
presents our theoretical framework of endogenous currency choice and exchange rate pass-through,
which informs our estimating equations and empirical strategy. Section 3 describes our dataset and the
construction of the variables for the empirical analysis, and then documents a number of new stylized
facts on the currency use in import and export transactions of Belgian rms. Section 4 contains our
empirical analysis of the currency choice at the rm level, for export and import transactions. Section 5
presents the results on pass-through of bilateral and dominant exchange rates into export prices and
quantities at the annual frequency, while Section 6 studies the ERPT dynamics and the relative contri-
bution of sticky-price and exible-price determinants of pass-through over various horizons. Section 7
o ers concluding remarks on the likely scenarios for the changing status of dominant currencies.

Literature review        The international macro literature has long emphasized the importance of cur-
rency of invoicing for the dynamics of terms of trade and expenditure switching (see e.g. the debate in
Obstfeld and Rogo 2000 and Engel 2003 and a more recent analysis in Boz, Gopinath, and Plagborg-
Møller 2017), as well as for the direction of international policy spillovers (see e.g. summary in Corsetti
and Pesenti 2007) and for the optimal exchange rate policy (see e.g. Devereux and Engel 2003 and a
more recent analysis in Egorov and Mukhin 2020).4
    International macro models rely, for the most part, on an exogenously assumed pattern of currency
invoicing. In particular, the original frameworks of Mundell (1963) and Fleming (1962), as well as of
Dornbusch (1976) and Obstfeld and Rogo (1995), relied on the assumption of producer currency pric-
ing (PCP), whereby exporters use the currency of their home country for invoicing. The evidence of
low exchange rate pass-through in the aftermath of the Bretton-Woods system (see Dornbusch 1987,
Krugman 1987), led to a shift towards the assumption of local currency pricing (LCP), whereby rms
set prices in the destination currency (see e.g. Bacchetta and van Wincoop 2000, Betts and Devereux
2000, Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan 2002). The emergence of micro-level data sets with information
   4
     Barbiero, Farhi, Gopinath, and Itskhoki (2019) emphasize the role of the currency of invoicing for the trade balance
consequences of tax and tari policies.


                                                           4
on the currency of invoicing at the transaction level (see e.g. Gopinath, Itskhoki, and Rigobon 2010)
has emphasized the role of the US dollar as the universal currency of invoicing, and led to the growing
prominence of the dominant currency paradigm (DCP), whereby a single dominant currency is used for
invoicing of all global trade (see Gopinath, Boz, Casas, Díez, Gourinchas, and Plagborg-Møller 2020).5
In this paper, we document that neither of the exogenous invoicing paradigms (PCP, LCP or DCP) ap-
proximates well the patterns in our data, where invoicing is an active rm-level decision, which results
in a co-existence of two dominant currencies with endogenous relative prominence.
       Our work draws on important earlier contributions to the analysis of currency choice at the rm
level and its implications for exchange rate pass-through. In a seminal paper, Engel (2006) provided
an equivalence result between currency choice and exchange rate pass-through in a one-period sticky-
price model, showing how existing theories of currency choice map into this equivalence result. Gopinath,
Itskhoki, and Rigobon (2010) generalized this result to a dynamic multi-period framework, separately
identifying the feedback e ects between currency choice and the dynamics of ERPT. More recently,
Mukhin (2017) nested this framework in a general equilibrium model of the international price system
with endogenously-emerging dominant currencies.6 We combine the insights from this literature to
derive our structural estimating equations.
       Our paper relates to the growing empirical literature on the dominant role of the US dollar in
international trade ows, following Goldberg and Tille (2008) and Gopinath (2016).7 The empirical
evidence in support of these models largely stems from data on countries which almost exclusively
rely on the dollar in both their exports and their imports (e.g., Gopinath, Itskhoki, and Rigobon 2010
examine the evidence for the US and Casas, Díez, Gopinath, and Gourinchas 2016 study the case of a
developing country--Colombia). The advantage of studying a Euro Area country, like Belgium, is that
there is much greater variation in currency choice, with the euro used at least as intensively as the dollar.
This additional variation enables us to shed light on the competition between two dominant currencies
-- an established global leader and a regional contender -- a case of intense theoretical interest.
       More recently, currency data has become available on other countries (e.g., UK, France, Switzerland,
Canada and some developing countries) with interesting cross-currency variation at the transaction
level that has been exploited to analyze either currency choice or ERPT (see Chung 2016, Chen, Chung,
and Novy 2018, Corsetti, Crowley, and Han 2020, Barbiero 2020, Auer, Burstein, and Lein 2020, Goldberg
and Tille 2016, Devereux, Dong, and Tomlin 2017, Drenik and Perez 2018). A distinguishing feature of
   5
      The dominant currency assumption was rst explored in an earlier literature, both theoretical (see e.g. Corsetti and
Pesenti 2007, Goldberg and Tille 2009) and empirical (see Goldberg and Tille 2008, Gopinath 2016), based on global trends in
the aggregate data. Prior to the availability of micro-level data, Friberg (1998) used a survey approach to elicit information
on the currency of invoicing for exports.
    6
      Other important early contributions to the literature on currency choice include Corsetti and Pesenti (2004), Devereux,
Engel, and Storgaard (2004), Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2005), as well as more recent work by Bhattarai (2009) and Cravino
(2017). Our work is also related to a vast exchange rate pass-through literature summarized in a number of survey articles,
most recently by Burstein and Gopinath (2013) and Itskhoki (2020).
    7
      An even larger literature, summarized in Gourinchas (2019), explores the other roles of the dollar as the dominant cur-
rency -- in rm nancing (see e.g. Gopinath and Stein 2020, Maggiori, Neiman, and Schreger 2020), as reserve and global
safe-asset currency (see e.g. Farhi and Maggiori 2017, He, Krishnamurthy, and Milbradt 2019), and for exchange rate pegging
and monetary anchoring (see e.g. Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogo 2019). An earlier literature has explored the role of the US
dollar as the dominant currency from the transaction-cost point of view (see e.g. Krugman 1980, Rey 2001, Devereux and Shi
2013 and more recently Drenik, Kirpalani, and Perez 2019).


                                                              5
our study is that we can match the currency invoicing data with rm-level characteristics required by
the theory in order to estimate a structural speci cation for both currency choice and the resulting
ERPT, capturing the contribution of both its exible-price and sticky-price determinants.


2        Theoretical Framework
In this section, we draw on new insights developed in the recent literature to provide a uni ed theory
of currency choice and exchange rate pass-through in order to derive a structural empirical framework.
We consider an industry equilibrium in a given industry s in foreign destination k , and we omit notation
s and k when it causes no confusion. We focus on the problem of a home (Belgian) rm i exporting
to market k , and consider in turn its desired price, the optimal preset price and the optimal currency
choice. We begin with a simple one-period model of price stickiness and then extend the analysis to a
dynamic environment.

2.1       Environment
Desired price Firm i's pro t from exporting to destination k is denoted by i (pi )  i (pi |),
where pi is the export price in producer currency (euros). Vector  describes the state of the world,
which includes exogenous shocks (e.g. productivity), endogenous shocks (e.g. exchange rate move-
ments), and the rm's competitor prices. The log desired price of rm i is given by:

                                                 p
                                                 ~i = arg maxpi i (pi ).                                                   (1)

         ~i  p
That is, p   ~i () is the price that the rm would choose in state , if it were setting prices exibly.
        The desired price of the rm can be converted to any currency , including the destination cur-
rency = k or the dollar = D:
                                                       p
                                                       ~i = p
                                                            ~i + e ,                                                       (2)

where e is the log bilateral exchange rate between currency                     and the euro. Speci cally, e is equal
to the number of units of currency              for one euro, and hence an increase in e corresponds to an
                                                                                            ~
appreciation of the euro. We reserve the  notation for the destination currency k , that is p  ~k
                                                                                             i pi.

Price stickiness and preset prices               The rm presets the price p
                                                                          ¯i in currency                before the state 
is realized, and with probability  this price stays in e ect. That is, the realized price in the producer
                      ¯i - e . With the complementary probability (1 -  ), the rm adjusts its price
currency is then pi = p
to the desired level, and in this case the realized price is pi = p
                                                                  ~i .
        The optimal preset price in currency solves:

                                          p
                                          ¯i = arg maxp      pi - e |),
                                                      ¯ E i (¯                                                             (3)
                                                             i



where the expectation is taken over all possible realizations of the state vector .8 One can prove
    This implicitly assumes that the rm's opportunity to adjust the price (with probability 1 -  ) is idiosyncratic, as in the
    8

Calvo model (see e.g. Gopinath and Itskhoki 2010, which extends this analysis to a model of state-contingent price adjustment).


                                                                 6
the following characterization of the optimal preset price p
                                                           ¯i , extending the logic of Proposition 1 in
Gopinath, Itskhoki, and Rigobon (2010):9

Lemma 1 (Preset prices) For any currency , the rst-order approximation to the optimal preset price is:

                                                     ¯i = E{ p
                                                     p       ~i + e },                                                       (4)

where p        ~i , i.e. the desired price in currency .
      ~i + e = p

Under any currency choice , the rm chooses its preset price to target the average desired price p
                                                                                                ~i ,
expressed in this currency.

Currency choice           When choosing p
                                        ¯i , the rm also chooses the currency , in which it presets the
price. The optimal currency choice solves:10

                                        = arg max        maxp     ¯i - e |
                                                            ¯ E i p                       .                                  (5)
                                                                i



In other words, given that prices are sticky (with probability  ), the rm has the option to choose the cur-
                                                           pi ) - i (¯
rency , which minimizes the loss from price stickiness, i (~         pi - e ), on average across states .
    Following the insights in Engel (2006), Gopinath, Itskhoki, and Rigobon (2010), and Mukhin (2017),
the complex problem in (5) with a general pro t function i (·) can be shown to be approximately
equivalent to a simpler problem, connecting the currency choice to the covariance properties of the
desired prices with the exchange rates. Speci cally, we have:11

Lemma 2 (Currency choice) Under a second-order approximation to the general pro t function i (·),
the optimal currency choice in (5) is equivalent to:

                                               = arg min       var p
                                                                   ~i + e          ,                                         (6)

where p        ~i , i.e. the desired price in currency .
      ~i + e = p

    The optimal currency of pricing ensures the minimal variation in the desired price expressed in
currency , p
           ~i . This result may at rst appear surprising; nonetheless, it is very intuitive upon re ection.
The preset price attempts to target the desired price on average (Lemma 1). When the desired price
expressed in currency          is volatile across states, currency           is a poor choice for presetting the price,
as it results in large gaps between p
                                    ¯i and p
                                           ~i , and thus large pro t losses across states of the world.
    9
      Formally, this lemma obtains from the Taylor expansion of the rst-order condition (FOC) for p   ¯i in (3) around p
                                                                                                                       ~i , which
according to the FOC for p ~i in (1) satis es i (~pi - e ) = 0.
   10
      The analysis here goes through if the pro t function i (·) is replaced with the joint surplus function of the supplier
and the buyer of product i, and hence the currency choice is not necessarily a unilateral decision of the supplier, but could
also be the outcome of a bargaining game. We use the pro t function interpretation, however, in Section 2.2 to derive the
expansion for the desired price p  ~i . Also note that since we do not impose any structure on the pro t function, apart from
double di erentiability in price, it can accommodate any stochastic discount factor.
   11
      To prove this lemma, Taylor expand around p    ~i the gap in average pro ts between currencies and d: E i p    ¯i - e -
E i p  ¯d             1
        i - ed  2 E{-i (~
                           ~ pi )} · var(~   pd
                                              i - var(~   pi , and thus currency is chosen when var(~    pi < var(~   pd
                                                                                                                       i for all
                                                                                                              2
alternatives d; the proof uses i (~ pi ) = 0 and i (~                                               pi - p
                                                      pi ) < 0, as well as Lemma 1, which implies E(~     ¯i ) = var(~ pi .


                                                               7
In contrast, when the desired price is stable in a given currency , xing the price in that same currency
results in little loss relative to the exible price setting pi = p
                                                                 ~i , as it can be accurately targeted by a
constant p
         ¯i . In other words, a moving target is easy when its movement is limited. This explains the
result in Lemma 2.
    Using Lemma 2, the choice of currency         would be favored over the default option of pricing in
euros if var(~
             pi ) > var(~
                        pi ) = var(~
                                   pi + e ). Expanding the last variance term and manipulating the
inequality, this condition is equivalent to:

                                           cov p
                                               ~i + e , e      1
                                                              < ,                                           (7)
                                              var e            2

where a speci c threshold of 1/2 comes from the second-order (quadratic) approximation. Note that
the left-hand side is the projection of the desired price in currency        on the corresponding bilateral
exchange rate, or the exchange rate pass-through (ERPT) elasticity for the desired price. Currency
is favored if the exchange rate pass-through into p
                                                  ~i is low, or equivalently p
                                                                             ~i does not vary closely
with the exchange rate. In the opposite case, if the inequality in (7) is reversed for every currency ,
the optimal choice for the rm is the producer currency (euro), which ensures high ERPT in every
currency other than the euro.
    Finally, we point out that currency choice is an indexing decision. Speci cally, it ensures that, in
the instance of price non-adjustment, the realized destination price of the rm pi =p
                                                                                   ¯i + ek tracks one-
for-one the bilateral exchange rate between the destination currency k and the currency of pricing
given by ek  ek - e . The goal of the currency choice is to nd such and ek that allows p
                                                                                       ¯i + ek to
closely track p
              ~i . Lemma 2 and equation (7) formalize this idea as a condition on the low volatility of
the desired price p
                  ~i , or equivalently the low exchange rate pass-through into p
                                                                               ~i .
    In what follows, we focus on the three most common cases, namely those of producer currency
pricing (PCP -- euro), dominant/vehicle currency pricing (DCP -- dollar), and local currency pric-
ing (LCP -- destination currency k ), with the realized destination-currency price conditional on non-
adjustment given by:
                               
                               p
                               ¯i + ek , under PCP (euro),
                        p
                               D      D
                         i   = p
                               ¯i + ek , under DCP (dollar),                                                (8)
                               ¯
                               p i,      under LCP (destination currency k ),

as the relevant exchange rate ek is eE         D        k
                                     k = ek , ek , and ek = 0 in these three cases respectively. Thus,
                                                         ~
PCP is favored if the destination-currency desired price p i tracks closely the euro-destination bilateral
exchange rate ek , as PCP ensures complete pass-through of ek in the short run. Similarly, DCP is favored
   ~
if p                                                        D
     i tracks closely the dollar-destination exchange rate ek , that is the desired price is stable in dollars.
                           ~
Finally, LCP is favored if p i is itself stable and does not track any exchange rate, as LCP ensures zero
short-run pass-through of all exchange rates.




                                                      8
2.2     ERPT and currency choice
Desired pass-through            The desired price corresponds to the desired (log) markup of the rm µ
                                                                                                    ~i ,
using the following price identity:
                                                     p
                                                     ~i = µ
                                                          ~i + mci ,                                                     (9)

where mci is the log marginal cost of the rm. In the remainder of the analysis, all lower-case letters
denote the log deviations from a constant-price steady state.
      We follow Amiti, Itskhoki, and Konings (2019) and adopt the following decomposition (of the log
deviation) of the desired price of the rm, based on the structure of the desired markup, which applies
across a general class of models of monopolistic and oligopolistic competition:12

                                              1           i
                                     p
                                     ~i =         mci +      (z  - ek ) + i ,                                           (10)
                                            1 + i       1 + i k
        is the competitor price index in the destination currency (in a given industry-destination),
where zk
i is the demand (markup) shock, and i is the elasticity of the desired markup with respect to price,
                                    1                                                                         i
i  - µ
     ~i /pi . As a result,         1+i    is the own cost pass-through elasticity of the rm and              1+i    re ects
the strength of strategic complementarities in price setting.
                                                                                      ~
      We now explore the elasticity of the desired price in the destination currency, pi = p
                                                                                           ~i + ek , with
respect to the bilateral euro-destination exchange rate ek and the dollar-destination exchange rate eD
                                                                                                     k .
By convention, an increase in both ek and eD
                                           k correspond to the depreciation of the destination currency
against the euro and the dollar respectively. We approximate the projection of the rm's desired export
price on the exchange rates as follows:
                                                                                               ~
Lemma 3 (Desired pass-through) Firm i's desired export price to k in the destination currency, p i,
comoves with the euro-destination and the dollar-destination exchange rates as follows:

                                    p
                                   d~                       D   D
                                     i = (1 - i - i ) dek + i + i deD
                                                                    k ,                                                 (11)

where i  - mc     D
           ek and i 
             i                       mci
                                     eD
                                            capture the exposure of the rm's marginal cost to foreign currencies
                                      k
                                                              -mc -e ]                         
                                         i                 [zk    i k         D           i  [zk -mci -ek ]
and to the dollar speci cally, and i  - 1+ i                   ek         and i          1+i      eD
                                                                                                               capture the
                                                                                                   k
exposure of the rm's desired markup to foreign currencies and to the dollar via the competitor prices.
                                                                                        i    
      This result follows directly from (9), by noting from (10) that µ
                                                                      ~i =             1+i (zk   - ek - mci ) + i , and
assuming that the rm's idiosyncratic demand shifter i is orthogonal with the exchange rates.13 A rm
                                                                                  D = 0; and a rm
exhibiting no strategic complementarities in price setting, namely i = 0, has i = i
with a marginal cost mci stable in the producer currency has i = D
                                                                 i = 0. If both are true, the rm
exhibits complete pass-through of the euro-destination exchange rate into its desired destination price,
~
p                                                                                   ~
 i /ek = 1, and zero desired pass-through of the dollar-destination exchange rate,  p
                                                                                          D
                                                                                      i /ek = 0.
This is the complete ERPT benchmark. In contrast, if the rm's marginal cost is sensitive to the euro
                                                                                                       
   12
                                                                                     ~i = M(pi + ek - zk
      Formally, (10) is the full di erential of (9) with the desired markup given by µ                   ) + i and decreasing
                                                                      
in the relative price of the rm, that is i = -M (~       p i + ek - z k ) > 0.
   13
      In our empirical speci cation, the aggregate demand shocks, which may be correlated with the exchange rate movements,
are absorbed into the industry-destination-time xed e ects.


                                                             9
or the dollar exchange rate, e.g. due to the use of foreign intermediate inputs, or if the rm's optimal
markup is sensitive to the prices of its competitors in the destination market, then such a rm would
exhibit an incomplete pass-through of the euro-destination exchange rate and a non-zero pass-through
of the dollar-destination exchange rate into its desired destination-currency price.
       In practice, we can proxy for i and D
                                           i with the rm's share of imported intermediate inputs in
total variable costs, sourced in all foreign currencies and in dollars in particular. The rms that source
all their intermediates domestically, or within the eurozone, are assumed to have i = D
                                                                                      i = 0. For
the markup channel, we follow Amiti, Itskhoki, and Konings (2019) who show, both theoretically and
empirically, that i is increasing in rm size (market share) and is zero for rms with negligible market
                                    D to increase in rm size, and  =  D = 0 for the smallest
shares. We, therefore, expect i and i                             i  i
 rms.14 We generally expect i  D           D
                               i  0 and i  i  0, as i and i correspond to the marginal
cost and markup sensitivity to any foreign currency (including the dollar), while D     D
                                                                                  i and i correspond
to the sensitivity to the dollar speci cally.

Currency choice          Lemma 3 provides a convenient decomposition of the variation in the desired
price   ~
        p i.   We now combine it with equation (8) to determine whether PCP, DCP or LCP best tracks
the desired price. The three limiting cases are as follows:
   1. PCP (euro) if dp                                  D D
                      i  dek , corresponding to i , i , i , i  0;

                       p
   2. DCP (dollar) if d~     D               D   D
                        i  dek , when i + i  i + i  1;

                                     p
   3. LCP (destination currency) if d~                        D   D
                                      i  0, when i + i  1 and i + i  0.
Outside of these limiting cases, one can use Lemma 2 and condition (7) to establish the optimal currency
                                                                         p
                                                                        d~
choice pairwise. Accordingly, LCP is favored over PCP if                  i
                                                                        dek   < 1                          1
                                                                                2 , which requires i + i > 2 , and
                                                                                 p
                                                                               d[~    D
                                                                                  i -ek ]
PCP is favored otherwise. Similarly, DCP is favored over PCP if                   deD       <1                   D
                                                                                             2 , where eD  ek - ek is
                                                      1
the euro-dollar exchange rate, which holds if D   D
                                              i + i > 2 . Lastly, in the comparison of DCP vs LCP,
                                p
                               d~             1                                      1
the DCP is chosen when           i
                               deD
                                      D   D                                  D   D
                                      i + i > 2 , and LCP may be chosen when i + i < 2 .
                                 k
       To summarize, low exposure to foreign currencies (low i and i ) favors PCP; high exposure to the
dollar (high D     D
             i and i ) favors DCP; LCP is chosen in the interim range where i and i are high, and
D     D
i and i are low. Therefore, the choice between producer currency and a foreign currency is clear
cut -- PCP is favored when the rm has a stable desired markup and marginal cost in the producer
currency. In contrast, the choice between di erent foreign currencies -- LCP vs DCP -- is more subtle.
                                                                 D =  D S with  >  D , which
Following the approximation suggested in footnote 14, i = Si and i       i
suggests that larger rms should favor LCP over DCP. Indeed, to the extent that larger rms exhibit
stronger strategic complementarities in pricing, they are more likely to adopt LCP to ensure that their
prices are better aligned with their local competitors in the destination country, who price in the local
currency by default.
  14
     The markup elasticity i is increasing with the size of the rm in a broad class of oligopolistic and monopolistic competi-
tion models. For example, in the Atkeson and Burstein (2008) oligopolistic competition model, the markup elasticity is simply
i = ( - 1)Si , where  > 1 is the within-industry elasticity of substitution and Si is a measure of rm size (destination
                                                                           
                                  i  [zk -mci -ek ]                 i  [zk -mci -ek ]
market share). We approximate 1+     i     ek
                                                      -Si and 1+       i     eD
                                                                                          D Si , and we expect    D  0.
                                                                               k
Berman, Martin, and Mayer (2012) were rst to document the systematic ERPT heterogeneity between large and small rms.


                                                             10
Realized pass-through The realized pass-through is shaped by a combination of the currency choice,
conditional on price non-adjustment, which occurs with probability  , and of the desired ERPT, condi-
tional on a price change. As a result, the realized price of the rm satis es:

                                  d[¯
                                    pi + ek ] = dek , with probability ,
                        dpi =
                                   p
                                  d~i,                  with probability 1 - ,

       p
where d~i is given by (11) and ek = ek - e is the exchange rate between the currency of pricing and
the destination currency k . The expected price change is therefore Edp                   p
                                                                       i =  dek + (1 -  )d~i.
   We again focus on the three main cases -- PCP, DCP and LCP -- denoting with L   D
                                                                               i , i  {0, 1} the
indicators for whether the rm adopts LCP or DCP respectively. Assuming that no other cases are
observed in equilibrium, we can denote the choice of the PCP (euro) as i = D   L
                                                                           i + i = 0, and the
choice of any foreign currency as i = 1. Using this notation, we combine (8) and (11) to obtain the
expression for the expected observed price change:

         Edp                     D D                              D   D    D
            i = dek +  - i dek + i dek + (1 -  ) - (i + i )dek + (i + i )dek .                      (12)

The rst term (dek ) isolates the complete pass-through of the euro-destination exchange rate (that is,
dp                                                                   D
  i /dek = 1) of a counterfactual rm pricing in euros (PCP, with i = i = 0) and not exposed to foreign
currency uctuations either via its marginal cost (i = D                                     D
                                                      i = 0) or via its desired markup (i = i = 0).
   The next terms in (12), in the rst square brackets pre-multiplied by  , isolate the direct e ect
of price stickiness -- in local or dominant currency -- holding constant the desired price of the rm.
This e ect occurs conditional on no price adjustment, which happens with probability  , and results in
incomplete (zero) pass-through of the euro-destination exchange rate for LCP; and in a complete pass-
through of the dollar-destination exchange rate into destination prices if DCP is adopted. The greater
the extent of price stickiness, the larger is  and thus the expected impact of this sticky price term on
the realized ERPT.
   The last term in (12), in square brackets pre-multiplied by (1 -  ), isolates the e ect of the de-
sired price pass-through on the realized ERPT conditional on a price adjustment, which occurs with
probability (1 -  ). As emphasized by Lemma 3, the desired pass-through re ects the exposure of the
 rm's marginal cost and desired markup to foreign exchange (i and i ) and the dollar in particular
(D     D
 i and i ). Therefore, equation (12) o ers a convenient way to decompose the observed incomplete
ERPT into the direct e ect of foreign-currency price stickiness (LCP and DCP) and the incomplete
pass-through into the desired price (11) conditional on a price adjustment.
   Importantly, equation (12) is robust to the underlying selection of heterogenous rms into di erent
currencies of pricing based on the characteristics of their desired pass-through. By controlling for the
desired pass-through conditional on a price adjustment, we can estimate the direct causal e ect of the
currency of pricing on the realized ERPT, captured by the parameter  . In other words, this allows us
to estimate the treatment e ect of randomly assigning a given rm to a particular currency of pricing
given its desired pass-through, even though in the data the assignment of rms to currency bins is not
random and is shaped, at least in part, by the desired pass-through itself.

                                                   11
2.3      Dynamics of ERPT
The one-period model introduced above does not specify a time unit, and as such can be applied at any
time horizon. In particular, equation (12) describing the realized ERPT can be applied over any time
interval, where parameter  decreases over time to re ect the fact that prices become more exible over
longer horizons. In the very short run, we expect   1, and in the long run   0. Therefore, as we
consider longer time horizons, the relative weight in (12) shifts away from the sticky-price term and
towards the desired-price ( exible-price) term. We approach the data non-parametrically, and estimate
a sequence of equations (12) over varying time horizons.
       To aid the interpretation of our estimates, we now extend the analysis to a dynamic price setting
problem with a Calvo price setting friction.15 That is, we consider a rm that has an exogenous op-
portunity to reset its price with a probability (1 -  ) each period, while with probability  it keeps its
price unchanged from the previous period. We consider a rm setting prices in currency , which may
correspond to PCP, LCP or DCP. Therefore, the rm's realized destination-currency price satis es:

                                            ¯it + ekt ,
                                            p                 with probability 1 - ,
                                 pit =
                                            pi,t-1 + ekt , with probability ,
                                                                  j
                              ¯it = (1 -  )
where the optimal reset price p                           j =0 ( ) Et p
                                                                      ~i,t+j    is a weighted average of current and
future desired prices (using the probability of non-adjustment  and the discount factor  as weights),
generalizing the concept of preset price (3) in the static model (see e.g. Galí 2008). For simplicity, we
assume that all bilateral exchange rates follow a random walk with Et ek,t+1 = 0, and we consider
                                                   ~
the special case of the desired price in (11) with p it = i ekt , where i = 1 - i - i .
                                                                                        16

       With this data generating process, we show in Appendix B that by estimating equation (12) over any
time horizon h (e.g., in months), one can recover both the structural parameter of price stickiness  , as
well as the causal treatment e ect of currency of pricing, as discussed above. In particular, by projecting
an h-period change in the observed prices, p         
                                            i,t+h - pit , on the h-period change in the exchange rate,
ek,t+h - ekt , interacted with a dummy for foreign currency choice i and controlling for the desired
pass-through terms, as in (12), one obtains the following coe cient (as a function of horizon h):

                                               ^(h) = 1  (1 -  h ),
                                                                                                                         (13)
                                                      h1-
from which it is easy to obtain the price stickiness parameter  . Furthermore, by varying the time
horizon h, one obtains a sequence of estimates, which can be used to check whether a simple Calvo
model with a single parameter  o ers a good approximation to the observed dynamics of prices. In-
deed, (13) suggests that ^(h) should decrease hyperbolically in h, and converge to zero in the long run,
as the e ect of price stickiness wanes.17 Finally, with a known  , the fraction of prices that have not yet
  15
      One can adopt alternative models of price and quantity dynamics, and use our non-parametric dynamic estimates to
discipline the structural coe cients in those models.
                               D
   16
      This implicitly assumes i  = D  i = 0 and that i is constant over time, which we do not impose in the estimation.
   17
      Note that the convergence is not geometric because it is a projection of the contemporaneous change in prices on the
change in the exchange rate, over increasingly longer time horizons, thus mixing the short-run and the long-run responses.
An alternative projection of a one-period price change on the distributed lag of past exchange rate changes recovers a geomet-
rically decreasing pattern of coe cients,  h , but is considerably more demanding to estimate. Appendix B provides details.


                                                             12
been adjusted h periods after the shock is given by a declining geometric progression  h , which also
measures the causal e ect of the foreign-currency price stickiness on the realized ERPT h periods out.


3      Empirical Analysis
In this section, we describe our data sets and the construction of the main variables. We then present
new empirical facts on currency invoicing.

3.1     Data Description
The novel data we use for our analysis is the information on the currency choice at the rm-product-
country-month level for imports and exports from February 2017 to March 2019. The Belgian Customs
O ce began to compile these data at this disaggregated level at the beginning of 2017, which were then
processed by the National Bank of Belgium. Because the Customs O ce only records transactions for
trade with countries outside the European Union (EU), the currency data are only available for ex-EU
trade transactions. All international trade transactions that take place within the EU are collected by a
di erent authority, the Intrastat Survey, which does not report the currency of invoicing. Importantly,
we have the invoicing information for both exports and imports for all ex-EU countries, with the im-
porting side rarely observed in other data sets. These data report the value, quantity, and currency
of invoice for exports and imports at the rm-product level by destination and source country with
each product classi ed at the 8-digit combined nomenclature (CN), comprising around 10,000 distinct
products. The rst 6-digits of the CN codes correspond to the World Harmonized System (HS).
      To understand the determinants of currency choice and exchange rate pass-through, we combine
the currency invoicing data with rm characteristics drawn from annual income statements of all in-
corporated rms in Belgium. This combination of invoicing data with rm characteristics is unique to
Belgium. It is straightforward to merge these datasets as both include a unique rm identi er. In partic-
ular, we use the quarterly VAT declarations, which all rms are required to submit to the tax o ce, for
information on the cost of total material inputs used. We draw on data from the Social Security O ce
for the wage bill component of total variable costs, where all rms have to report their employment
and wages paid.
      Using these data, we construct two key variables -- the rm's import intensity from outside the EU
it and its destination-k market share Sikt , measured for each rm-product i. Speci cally:

                                        Total non-euro import valueit
                                  it                                  ,                              (14)
                                            Total variable costsit

where total variable costs comprise a rm's total wage bill and total material cost. Note that it is
measured at the rm-level, and thus applies to all CN8-products i exported by multi-product rms.
We usually average this measure over time to obtain a rm-level average import intensity denoted
by i . A novelty with our data is that we can further split a rm's import intensity by the currency
of invoicing, to get a measure of the share of imports invoiced in euros and non-euros. We denote the
euro- and non-euro-invoiced import intensities with E and X superscripts respectively, so that the
overall import intensity of the rm can be decomposed as i = E   X
                                                            i + i .


                                                   13
       The rm's market share is constructed as follows:

                                                        Export valuefskt
                                        Sikt                                   ,                                      (15)
                                                    f   Fskt Export valuef skt

where Export valuefskt is the combined export value of all products of rm f in industry s (correspond-
ing to rm-product i) shipped to destination k at time t, and Fskt is the set of all Belgian exporters to
destination k in industry s at time t. Therefore, Sikt measures the market share of the rm relative
to all Belgium exporters in a given industry-destination.18 We de ne industries s at the HS 4-digit
level, at which we both obtain a nontrivial distribution of market shares and avoid having too many
industry-destinations served by a single Belgian exporter.
       For the import and export currency choice estimation, we use the full sample of monthly data
available to us from February 2017 to March 2019, and de ne the dependent variables as equal to 0 if the
currency choice is the euro and 1 otherwise. For the export regressions, we run additional speci cations
for a subset of non-peg destinations, with the dependent variable equal to 1 for dollar choice and zero
otherwise. We follow Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogo (2019), and use monthly data (from 2012 to 2018)
to classify as pegs all currencies with an annualized root mean squared error of exchange rate changes
against the dollar below 5%, identifying 65 dollar pegs among 151 destination countries, which account
for 43% of Belgian exports outside the EU.
       When we turn to the baseline exchange rate pass-through analysis, we start with annual data on
trade ows and rm characteristics for the period 2012 to 2018, as we are interested in studying the
equilibrium relations following the theoretical framework described in Section 2. Since our data does
not include information on the currency of invoicing prior to 2017, we take the currency of invoicing
from the monthly trade data from 2017 to 2019 and extrapolate it to the years 2012-2016. In doing so,
we calculate each rm's share of exports by destination invoiced in noneuros, and assume that it is
persistent over time in the previous ve years.19 This assumption is based on the high persistence in
the currency choice in exporting: over our 26-month sample period, there was a switch between euros
and noneuros for only 3.2% observations (3.7% value).
       The dependent variable in the ERPT analysis is the log change in the export price of rm-product i
to destination country k at time t, measured as the ratio of export value to export quantity (unit value):

                                                            Export value
                                      pikt   log
                                                                         ikt
                                                                                   ,                                  (16)
                                                           Export quantityikt

where values are converted to the destination currencies k (hence  superscript) and quantities are
measured as weights (where available) or units. Despite the high degree of disaggregation in the CN
product codes, unit values may still be an imprecise proxy for prices because there may be more than
  18
      Theoretically, the relevant market share is relative to all rms supplying the destination market, including exporters
from other countries and local competitors. Since our analysis is across Belgian exporters within industry-destinations,
the competitive stance in a particular industry-destination is common for all Belgian exporters and absorbed into industry-
destination-time xed e ects, thus letting Sikt capture all relevant variation.
   19
      For 70% of the observations, this rm-destination share is a zero-one dummy variable; even when fractional (for rms
with multiple products), it is in the (0.2,0.8) range for only 8.3% of the observations.



                                                            14
one rm-product within a CN 8-digit code, resulting in unit value changes due to compositional changes
in aggregation, or because of errors in measuring quantities. To minimize these issues, we clean the
data by dropping the observations with abnormally large price jumps, namely with year-to-year price
ratios above 3 or below 1/3. Summary statistics for all variables are provided in the Appendix Table A2.

3.2      Stylized facts on currency choice
We start by documenting the overall incidence of di erent currencies in Belgian exports and imports.
The currency data is available only for the ex-EU trade, which accounts for 27% of total Belgian exports
and 34% of imports in 2018.20 Nonetheless, as Belgium is a very open economy, with a trade (exports
plus imports) to GDP ratio of 151% in 2018, its ex-EU trade ows, while accounting for only about a
third of its total trade ows, are still signi cant as a share of GDP.
       In Table 1, we report the shares of currency use (for the euro, dollar, and other currencies combined)
in Belgian ex-EU exports and imports for our full sample (February 2017 to March 2019). We report
the shares of both the observed transactions (at rm-product-country-month level) and the value of
trade ows. For exports, the euro accounts for two-thirds of the observations, yet only 35% of the
value, suggesting that it is the smaller transactions that are denominated in euros. In contrast, the
dollar accounts for just 23% of observations, yet more than half (52%) of the value of exports, making
the dollar the dominant export currency. The other currencies combined account for just over 10%
of Belgian exports, both in count and in value terms. Therefore, the incidence of local (destination)
currency pricing -- other than the dollar -- is not very high in Belgian exports.21
       For imports, the distribution of value shares across these di erent currency categories is almost the
same as for exports: the euro accounts for 38% of the value of imports, the dollar accounts for 54% and
all other currencies combined account for 8%. For imports, however, there is almost no discrepancy
between the shares in terms of number of observations and in value terms, suggesting that on average
there is no di erence in the size of the transactions across the three currency bins that we consider.
The limited role of the other currencies suggests that producer currency pricing -- again outside of the
case of the dollar -- is an infrequent phenomenon in Belgian imports.
       Di erentiated goods (de ned by the Rauch classi cation) account for more than 80% of the obser-
vations and almost 60% of the value of trade (for both exports and imports). The distribution across
currency categories for di erentiated goods show similar patterns to the overall value shares, with a
somewhat more pronounced role of the euro. Indeed, one noticeable di erence is that the role of the
dollar is somewhat smaller in the di erentiated trade ows -- accounting for just under 40% of both
di erentiated exports and imports, versus over 50% in the overall trade. The euro share is equally
  20
      Most of the EU countries are also in the eurozone (which accounts for 57% of Belgian exports and 55% of imports), and
thus the euro is the most likely currency for trade with these countries. However, there are eight EU countries not in the
eurozone for which we also do not have currency data -- Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Hungary, Poland,
Romania, Sweden and the United Kingdom (accounting for 15% of Belgian exports and 10% of imports). For the countries that
do report the currency of invoicing, we have at least 90% coverage, both in count and value terms.
   21
      Importantly, these invoicing patterns are not driven by the US, which is Belgium's largest trade partner outside the EU.
For example, if we drop the US as an export destination, the share of the dollar use in export invoicing only falls from 52% to
46% of Belgium's ex-EU exports and hardly changes for ex-EU imports. This highlights the dominant role of the US dollar as
the vehicle currency in international trade, consistent with the patterns documented by Gopinath (2016).


                                                              15
                                   Table 1: Currency use in exports and imports
                                      Exports                                         Imports
                        Count           Value share                    Count            Value share
                        share       All   Di     Non-di                share        All   Di     Non-di
             Euro        0.659     0.353     0.398      0.293           0.377     0.380     0.484       0.244
             Dollar      0.230     0.516     0.393      0.681           0.526     0.536     0.378       0.742
             Other       0.111     0.131     0.209      0.026           0.097     0.084     0.137       0.014
Note: The currency data are at the rm-product (CN8)-country-month level for February 2017 to March 2019, for all ex-EU
countries. "Other" row refers to all transactions in currencies other than the euro or dollar. "Di " columns refer to di eren-
tiated goods as de ned by the Rauch classi cation; "Non-di " are all other goods.


prominent for exports and even larger for imports at 48%. Unsurprisingly, the dollar is a much more
prevalent currency for commodities and homogeneous goods (non-di erentiated category), where the
dollar accounts for around 70% of the trade. Also note that the use of third currencies, which are nearly
absent in the non-di erentiated trade invoicing, becomes more prevalent for di erentiated goods --
accounting for 21% of exports and 14% of imports.
    A clear message from Table 1 is that the currency patterns are at odds with standard macro models
that assume either producer (PCP) or local (LCP) currency pricing. Under PCP, exports should be
predominantly invoiced in euros and imports in the currency of the source country, whereas under
LCP, exports should be invoiced in the destination currency and imports in euros. The co-dominance of
euros and dollars in both importing and exporting suggests that neither LCP nor PCP accurately re ect
the currency choices. Instead, the patterns are more in line with recent work emphasizing the dollar as
the dominant currency (see Gopinath, Boz, Casas, Díez, Gourinchas, and Plagborg-Møller 2020).
    As in the recent literature, we also nd an outsized role of the US dollar relative to the share of US
trade, with the share of dollar invoicing over 50% versus the 20% share of the US in Belgian ex-EU trade.
However, to gauge the relative importance of the US dollar, a more informative benchmark may be the
Belgian trade share with dollarized and dollar-pegged countries. For the pegged countries, whether
Belgian exporters choose to invoice in the destination currency or in dollars is essentially the same.
Indeed, we nd that the value share of dollar invoicing of 52% is fairly close to the Belgian trade share
with the US and pegged countries combined, equal to 47% for exports and 55% for imports (in line with
the complementarity emphasized in Gourinchas 2019). If we focus only on the di erentiated products,
we nd the trade shares with the US and pegged countries to be higher, equal to 44% for exports and
60% for imports, than the 39% dollar invoicing share reported in Table 1. Even though a large share of
transactions are in dollars, both in number and value, the pattern that we emphasize is the emergence
of the euro as another dominant currency, at least in Belgian trade outside the EU in di erentiated
goods (for a theoretical analysis of multiple dominant currencies see Mukhin 2017).
    The prominence of the two dominant currencies is also apparent in Belgian bilateral trade as shown
in Figure 1, where we plot the dollar and the euro share of trade, for exports in the left panel and imports
in the right panel. Each circle corresponds to a separate country outside the EU and the size of the circles
re ects the share of the country in total Belgian trade. The fact that most circles lie on the negative


                                                             16
                         (a) Exports                                                          (b) Imports
     1                                                                    1



   0.8                                                                  0.8



   0.6                                                                  0.6



   0.4                                                                  0.4



   0.2                                                                  0.2



     0                                                                    0
         0       0.2        0.4        0.6        0.8         1               0      0.2        0.4         0.6       0.8         1



                             Figure 1: Dominant currencies in Belgian bilateral trade
Note: The gures plot the share of dollar invoicing against the share of euro invoicing by country, for Belgium exports on the
left and imports on the right; circles represent the size of individual countries (outside the EU) in Belgian trade; the distance to
the diagonal corresponds to the share of third currencies (other than the dollar and the euro). The legends identify the top-7
Belgian trade partners outside the EU in terms of total trade. The dotted lines plot the average currency shares from Table 1.


diagonal, or slightly below it, re ects the dominance of the combined use of the dollar and the euro
in trade invoicing with virtually every trade partner. Furthermore, exports to the US and India and
imports from Russia, among major trade partners, are invoiced disproportionately in the US dollar,
while trade with Switzerland and Turkey is invoiced disproportionately in euros, with a lot of variation
in the relative shares of the two dominant currencies across other trade partners.
    Figure 1 also shows that there are bigger departures towards third currencies in exports than in
imports. For imports, only Japan among the main trade partners has a large third-currency share, which
in particular implies that very few major industrial countries use their own currency when exporting to
Belgium. However, for Belgian exports, there are more countries below the diagonal with a sizable share
of trade invoiced in third currencies, typically the currency of the destination country. This includes
China, Japan, Switzerland, Turkey and Russia, as well as a number of other smaller trading partners.

Variance decomposition Drilling deeper and focusing on exports, we now explore the patterns of
variation in currency invoicing at the rm-product-country-month level, which is the unit of obser-
vation in our currency choice regression analysis. We de ne a currency dummy variable for rm-
product i, export-destination k , in month t:

                                                0, if export transaction is in euro,
                                    ikt =                                                                                      (17)
                                                1, otherwise, if in non-euro.

From Table 1 we know that ikt = 0 for two-thirds of export observations, accounting for 35% of the
total value of exports. As noted above, there is very little variation in currency choice over time t, so
we explore the patterns of cross-sectional variation in currency choice -- across country-destinations,
industries and rms.

                                                                  17
                      Table 2: Currency invoicing in exports: variance decomposition
                                          (1)       (2)         (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)        (7)         (8)
  Adjusted R2                         0.619      0.850     0.155       0.371     0.612     0.713     0.865         0.877

  # of observations ('000)           3,491.2    3,458.7   3,497.3     3,497.3   3,483.3   3,430.8   3,445.7    3,394.3
  # of xed e ects ('000)                16.5       84.8       0.2         1.2      58.7     171.1     141.5      249.6
   · rm
   · rm×destination
   · destination
   · HS4 industry
   · HS4 industry×destination
   · CN8 product×destination
Note: Value-weighted projections of ikt , a dummy for whether a given rm-product-destination-month export observation
is in non-euros, on di erent sets of xed e ects; numbers of observations and included xed e ects (in thousands).


       In Table 2, we project the currency dummy ikt for export observations on various subsets of xed
e ects, and report the adjusted R2 from a value-weighted projection.22 The rst thing to note from
column 1 is that rm xed e ects alone explain 62% of the variation in export currency invoicing, and
interacting rm xed e ects with country destinations in column 2 boosts that to 85%. That is, the bulk
of the variation in export currency invoicing can be traced to the behavior of rms within given export
destinations.
       In contrast, the variation across destination countries alone in column 3 accounts for only a small
share, 16%, of the variation in the currency choice in our panel, while the variation across industries
(at HS4 level) accounts for 37% in column 4. Interacting industry and destination-country xed e ects
in column 5, boosts the share of explained currency choice to 61%, nearly the same as with the rm
 xed e ects alone.23 Using the more micro-level dimension of our data, we can explain a great share
of variation in currency invoicing: interacting CN8-product and destination-country xed e ects in
column 6 explains a large share, over 70%, of the variation, yet still not as much as with rm-destination
 xed e ects. Interestingly, adding industry-destination or even product-destination xed e ects to the
 rm-destination xed e ects, in columns 7 and 8, hardly changes the explanatory power of the rm-
destination xed e ects alone.
       Consistent with the rm-level theory presented in Section 2, the di erential behavior across rms
does appear to be central in explaining the variation in currency choice in the data, and is at least as
important as the variation across industry-destinations. The remainder of the analysis leverages the
micro-level features of our data, with a focus on the variation across rms within industry-destinations.
  22
    The patterns for the unweighted projections and for imports are similar, albeit with slightly lower R2 s.
  23
    Note that the number of included xed e ects is generally two orders of magnitude smaller than the number of
observations; furthermore, the number of rm×destination xed e ects in column 2 is comparable to the number of
industry×destination xed e ects in column 5, and smaller than the number of product×destination xed e ects in column 6.




                                                           18
4         Currency choice
This section analyzes the rm-level determinants of currency choice in export and import transactions,
guiding our empirical speci cation with the theoretical predictions laid out in Section 2.

Exports         We estimate the rm-level determinants of currency choice in export transactions using a
linear probability speci cation, controlling for time, destination and HS4-digit-industry xed e ects,
thus focusing on the variation across rms within industry-destinations.24 Following the theory laid
out in Section 2.2, our baseline speci cation is given by:

                                           P{ikt = 1} = aks + bi + cSik .                                                   (18)

The dependent variable is a dummy ikt  {0, 1} at the rm-CN8 product-destination-time level, with 0
corresponding to the use of the euro for export transaction (PCP) and 1 corresponding to the use of
all other currencies, including the destination currency (LCP) and the dollar (DCP). We explore further
the choice between the dollar and the destination currency below. The xed e ects aks are at the
country-industry level, i is the rm import intensity, and Sik is a measure of rm size, with i and
Sik proxying for the determinants of the desired price pass-through in (11). We later upgrade this
speci cation with additional controls for other rm characteristics, as well as the currency choice by
the rm's competitors.
         Table 3 reports the results. We start in columns 1 and 2 with a simple projection of the export
currency choice ikt on the ex-eurozone import intensity of the rm i and two characteristics of rm
size. The rst one is the log of the rm's average employment log Li , providing an absolute measure
of the rm size; and the second is the rm's market share Sik in a destination-industry relative to
all Belgian rms, providing a relative measure of the prominence of the rm in a speci c industry-
destination. Column 1 controls only for time and country xed e ects, while column 2 replaces country
 xed e ects with detailed country×industry (HS4-digit) xed e ects. In both speci cations, the rm's
import intensity and its absolute size are strong determinants of the currency choice. Larger rms and
those with a greater share of ex-eurozone imports in variable costs are more likely to invoice their
exports in a currency other than the euro (within a given industry-destination). This implies that such
 rms are more likely to adopt either the dollar or the destination currency in pricing their exports.
Conditional on the absolute size of the rm, we nd that the relative destination-speci c rm market
share is not statistically signi cant.25
         While the coe cient on the employment measure of rm size changes very modestly from column 1
to column 2, the coe cient on import intensity shrinks by a third with the inclusion of the industry
    24
      While our data has the time-series dimension, only about 3% of observations record a change in currency use across any
two periods, and therefore the results in the panel are essentially the same as the ones in a between cross-sectional regression.
By including all time periods we capture more transactions as not all rms trade every month. We cluster the standard errors
at the rm level.
   25
      The coe cient on the market share is positive and signi cant, however, when it is included on its own (not reported in
the table), suggesting perhaps that log employment is a less noisy measure of rm size; an alternative interpretation is that
the currency choice is decided at the level of the rm, rather than rm-destination.



                                                               19
                                           Table 3: Currency choice in exports
  Dep. var.: ikt                   (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)
  i                              0.417         0.270
                                 (0.143)       (0.107)

  E
  i                                                          0.057         0.064       -0.004          0.121         0.074
                                                             (0.148)       (0.150)       (0.189)       (0.141)       (0.160)

  X
  i                                                          0.326         0.316         0.565         0.358         0.368
                                                             (0.165)       (0.162)       (0.197)       (0.180)       (0.194)

  log Li                         0.092         0.084         0.082         0.055         0.061         0.053         0.054
                                 (0.024)       (0.016)       (0.015)       (0.013)       (0.018)       (0.012)       (0.013)

  Sik                          -0.028        -0.022        -0.024        -0.021        -0.020        -0.012          0.027
                                 (0.029)       (0.030)       (0.030)       (0.029)       (0.026)       (0.017)       (0.025)

  out-FDIi                                                                 0.125         0.089         0.115         0.121
                                                                           (0.041)       (0.045)       (0.040)       (0.043)

  in-FDIi                                                                  0.016         0.051         0.026         0.026
                                                                           (0.039)       (0.047)       (0.039)       (0.041)

  ¯
  -ikt                                                                                   0.174         0.037         0.620
                                                                                         (0.027)       (0.018)       (0.277)

  # obs.                       741, 565       734, 012     734, 012      734, 012      676, 966      676, 937      656, 389
   2
  Radj                           0.290         0.575         0.577         0.582         0.327         0.391            --
  Fixed E ects:
   destination
   industry (HS4)
   industry×destination
   month×year
Notes: The observations are at the rm-product (CN8)-destination-month level for all ex-EU destinations from February 2017
to March 2019. The dependent variable ikt = 0 if the export transaction is invoiced in euros and 1 otherwise. Std errors clus-
tered at the rm level. Columns 1­6 are estimated with OLS; column 7 with IV (see footnote 30 for description of instruments,
which pass the weak IV test with a Cragg-Donald F -stat of 609.9, as well as the over-id Hansen J -test with a p-value of 0.15).


 xed e ects. This suggests that there is selection of high import-intensive rms into industries char-
acterized by a lower prevalence of producer currency pricing in exports. Nonetheless, rm import
intensity remains a strong determinant -- both statistically and economically -- for export currency
choice across rms within industry-destinations. The overall ex-eurozone import intensity of Belgian
exporters varies in our sample from zero at the 5th percentile to 44% at the 95th percentile, with a mean
of 14% percent (see summary statistics in Appendix Table A2). Based on the estimates from column 2,
the variation across these percentiles of import intensity corresponds to a reduction of 12 percentage
points (=0.27*0.44) in the probability of choosing euros in the pricing of exports.
    In addition, there is a wide variation in rm size across Belgian exporters -- rm employment
increases by about 500 log points from the 5th to the 95th percentile (that is, almost 200 times). Given
the coe cient of 0.084, this variation corresponds to a 42 percentage point lower incidence of the use
of the euro in exports by the very large rms. Euro invoicing is disproportionately characteristic of the



                                                              20
           (a) All destinations (ex-eurozone)                                (b) Excluding US and dollar pegs




                                Figure 2: Firm size and currency choice in exports
Note: Export currency invoicing shares by employment size bins of rms: the red bars correspond to euros (PCP), the dark
blue bars to dollars (DCP), the white bars to destination currency (LCP); the left panel additionally separates the DCP+LCP
category for the US+dollar-peg destinations using the light-blue bars.


smaller rms, as we already anticipated from the data description in Table 1.
    In the remaining columns of Table 3, we split the ex-eurozone import intensity of the rm by
currency of imports -- into euros E               X
                                  i and non-euros i (dollars and other currencies).
                                                                                    26 Column 3

reports the results from a speci cation as in column 2 (with detailed industry×destination xed e ects),
but splitting the import intensity variable by currency. As expected, it is only the imports in non-euros
that are strongly statistically related with the use of non-euros in rm exports. That is, import-intensive
 rms are more likely to adopt non-euros in their export transactions only if their imports are themselves
priced in currencies other than the euro, which in the vast majority of cases is the dollar. In other words,
the higher the share of imports in dollars, the more likely the rm is to invoice its exports in dollars,
which ensures real hedging by coordinating the pass-through into export prices with the movements
in the marginal costs.27
    In column 4, we upgrade the speci cation in column 3 with two dummies that indicate whether a
 rm has inward or outward FDI.28 These variables proxy for the international nature of the rm and/or
whether the rm is part of a global value chain, which we expect increases the likelihood that the rm
adopts the dollar or another foreign currency in export pricing. This is indeed the case. When we
include one of the FDI dummies at a time, each is positive and signi cant (not reported). However,
when we include both dummies together, it is only the outward-FDI that remains statistically and
    26
       As noted in Section 3, the currency data is only reported for ex-EU countries, hence we do not know the currency of
imports from within the EU; where relevant, we control for the share of missing currency observations, i - E            X
                                                                                                                  i - i .
    27
       Note that nancial hedging (by means of forward exchange rate contracts) is not a substitute for real hedging. Although
it can insure against nancial risk and/or relaxe nancial constraints, it cannot a ect the realized or the desired price of the
  rm. Currency choice and real hedging instead make it possible to bring the two prices closer together during the periods
of price stickiness. See Fauceglia, Shingal, and Wermelinger (2012) and Martin and Méjean (2012) on the mechanisms of real
and nancial hedging of the exchange rate risk.
    28
       The FDI dummies equal 1 if the rm has at least 10% inward or any outward FDI, respectively, during the sample period,
as reported in the National Bank of Belgium FDI survey.



                                                             21
economically signi cant. A rm that engages in outward FDI is 12 percentage points less likely to use
euros in pricing its exports. Intuitively, rms that are more global are more likely to adopt foreign
currencies in export pricing. Inclusion of these dummies does not a ect the coe cient on import
intensity, yet it reduces the coe cient on the rm size by about a third, as it is the large rms that are
more likely to engage in cross-border FDI. Nonetheless, both rm size and outward FDI are strongly
statistically signi cant when included jointly.
       The last three columns of the table explore whether the invoicing choices of a rm's competi-
tors, de ned within HS4 industry-destinations, a ect the rm's own currency choice, that is strategic
complementarities in currency choice.29 We measure rm-i's competitors' currency choice, ¯
                                                                                        -ikt , as the
export-weighted average currency choice of all Belgian exporters, excluding rm i, in a given industry-
destination. Columns 5 and 6 report the results with and without HS4-industry xed e ects (with the
time and country xed e ects always included). While in both cases we nd a positive and signi cant
strategic complementarity coe cient, its magnitude is reduced to nearly zero when we include country
                                                                        -ikt may be due to a re-
and industry xed e ects together in column 6. The positive coe cient on ¯
 ection problem, and to address it, we use country-industry-level instruments in column 7 to proxy for
the competitor currency choice.30 While instrumenting does not change the coe cient estimates on
other variables, the competitor currency choice now features a lot more prominently as a determinant
of the rm's currency choice. If within an industry-destination all competitors of the rm switch from
euro to non-euro export pricing, the rm itself is 62 percentage points more likely to adopt non-euros
in its pricing of exports -- suggesting strong strategic complementarity in currency choice.

Imports       Next, we explore the rm-level determinants of currency choice in imports. Now, the de-
pendent variable is M
                    ikt  {0, 1} corresponding to the rm-product-source country dummy for the
invoicing currency of rm imports by CN8-digit product category, where zero corresponds to euro
invoicing and one otherwise. We construct rm-level determinants analogous to those in the export
regressions in Table 3, adjusting the variables appropriately. In particular, instead of the ex-eurozone
import intensity variables we include the share of ex-eurozone exports i in total sales of the rm (over-
all and split by currency of exports); instead of the industry-destination export market share variable,
                                            M in total Belgian imports by HS4-industry×source
we construct the share of the rm's imports Sijk
country; and in parallel with the competitor currency in exports we include the average competitor
                                                          M
share of foreign-currency inputs in total variable costs, ¯-ikt .
       Table 4 shows that a key correlate of the rm import currency invoicing is the currency the rm
adopts in its total sales, proxied by the ex-eurozone export share in total revenues in columns 1 and 2,
and the foreign-currency export share in revenues in columns 3­7. This pattern is the mirror image of
the results for the export currency choice. Firms that use foreign currency in export pricing also tend to
use it in importing, consistent with the real hedging mechanism and marginal cost channel for desired
  29
      In Section 2.2, strategic complementarities in currency choice emerge from the strategic complementarities that shape
                                                                  
the desired price: the second term in (10) with the behavior of zk sensitive to the currency choice of the rm's competitors.
   30
      We construct three Bartik-type instruments for ¯-ikt as follows: we use bilateral trade data at the HS6 level for 2017-18
for exports from country j to k from UN Comtrade, dropping Belgium; we then construct the shares of exports from the US,
China, and other dollar-pegged countries to country k, for each industry (HS4)-destination k.


                                                              22
                                          Table 4: Currency choice in imports
  Dep. var.: M
             ikt             (1)           (2)            (3)              (4)         (5)           (6)          (7)
  i                        0.106        0.104
                           (0.059)      (0.050)

  E
  i                                                    0.007           0.002       0.013        -0.008           0.031
                                                       (0.059)         (0.060)     (0.086)        (0.070)        (0.074)

  X
  i                                                    0.273           0.267       0.377          0.322          0.351
                                                       (0.095)         (0.098)     (0.115)        (0.105)        (0.121)

  log Li                 -0.006       -0.008         - 0.011          -0.007      -0.005        -0.006         -0.003
                           (0.007)      (0.006)        (0.005)         (0.010)     (0.013)        (0.011)        (0.011)
   M
  Sijk                   -   0.053    -   0.154      -   0.152        -   0.149   -   0.089     -   0.104      - 0.101
                           (0.029)      (0.028)        (0.028)         (0.028)     (0.036)        (0.028)        (0.032)

  out-FDIi                                                             0.001       0.001          0.003          0.005
                                                                       (0.033)     (0.046)        (0.039)        (0.041)

  in-FDIi                                                             -0.027      -0.029        -0.027         -0.025
                                                                       (0.034)     (0.045)        (0.038)        (0.040)

  M
  ¯-ijkt                                                                           0.151          0.042          0.791
                                                                                   (0.023)        (0.019)        (0.219)

  # obs.                 270, 477      267, 009       267, 009        267, 009    235, 062      235, 022       223, 991
   2
  Radj                     0.261          0.456          0.458            0.459       0.275         0.340          --
  Fixed E ects:
   country (source)
   industry (HS4)
   industry×country
   month×year
Notes: The observations are at the rm-product (CN8)-source country-month level for all ex-EU source countries from Febru-
ary 2017 to March 2019. The dependent variable is M
                                                  ikt = 0 for import transactions invoiced in euros and 1 otherwise. Stan-
dard errors are clustered at the rm level. Columns 1­6 are estimated with OLS; column 7 with IV (the instrument set is
constructed analogously to the one in the export regression, and it also passes the weak IV test with a Cragg-Donald F -stat
of 465.9 and the over-id Hansen J -test with a p-value of 0.73).


pass-through. The quantitative magnitude of the e ect is also comparable, albeit somewhat weaker
(compare columns 1­3 in Tables 4 and 3).
      Furthermore, strategic complementarities in import currency choice also play a large role, just like
in exports (see columns 5­7). Firms with competitors that import in non-euros are themselves more
likely to import in foreign currencies. We con rm this using OLS in columns 5 and 6, and with instru-
mental variable estimation in column 7. The IV speci cation results in a much larger coe cient on the
competitor currency choice variable relative to OLS, like it did for exports. If all of a rm's competitors
switch from euros to foreign currency in importing, that rm is 79 percentage points more likely to
also use the foreign currency (controlling for industry and source country xed e ects).
      Surprisingly, we do not nd a similar e ect of rm size on import currency choice as we did for
export currency choice. Here, the coe cient on the overall rm size (log employment) is insigni cantly
di erent from zero in almost all of the speci cations. However, controlling for the rm's overall em-
ployment size, if a rm is a large importer of a particular good (relative to the size of the Belgian import
market in an industry), then it is more likely to source its imports in local currency (euros) -- that is, the


                                                                 23
coe cient on the import market share variable is negative and signi cant. This is more characteristic of
the inward-looking domestically-oriented rms whose sales are predominantly denominated in euros.
Finally, and perhaps also surprising, neither the inward nor the outward FDI dummies correlate with
import currency invoicing, unlike they do for exports: being a more global rm, in terms of cross-border
ownership, does not appear to a ect the incidence of foreign-currency invoicing of imports.

Dominant currency in exports So far, we have focused on the determinants of a rm's choice
between invoicing in euros and any other foreign currency, without distinguishing whether the for-
eign currency is a vehicle currency. There are two main reasons for this approach. First, theoretically,
there is a clear mapping between rm characteristics and the choice between producer currency and
other currencies. Firms with low exposure to foreign inputs and weak strategic complementarities
in pricing are likely to adopt producer currency pricing, which ensures high short-run exchange rate
pass-through into destination prices. In contrast, rms with high exposure to foreign inputs and strong
strategic complementarities are more likely to adopt foreign currencies. However, the theory provides
a less sharp prediction regarding which foreign currency will be chosen. For example, for exporters
that intensively rely on foreign inputs, the choice between local and vehicle currencies also depends
on the statistical properties of the exchange rates and the composition of currencies used in import
invoicing (recall Lemma 3). Similarly, strong strategic complementarities can favor either dominant or
local currency pricing, depending on the composition of competitors and their pricing decisions in the
foreign market. Nonetheless, we expect foreign-currency-sourced inputs, which in practice are typi-
cally in dollars, to favor the use of the dominant currency, while strong strategic complementarities are
likely to favor the use of local currency, as many competitors are local rms pricing in local currency.
    Second, distinguishing between the choice of local and dominant currency is complicated by the
fact that many countries peg their exchange rates to the dollar, limiting the empirical variation needed
for identi cation. Indeed, under pegs to the dollar, the di erential bene t of using the dollar versus
the local currency is minimal, and hence di cult to robustly link to rm characteristics. Furthermore,
in cases of hard pegs, it is not even clear how to classify the use of the dollar versus the destination
currency into the vehicle and local categories: in the limit, for the United States and fully dollarized
economies, such a distinction is altogether impossible.
    To cleanly distinguish between the choice of vehicle and local currency, we focus on the subsample
of rms that choose non-euros in their export pricing and consider only export destinations with a
 oating exchange rate with the dollar.31 Using this smaller sample of rm-product-destinations, we
estimate a speci cation for export currency choice between the vehicle and the local currency, which
parallels the speci cations in Table 3. Speci cally, we de ne a dummy D
                                                                      ikt = 1 when the US dollar is
used in the export transaction and 0 if the destination currency is used.
    We report the results in Table 5. The rst two columns show that the choice between local and
vehicle currency is not a ected by the overall ex-eurozone import intensity. However, in the subsequent
columns, where we split import intensity by currency, we nd that importing in non-euros (X
                                                                                         i ), and
  31
     This subsample also drops observations where the currency choice is other than the dollar or the destination currency,
which occurs in 4% of non-euro observations (or around 1% of all observations). Including these observations and classifying
any third-currency use as vehicle does not change the results reported in Table 5.


                                                            24
                                    Table 5: Vehicle currency choice in exports
  Dep. var.: D
             ikt                 (1)              (2)               (3)             (4)                (5)            (6)
  i                          -0.204           -0.027
                                (0.168)         (0.109)

  E
  i                                                            -0.106           -0.108           -0.070           -0.127
                                                                   (0.134)        (0.135)          (0.121)          (0.161)

  X
  i                                                                0.457                           0.504            0.729
                                                                   (0.156)                         (0.146)          (0.216)

  D
  i                                                                               0.490
                                                                                  (0.163)

  log Li                     - 0.092          - 0.088          - 0.079          - 0.077          - 0.093          - 0.095
                                (0.012)         (0.010)            (0.010)        (0.010)          (0.017)          (0.022)

  Sik                           0.061            0.049             0.012          0.009            0.012            0.113
                                (0.037)         (0.051)            (0.044)        (0.044)          (0.044)          (0.069)

  out-FDIi                                                                                         0.051            0.107
                                                                                                   (0.042)          (0.060)

  in-FDIi                                                                                          0.026          -0.022
                                                                                                   (0.034)          (0.061)

  D
  ¯-ikt                                                                                                             1.516
                                                                                                                    (0.697)

  # obs.                      113, 327         111, 606         111, 606         111, 606        111, 606         104, 584
   2
  Radj                          0.650            0.878             0.882          0.882            0.883              --
  Fixed E ects:
   destination
   industry (HS4)
   industry×destination
   month×year
Notes: The observations are for exports at the rm-product (CN8)-destination-month level for the sample of non-pegged
destinations only (i.e., excluding the US and dollar-pegged countries) from February 2017 to March 2019. The dependent
variable is D
            ikt = 1 for exports invoiced in dollar (DCP) and 0 in destination currency (LCP). Standard errors are clustered at
the rm level. Columns 1­5 are estimated with OLS; column 6 with IV (instruments as in Table 3, and again pass the weak
IV test with a Cragg-Donald F -stat of 100.9 and the over-id Hasen J -test with a p-value of 0.824).


in particular in dollars (D
                          i ), favors the use of the dominant currency in exporting, and the e ect is
both strong and economically sizable.32
    There is also a robust negative association between the absolute size of the rm (log employment)
and the use of the dollar: the largest rms adopt local currency pricing instead of the dollar.33 Note,
however, that this sample only comprises the larger rms, as we limit the sample to rms that do not
price their exports in the producer currency (euro). Even if surprising at rst, this pattern is consistent
with theory, as we discuss in Section 2.2. To the extent that rm size proxies for strategic complemen-
tarities, we expect larger rms to adopt local currency pricing to ensure that their prices are better
aligned with their local competitors in the destination country, who use the local currency by default.
   32
      We also split import intensity by the country of origin (not reported in the table), and nd no additional e ect of import
intensity from dollar-pegged countries, as a lot of the imports from oating countries are also denominated in dollars.
   33
      Just like for the choice of producer versus foreign currency, we nd that, controlling for the absolute size, the relative
size of the rm in the destination market does not robustly correlate with the choice between local and vehicle currency.


                                                              25
         We illustrate the relationship between rm size and the export currency choice in Figure 2, where
the left panel shows the results for all ex-eurozone destinations, while the right panel focuses on the
subset of destinations excluding the United States and the dollar-pegged countries. Indeed, a much
clearer pattern emerges from the subsample of non-pegged countries, where the distinction between
LCP and DCP can be clearly identi ed. The incidence of use of foreign currencies robustly increases
with rm size, and this pattern is particularly pronounced for the use of LCP, which is negligible for the
smallest rms, yet covers almost 30% of export revenues for the largest rms, exceeding the incidence
of the dollar use in this bin (for the non-pegged destinations).34
         In addition, the (outward) FDI variable, arguably proxying for the international nature of the rm
and its role in the global value chains, also positively correlates with the dollar use (DCP) in exporting
(albeit with a low t-stat of 1.78). Finally, we also nd evidence of strong strategic complementarities,
yet imprecisely estimated, in the dominant currency choice across Belgian exporters.

Summary           Our evidence on the currency use in exports and imports is consistent with the theory
of currency choice presented in Section 2. For exports, it is the rms that source intermediate inputs
in foreign currencies that are likely to use foreign currency for exports, especially the dollar. Larger
 rms are also more likely to price in foreign currencies, especially in the destination currency, as we
expect them to have low desired pass-through and pricing complementarities with the local competi-
tors. Furthermore, our evidence is consistent with the view that export currency choice is a more active
 rm-level decision than the import currency choice.35 In particular, rm size, which tends to correlate
with many rm-level characteristics, does not show an association with import currency choice, while
it strongly predicts export currency choice (compare Figures 2 and A1). Finally, we nd evidence of
pronounced strategic complementarities in currency choice across rms, in both exports and imports,
which likely propagate the currency choice equilibrium over time. In addition to the variables in the
theory, we nd that a rm's cross-border ownership (FDI) also predicts a greater likelihood of foreign
currency (especially dollar) use in export pricing, perhaps proxying for the rm being part of a global
supply chain.


5         Exchange rate pass-through
Having established the rm-level determinants of currency choice, we now turn to the analysis of ex-
change rate pass-through into prices and quantities. We start with a rm-level speci cation of exchange
rate pass-through into export prices, following Amiti, Itskhoki, and Konings (2014), which emphasizes
 rm size and import intensity as the key determinants of incomplete pass-through, operating through
the markup and marginal cost channels respectively. We augment this speci cation with the rm's
currency choice, which mechanically a ects ERPT during the period of sticky price duration, di er-
entially depending on the currency of pricing. We start with the projection of price changes on the
    34
     Appendix Figure A1 reports analogous gures for imports; consistent with Table 4, there is no clear pattern in import
currency use (euro, dollar or other) across size bins, whether we consider all source countries or only non-pegged ones.
  35
     The baseline models of currency choice, as presented in Section 2, typically focus on the supplier making the currency-
choice and price-setting decisions, while the downstream rms choosing quantities given the realized prices.



                                                            26
euro-destination exchange rate, as a benchmark in the exible-price pass-through literature. However,
such speci cations are misspeci ed in the presence of dominant-currency price stickiness, and there-
fore, following the theory in Section 2, we augment these speci cations with the dollar-destination
exchange rate as well. Finally, we consider the response of quantities to price changes, which we in-
strument with the rm-level determinants of ERPT.

Producer-destination ERPT In Table 6, we show how rm-product-destination prices, at the an-
nual frequency, respond to movements in the euro-destination exchange rate. We interact the exchange
rate with various exible-price determinants of the desired pass-through, as well as with a currency
choice dummy to capture the pass-through implications during the period of price stickiness. Speci -
cally, we estimate the following regression:

              pikt =  + i + Sik + ik ekt + xed e ects and controls +                     ikt ,          (19)

where the dependent variable pikt is the change in the rm's export price in the destination currency,
and an increase in ekt measures the depreciation of the destination currency against the euro. We
use the rm's import intensity i to proxy for the marginal cost channel of ERPT and its industry-
destination market share Sik to proxy for the markup channel, as well as the foreign-currency dummy
ik equal to one if the rm prices in non-euros (that is, in local or dominant currency).
    Note that speci cation (19) is a special case of the theoretical equation (12), which implicitly imposes
D
i   = D   D
      i = i = 0, ruling out the e ect of the dollar-destination exchange rate. The coe cient 
measures the ERPT of a counterfactual small Belgian exporter, with zero destination market share,
using no foreign intermediate inputs, and setting its export price in euros. We expect  ,  and  to
be negative, re ecting incomplete pass-through due to foreign intermediates, variable markups, and
foreign-currency price stickiness, respectively. In our previous work, we showed that  and  are
negative without controlling for the currency of export pricing. We now are able to estimate these co-
e cients controlling for the currency choice of the rm, in order to establish whether the exible-price
variables continue to be signi cant determinants of ERPT. Furthermore, we are interested in whether 
is signi cant, conditional on the exible-price determinants, as a negative  provides evidence for the
consequences of the foreign-currencies price stickiness. The absolute magnitude of  re ects the extent
of price stickiness over the annual horizon (recall (12)).
    The rst column of Table 6 does not include the currency choice variable, reproducing our spec-
i cation from Amiti, Itskhoki, and Konings (2014), with the dependent variable now expressed in the
destination currency. We use the full sample of ex-EU destinations and include year and destination-
industry (HS4) xed e ects. As in that paper, we nd that a counterfactual small Belgian exporter with
no foreign inputs exhibits complete (100%) exchange rate pass-through into the destination prices.
Firms that rely on foreign inputs and/or are large -- in either absolute employment size Li or in terms
of their destination market share Sik -- exhibit incomplete pass-through, captured by the negative sig-
ni cant coe cients on the interaction terms. This is consistent with the theoretical determinants of
the desired pass-through in (11).


                                                    27
                                         Table 6: Exchange rate pass-through
                                                         All countries                                OECD            US only
  Dep. var.: pikt                        (1)             (2)           (3)              (4)            (5)              (6)
  ekt                                  1.111           1.075           1.075             --           1.047              --
                                       (0.031)         (0.029)         (0.029)                        (0.037)

  ekt · i                            - 0.272         - 0.173
                                       (0.087)         (0.077)

  ekt · E
        i                                                             -0.081           0.125        -0.418             0.328
                                                                       (0.139)        (0.174)         (0.354)          (0.269)

  ekt · X
        i                                                             - 0.227       - 0.306         - 0.416           - 0.533
                                                                       (0.106)        (0.122)         (0.147)          (0.221)

  ekt · Sik                          - 0.061         - 0.061          - 0.061       -0.058          - 0.146           - 0.174
                                       (0.028)         (0.028)         (0.028)        (0.046)         (0.082)          (0.067)

  ekt · log Li                       -   0.017       -0.003           -0.003        -0.007            0.005           -0.010
                                       (0.006)         (0.006)         (0.006)        (0.006)         (0.006)          (0.012)

  ekt · ik                                           - 0.207          - 0.206 - 0.148               - 0.300           - 0.240
                                                       (0.038)         (0.037)        (0.043)         (0.042)          (0.082)

  # obs.                              262,043         262,043         262,043         221,702         88,144           21,635
    2
  Radj.                                0.056           0.057           0.057           0.078          0.019            0.020
  Fixed E ects:
   year
   industry×destination
   industry×destination×year
Notes: The observations are at the rm-product (CN8)-destination-year level from 2012 to 2018. The dependent variable is
the log change in export price in the destination currency; ik is a time-invariant indicator of foreign-currency (non-euro)
pricing based on the 2017-2019 currency use data; ekt is the bilateral euro-destination exchange rate. All interaction terms
are also included separately in levels (not reported). Standard errors are clustered at the destination-year level.


       In the remaining columns of the table, we include the exchange rate interaction with the currency
choice ik , which is the novel ingredient of this study. We expect the coe cient on this interaction
to re ect the extent of nominal price duration (stickiness) -- a period during which the ERPT is fully
determined by the currency choice of the rm. Column 2 represents our benchmark speci cation.
Indeed, we nd that a rm that prices its exports in non-euros has a signi cantly lower ERPT at the
annual frequency. The estimated coe cient suggests that roughly 20% of prices remain unchanged
at the annual horizon. Conditional on the currency choice, the exible-price determinants of ERPT
are still important -- both greater import intensity and larger destination market share reduce the
estimated ERPT at the annual frequency, after controlling for currency choice. Note that the absolute
size of the rm no longer a ects ERPT after controlling for currency choice, with the coe cient on
the employment interaction becoming virtually zero.36 Finally, we still nd that a small non-importing
 rm that prices its exports in euros exhibits complete ERPT at annual horizon.
  36
    Recall from Table 3 that employment was one of the main determinants of the currency choice whereas the destination
market share was not. This suggests an interesting exclusion restriction for the currency choice and ERPT regressions,
whereby the absolute size of the rm shapes its currency choice, while the destination-speci c market share determines its
 exible-price pass-through.




                                                                 28
       Column 3 estimates a similar speci cation, additionally splitting the ex-eurozone import intensity
of the rm i into its components that are imported in euros E
                                                           i and those imported in other curren-
cies X
     i . As in the currency choice regressions, we nd that it is the non-euro import intensity that
drives the qualitative and quantitative results for the marginal cost channel, consistent with the theory.
       In column 4, we verify that all the results hold when we include extremely detailed time-destination-
industry xed e ects, which in particular fully absorb the bilateral euro-destination exchange rate
 uctuations. In this speci cation, which includes over 40,000 xed e ects, all of the identi cation
is from rms' di erential responses to the same exchange rate movement within a given industry-
destination at a given point in time, and thus facing the same general equilibrium environment. We
 nd largely the same patterns, as in columns 2 and 3, with a mildly attenuated (yet not statistically
di erent) coe cient on the currency choice variable.
       Finally, we re-estimate the main speci cation from column 3 for a subsample of destinations --
the developed OECD countries in column 5 and the US only in column 6. One reason to limit the
sample to non-eurozone OECD countries, which represent around a third of export observations in our
sample, is so we can focus on a subset of relatively homogenous destinations for which the patterns
are arguably more comparable (see Amiti, Itskhoki, and Konings 2014). Indeed, we nd that in this
subsample we identify the same patterns as for all countries, but with larger estimated coe cients
on interaction terms. In particular, we still nd complete pass-through for small non-importing rms
that price their exports in euros, and a more pronounced reduction in pass-through driven by both the
 exible-price and the sticky-price (currency choice) determinants. The same patterns emerge when we
focus exclusively on Belgian rm exports to the United States.

Dominant currency pass-through In all of the speci cations in Table 6, we have only included
the euro-destination exchange rate; however, the dollar-destination exchange rate is also relevant in
cases when rms use DCP in their export pricing. As a result, the speci cations estimated in Table 6
may su er from an omitted variable bias, a concern that we address next. We use theory introduced in
Section 2.2 to guide the correct empirical speci cation with multiple currencies.
       Before we proceed, it is instructive to note that column 6 of Table 6, where we focus on exports
to the US only, does not su er from this potential bias from the omission of the dominant exchange
rate. Indeed, the choice of the US dollar in this case simultaneously corresponds to local and dominant
currency invoicing. A similar argument applies for the dollar-pegged destinations, for which there is
also little distinction between LCP and DCP, as the two are nearly equivalent, and exactly so in the limit
of a perfect peg. In the context of theoretical relationship (12), this corresponds to the case of eD
                                                                                                    kt  0,
as the dollar-destination exchange rate is xed/pegged, and thus the empirical speci cation (19) does
not su er from omitted variable bias.
       In column 1 of Table 7, we start by re-estimating the baseline speci cation from column 2 of Table 6
for the subset of destinations (both inside and outside of OECD) that peg their exchange rate to the
US dollar, including the United States (the results are nearly identical if we exclude the US).37 We
  37
     To keep the number of exchange rate interaction variables from expanding too much, the speci cations in Table 7 do not
include the insigni cant interactions with the rm employment size, and only use the overall import intensity of the rm i
without splitting it by currency of imports.


                                                            29
                                 Table 7: Exchange rate pass-through: Vehicle currency
                                       USD/Pegs                   Non-pegged                         All countries
  Dep. var.: pikt                        (1)                (2)                (3)                 (4)             (5)
  ekt                                    1.130            1.064             1.006                1.011               --
                                         (0.075)          (0.032)           (0.015)              (0.015)

  ekt · i                               - 0.514         -0.058            - 0.339              - 0.392           - 0.354
                                         (0.136)          (0.090)           (0.100)              (0.077)           (0.100)

  eD
   kt · i                                                                   0.414                0.435             0.386
                                                                            (0.086)              (0.076)           (0.113)

  ekt · Sik                             - 0.101         -0.049            -0.031               -0.047            -0.058
                                         (0.058)          (0.032)           (0.049)              (0.035)           (0.072)

  eD
   kt · Sik                                                                 0.023              -0.011              0.006
                                                                            (0.042)              (0.035)           (0.068)

  ekt · ik                              - 0.358         - 0.133           - 0.330              - 0.342           - 0.235
                                         (0.038)          (0.042)           (0.057)              (0.036)           (0.047)

  eD
   kt   ·   D
            ik                                                              0.306                0.321             0.235
                                                                            (0.051)              (0.042)           (0.050)


  # obs.                                 99,025          163,018           150,659              240,440           200,888
    2
  Radj.                                  0.016            0.074             0.078                0.062             0.086
  Fixed E ects:
   year
   industry×destination
   industry×destination×year

Notes: The speci cations are as in Table 6, additionally including interactions with the dollar-destination exchange rate, eD
                                                                                                                            kt ;
D
ik is a time-invariant indicator of US dollar invoicing based on the 2017-2019 currency use data. Standard errors are clustered
at the destination-year level.


 nd similar quantitative and qualitative results, as in the case of the US-only exports in column 6
of Table 6. In column 2, we estimate the same speci cation for the subsample of non-dollar-pegged
destinations (excluding the US), in which case we nd considerably weaker patterns, both statistically
and economically. This is to be expected, as the speci cation for the non-pegged countries is more
likely to su er from the omitted variable bias.
    The dominant currency literature following Gopinath et al. (2020) has emphasized the role of the
dollar-destination exchange rate as a key determinant of pass-through into export prices, yet the spec-
i cations we considered so far do not control for this. Therefore, in the remaining speci cations, in
columns 3­5 of Table 7, we include the interaction terms with both the euro-destination ekt and the
dollar-destination eD
                    kt exchange rates. We follow the theoretical ERPT relationship (12), for which we
estimate an empirical counterpart given by:

 p                            D    D      D D  D
  ikt =  + i + Sik + ik ekt +  i +  Sik +  ik ekt + F.E./controls +                                                  ikt .   (20)

The  and  D terms capture the sticky-price determinants of the exchange rate pass-through, respec-
tively for products priced in any foreign currency (ik = 1) and in dollars speci cally (D
                                                                                        ik = 1).
The magnitudes of  and  D measure the extent of price stickiness at the annual horizon. The other


                                                              30
terms in (20) correspond to the exible-price determinants of ERPT. To the extent that prices are ex-
ible at the annual horizon, the rm's pass-through does not depend on the currency of pricing, but
does depend on the exposure to foreign inputs i and strategic complementarities in price setting,
as we discussed in Section 2.2. We expect   1, and , ,  < 0, resulting in incomplete pass-
through of the euro-destination exchange rate for rms with i , Sik , ik > 0. Additionally, we expect
 D ,  D ,  D > 0, so that rms with i , Sik , D
                                             ik > 0 exhibit a positive pass-through of the dollar-
destination exchange rate.
    In column 3 of Table 7, we test these theoretical predictions using the export price data for the
subsample of Belgian rm exports to non-dollar-pegged destinations invoiced in euros, dollars or the
destination (local) currency. We estimate the regression with year and destination-industry (HS4) xed
e ects. Note that the year xed e ect absorbs the euro-dollar exchange rate, and so we cannot si-
multaneously include in the regression the euro-destination and the dollar-destination exchange rates,
however we can include their interactions with the rm-level characteristics.
    The results are consistent with the theory, and in particular correct the omitted variable bias present
in the previous speci cation. Indeed, comparing the coe cients in columns 3 and 2, we see that control-
ling for the dollar-destination exchange rate interactions increases substantially (in absolute value) the
coe cients on the euro-destination exchange rate interactions, both with import intensity and with the
foreign-currency dummy. Thus, we now estimate the sticky price coe cients  and  D to be about 0.3
in absolute value (similar to  in column 1 for pegged destinations), which roughly corresponds to 30%
of prices still being sticky at the annual horizon in the currency of pricing.
    Furthermore, unlike in column 2, we recover a large and signi cant e ect of the imported inputs i
on ERPT via the marginal cost mechanism. Consistent with theory, imported inputs reduce pass-
through on the euro-destination exchange rate and increase it on the dollar-destination exchange rate,
with the elasticity around 0.4 in both cases. If we take a value of  = 0.3, then an extra 10 percentage
points cost share on foreign intermediates reduces exible-price pass-through of the euro-destination
exchange rate and increases it for the dollar-destination exchange rate by about 6 percentage points
( 0.1 · 0.4/(1 -  )  0.06). These estimates are again consistent with those in column 1 of Table 7
for the pegged destinations, and are considerably larger than those we found in column 2 of Table 6 for
all countries.
    Lastly, we estimate the same dominant-currency speci cation (20) from column 3 of Table 7 on
the full sample of destination countries, some of which have a pegged exchange rate, with year and
destination-industry xed e ects in columns 4 and the extremely detailed destination-industry-year
 xed e ects in column 5. The speci cation in (20) applies generally to any destination, whether dollar-
pegged or not, however identi cation of the DCP coe cients requires destinations with su ciently
varying exchange rates against the dollar. The results are consistent with those in columns 1 and 3 of
Table 7, which also feature speci cations without omitted dominant currency interactions.
    To summarize, small Belgian exporters with no exposure to foreign inputs and pricing in eu-
ros (PCP) exhibit complete pass-through. The same exporters that set prices in local or vehicle currency
exhibit a 34% lower pass-through of the euro-destination exchange rate at the annual horizon, and a
32% pass-through of the dollar-destination exchange rate if pricing in dollars, in line with the sticky-

                                                    31
price mechanism. Greater exposure to foreign inputs substantially reduces (increases) pass-through
of the euro-destination (dollar-destination) exchange rate, after controlling for the currency choice
of the rms -- consistent with the exible-price determinants of exchange rate pass-through condi-
tional on price adjustment. Lastly, exporters with larger destination market shares exhibit somewhat
lower pass-through of the euro-destination exchange rate, consistent with strategic complementarities
in price setting conditional on price adjustment.

The response of quantities We now turn to the e ects of exchange rate movements on quantities,
in order to establish the consequences of currency choice and incomplete pass-through into prices for
real allocations. Indeed, even if prices are sticky, they may not necessarily be allocative, that is, they
may have no e ect on quantities, which are themselves xed in contracts or negotiated separately
from prices. We test this using IV estimation and nd that quantities do have a pronounced response
to prices, and in particular respond to the components of price variation, which correspond to both the
 exible-price and the sticky-price determinants of ERPT studied above.
                                                                                               on
       In Table 8, we report the second-stage regression of changes in log export quantities qikt
changes in log export prices pikt in destination currency. In the rst stage, we instrument the change
in export prices with the exchange rates interacted with the rm-level exible-price and sticky-price
determinants of incomplete pass-through, as in (20). Di erent columns of the table correspond to dif-
ferent rst-stage speci cations, namely di erent xed e ects and instrument sets, which correspond
to various ERPT speci cations from Tables 6 and 7.38 We report the result for the full set of ex-EU
destinations, as in columns 4­5 of Table 7.
       In all cases, we nd a signi cant and negative e ect of export prices on export quantities. The
 rst column includes time and destination-industry (HS4) xed e ects separately, and the remaining
columns of Table 8 include over 40,000 extremely detailed time-destination-industry xed e ects. In
column 1, the main variation in prices and quantities comes from the time-series changes in the euro-
destination exchange rates (as can be seen from the reduced-form regressions in Table A3). In the
other columns, that variation is absorbed into the xed e ects, and all inference comes from the cross-
sectional di erences in price and quantity responses to the exchange rates for rms with di erent
characteristics within a given time-destination-industry. Therefore, if product demand at the sectoral
level is correlated with exchange rate movements, we expect a possible endogeneity bias in the rst
speci cation, which we control for in the subsequent speci cations with detailed xed e ects.
       Indeed, we nd a precisely-estimated elasticity below 1 in absolute value in the rst speci cation.
In contrast, in all other speci cations, we recover an elasticity greater than 1 in absolute value, yet
much less precisely estimated, as these speci cations include detailed xed e ects, which absorb the
bulk of the aggregate exchange rate variation used for estimation in column 1. The point estimates for
this elasticity range from -1.1 to -1.7, depending on the rst stage used. Speci cally, column 2 uses
the baseline speci cation from column 5 of Table 7 with the full set of exible-price and sticky-price
  38
     In all cases, we additionally include over 2,000 rm xed e ects to avoid the need to control for rm variables in levels.
Inclusion of rm xed e ects does not have a material e ect on the other coe cient estimates, either in the rst or the second
stage. Appendix Table A3 reports the corresponding rst stages and reduced forms.



                                                            32
                                            Table 8: Quantity response, IV
           
 Dep.var: qikt                                     (1)                   (2)                   (3)                 (4)
 pikt                                          -   0.446             -   1.098             -   1.255           - 1.709
                                                 (0.076)               (0.524)               (0.549)             (0.880)

 # obs.                                         240,188               200,595               200,595             221,564
 First stage                                 (4) inTable 7         (5) inTable 7        (5) inTable    7     (4) inTable    6
 Over-ID J -test    2                            15.62                 13.90                  6.35                0.30
 [p-value]                                       [0.02]                [0.02]                [0.10]              [0.58]
 Weak IV F -test                                1,403.8                  10.6                  14.9                7.0
 Fixed E ects:
    rm
  industry×destination & year
  industry×destination×year
Note: The observations are at the rm-product (CN8)-destination-year level from 2012 to 2018. The dependent variable is the
log change in export quantities. All columns are estimated with IV, with the rst stages based on di erent ERPT speci cations
from Tables 6 and 7, as noted ( means that the speci cation drops the insigni cant market share interactions; all speci cations
additionally feature rm xed e ects). See rst stages and reduced forms in Appendix Table A3.


determinants of ERPT, using both euro-destination and dollar-destination exchange rates. In column 3,
we drop the insigni cant interaction terms with the destination market-shares, which leads to a larger
point estimate (in absolute value) of the quantity elasticity. Also, in this case, the instrument set is
both strong and passes the over-identi cation test. Finally, in column 4 we drop the dollar-destination
exchange rate interaction terms from the set of instruments, which further increases the estimated
quantity elasticity (in absolute value), yet results in a weak instrument set.39
    Interestingly, both the exible-price (import intensity) and the sticky-price (currency choice) de-
terminants of exchange rate pass-through contribute signi cantly to the instrument set, and we do
not reject the over-identi cation test for the two types of instruments (in columns 3 and 4 of Table 8).
This suggests that incomplete pass-through into export prices -- whether due to the limited marginal
cost exposure to the exchange rate because of imported inputs or due to price stickiness in foreign
currencies -- both have important allocative e ects on export quantities, at the annual frequency.
    The quantity elasticity that we estimate is greater than 1 in absolute value, consistent with the
time-series macro literature (Feenstra, Luck, Obstfeld, and Russ 2018), yet still small compared to the
micro-level elasticities conventional in the international trade literature (Broda and Weinstein 2006).
Note, however, that the prices we work with are the factory-gate exporter prices, after which there
may be multiple further rounds of incomplete pass-through into nal consumer prices, reducing the
quantity response (see Auer, Burstein, and Lein 2020). As a result, our estimates may well be consistent
with a much higher structural elasticity of the nal product demand.
   39
      The movement in the dollar-destination exchange rate interacted with rm characteristics, while having a signi cant
e ect on prices in the rst stage, does not have a statistically pronounced e ect on quantities, as can be seen from the
reduced form regression in Appendix Table A3.




                                                              33
6         Pass-through Dynamics
So far, we have focused on exchange rate pass-through at the annual frequency. We now study the dy-
namics of exchange rate pass-through by re-estimating (20) using monthly data for the period January
2012 to March 2019, for di erent time horizons from 1 to 24 months, gradually increasing the horizon
over which we measure price and exchange rate changes. Indeed, the regression speci cation (20) ap-
plies, in general, over any time interval, with the coe cients changing to re ect the relative importance
of the sticky- and exible-price determinants of pass-through at di erent horizons (see Section 2.3).
         Concretely, we estimate the following speci cation for each regression horizon h:

             h p                             D     D D     D
                ikt = h + h i + h ik h ekt + h i + h ik h ekt + xed e ects +
                                                                                                      h
                                                                                                      ikt ,    (21)

where h is the h-month di erence, e.g. h ekt = ekt - ek,t-h , and the other variables are as in the
benchmark speci cation (20) above. The estimates at one-month horizon are very noisy due to the
standard timing issue of the shock and price adjustment, and therefore, we report the results starting
from a four-month horizon and up to 24 months, h  {4, .., 24}, where the timing issue no longer results
in such noisy ERPT estimates. Speci cation (21) is the same as in column 4 of Table 7, but dropping
the insigni cant market share interaction terms.40 We also run a similar pass-through speci cation for
                , including the detailed time-industry-destination xed e ects, exactly as in column 3
quantities, h qikt
of Table A3, and thus necessarily omitting the rst exchange rate term, h h ekt -- that is, estimating
only the di erential e ect of foreign currency pricing on quantities.
                                                        D ) and the exible-price ( ,  D ) coe cients in (21)
         We are interested in how the sticky-price (h , h                         h h
evolve with the regression horizon h. For the exible-price determinants of ERPT, theory predicts that
        D , as rms with higher exposure to foreign intermediates  should have a lower exible-
h < 0 < h                                                        i
price pass-through of the euro-destination exchange rate, and a higher one of the dollar-destination
                                               D  0 , when prices are mostly sticky, with both
exchange rate. In the short-run, we expect h , h
coe cients gradually increasing in absolute value with the regression horizon h (recall (12) and (13)).
                                                                                     D , with  D capturing
         In turn, for the sticky price determinants of ERPT, theory predicts h < 0 < h        h
the pass-through of the dollar-destination exchange rate by the DCP rms, and h capturing the gap
in the pass-through of the euro-destination exchange rate between the foreign-currency (LCP or DCP)
invoicing and PCP invoicing. Since PCP rms have the highest pass-through in the short run, h is
                                                D to decline over time in absolute value, as rms
expected to be negative.41 We expect both h and h
adjust prices and the e ects of the price stickiness dissipate.
         Indeed, these are exactly the patterns we nd in the data. We report the results in Figures 3 and 4.
The left panel of Figure 3 plots the dynamics of exchange rate pass-through for PCP, LCP and DCP
 rms respectively, conditional on the exible-price determinants of ERPT. The rst thing to note is that
a counterfactual PCP rm that uses no foreign intermediate inputs has a complete pass-through of the
euro-destination exchange rate into destination prices, with h  1 at all horizons h. In contrast, if the
    40
    We also include rm xed e ects, as in column 3 of Table A3, which does not a ect the coe cient estimates in (21).
    41
    Note that h estimates the pass-through of the PCP rms, while h + h , estimates the pass-through of the foreign-
currency pricing rms, and we expect h + h < h (that is, h < 0).


                                                        34
             (a) Sticky-price determinants                                 (b) Flexible-price determinants




                                Figure 3: Exchange rate pass-through dynamics
Note: coe cient estimates from the ERPT speci cation (21), with rm, industry-destination and time xed e ects, for di erent
horizons h; shaded areas re ect 95% con dence intervals. The left panel plots the sticky-price coe cients: h depicts the
                                                                                                    D
euro-destination ERPT for the PCP rms and h + h for the foreign-currency (LCP and DCP) pricing rms; h corresponds
to the additional dollar-destination ERPT of the DCP rms; see text for further details. The right panel plots the exible-
                        D
price coe cients: h and h depict the euro-destination and the dollar-destination ERPT, respectively, per unit of the rm's
imported input intensity i .


same rm were to price its exports in foreign currencies (LCP or DCP), it would have an incomplete
pass-through of the euro-destination exchange rate, h + h < 1, which gradually increases from 45%
at the 4-month horizon to 65% at the 24-month horizon. This closes over a third of the gap with the
complete pass-through of the PCP rms. The DCP rms, in addition, exhibit a high, nearly 55%, pass-
through of the dollar-destination exchange rate at the 4-month horizon, which gradually decreases to
about 30% at the 24-month horizon.
    The right panel of Figure 3 plots the dynamic contribution of the exible-price determinants, namely
the imported intermediate inputs i , conditional on the currency of pricing. The exposure to foreign
intermediates reduces the pass-through of the euro-destination exchange rate, h < 0, and increases
                                                          D > 0. These e ects are small, or even
the pass-through of the dollar-destination exchange rate, h
insigni cant, in the short run, and build up gradually over the regression horizon h, in line with the
theory. The magnitude of estimated e ects continues to increase beyond the one-year horizon, h = 12,
which was our benchmark in the analysis in Section 5.
    Figure 4 compares the dynamic patterns of foreign-currency price stickiness to a theoretical bench-
mark, both for prices and quantities. Towards this end, we enhance speci cation (21) with highly de-
tailed industry-destination-time xed e ects. This is the theoretically desirable speci cation for both
prices and quantities, as it controls for all dynamic industry-destination-level shocks, but it is at the
cost of absorbing the levels of pass-through, captured by h in Figure 3. Hence, the coe cients re ect
the dynamic estimates of the di erential pass-through for PCP and DCP rms relative to LCP rms,
                     D , respectively. Two striking results emerge. First,  D  - at all horizons,
as captured by h and h                                                     h    h




                                                           35
                         (a) Prices                                                     (b) Quantities




                       Figure 4: The dynamic e ect of foreign-currency price stickiness
Note: left (right) panel estimates (21) for prices (quantities) for di erent h, with rm and industry-destination-time xed
e ects; shaded areas are 95% con dence intervals. Coe cients h and q,h estimate the di erential responses of prices and
                                                                              D     D
quantities to the euro-destination exchange rate for PCP relative to LCP rms; h and q,h estimate the di erential responses
of prices and quantities to the dollar-destination exchange rate for DCP relative to LCP rms. The dashed line in the left
panel is ^(h) from (13) evaluated for  = 0.88.


which suggests the extent of price stickiness for rms pricing in di erent currencies is symmetric. This
is exactly the prediction from a simple Calvo model with a common price stickiness parameter  , which
implies  D = -h =      ^(h), as given by (13). This is evident in the left panel of Figure 4, which plots  D
           h                                                                                                                h
alongside the negative of h , to facilitate the comparison of the estimates. Consistent with the theory,
the impact of currency of pricing is large in the short run and gradually decreases over time.
    Second, we nd that    ^(h)  1  (1 -  h ), derived in Section 2.3, and plotted with a dashed
                                    h 1-
                                                                                    D and -
line in the gure for the parameter value  = 0.88, approximates the dynamics of both h       h
very accurately for h  [12, 24] months.42 This suggests that a Calvo model with a single parameter
 = 0.88, corresponding to a 1/(1 -  ) = 8.3 months price duration, provides a good t to the medium-
run dynamics of pass-through in the data. Note that at the 12-month horizon,  12 = 0.22, which
means that 22% of rms have yet to adjust their prices after 12 months, consistent with our back-of-
the-envelope calculations in Section 5. This fraction at 24 months is  24 = 0.05, suggesting that the
e ect of sticky prices nearly washes out at this horizon.43 This provides new evidence for the long-run
convergence in exchange rate pass-through across currency bins of rms, conditional on the underlying
 rm characteristics.
    Finally, we turn to the dynamic response of quantities. In the right panel of Figure 4, we plot -q,h
   42
      We calibrated  to match the 12-month pass-through estimate, that is     ^(h) = -h for h = 12. Note that for this value
of  , ^(h) overstates the extent of pass-through for h < 12, which could suggest either the presence in the data of a subset of
more exible price setters or the downward bias in our estimates over short horizons due to the timing issue discussed above.
   43
      As we show in Appendix B, the Calvo model with parameter  implies that  h is the direct causal e ect of price stickiness
on ERPT at horizon h. At the same time, the estimates in speci cation (21), h   D
                                                                                   = -h =     ^(h), can be considerably larger
for large h, as this regression uses variation over all horizons up to h, which explains the hyperbolic rather than geometric
decline in ^(h), with  ^(h) >  h for h > 1. For small h, the gap between   ^(h) and  h is small.



                                                              36
    D , which are estimates of the di erential impact of the exchange rates (euro-destination and
and q,h
dollar-destination, respectively) on quantities at various horizons for euro- and dollar-pricing rms
(relative to LCP rms), respectively. Recall that an increase in both exchange rates corresponds to a
depreciation of the destination currency, and hence results in a (partial) increase in the destination-
                      D > 0). In turn, we expect a reduction in quantities in response to these shocks,
currency prices (-h , h
                                                                                       D < 0, respec-
especially for rms pricing their exports in euros or in dollars, as captured by -q,h , q,h
tively.44 These coe cients re ect the direct causal impact of foreign-currency price stickiness on the
exchange rate pass-through into real economic outcomes. According to the theory, these e ects should
be particularly pronounced in the short run, gradually dissipating over time as prices become exible.
    As expected, we nd negative point estimates for the response of quantities to both exchange rates
at almost all horizons. Although the estimates are noisy, we still see that they become larger in absolute
value over time and become statistically signi cant around the one-year horizon. On the one hand, this
is consistent with the allocative e ects of price stickiness in alternative currencies of pricing, yet on
the other hand, it suggests a presence of some additional frictions limiting the response of quantities
on impact and in the short run (cf. the J -curve literature).


7     Conclusion
In this paper, we show that the currency of invoicing is an active rm-level decision, which a ects how
much of the exchange rate movements are passed through into destination prices and quantities. The
same rm characteristics that determine exible pricing also determine the currency choice, namely the
 rm size and the share of imported inputs. Large exporters that rely intensively on imported intermedi-
ate inputs are more likely to invoice in foreign currencies, especially in the US dollar, while the smaller
 rms tend to use the euro. A rm's currency choice is also in uenced by the decisions of its competi-
tors in a given market, due to strategic complementarities. We nd that the currency choice matters
for exchange rate pass-through, even after controlling for the exible price characteristics, providing
evidence for the role of price stickiness. The cross-currency pass-through di erentials persist beyond
a one-year horizon, generating allocative expenditure-switching e ects on foreign import quantities.
    Our results have important implications for the international transmission of shocks and macroe-
conomic policies. The large cross- rm heterogeneity in currency choice combined with the persistence
of two dominant currencies over time suggest interesting counterfactuals. One possibility is that the
US dollar strengthens its position as the dominant global currency. This could happen with greater
globalization of production and more intensive reliance on global value chains, as our results show
that cross-border FDI -- a proxy for global value chains -- is associated with more US dollar currency
invoicing. This would render exchange rates less relevant as determinants of relative prices and expen-
diture switching in the global supply chain. In contrast, fragmentation and localization of production
chains, e.g. in response to a global pandemic shock, can reverse this trend and speed up the transition
   44
      To clarify, q,h corresponds to the relative response of quantities for LCP vs PCP rms, and thus -q,h < 0 is the negative
                                                                           D
relative response of quantities for PCP rms, as we expect. Similarly, q,h      < 0 is the negative response of quantities for DCP
 rms relative to LCP rms.



                                                               37
to a multiple-regional-currencies equilibrium, with more intensive trade within the regions and greater
barriers to cross-regional trade. This, in turn, may increase the expenditure-switching role of bilateral
exchange rate movements, yet with a lower volume of long-distance trade.
   Alternatively, a shift in the exchange rate anchoring policies of the major trade partners, such as
China, could trigger a long-run shift in the equilibrium environment. If China were to freely oat its
exchange rate, encouraging Chinese exporters to price more intensively in renminbi, the equilibrium
environment would change for exporting rms around the world. In particular, this would alter both
the dynamics of prices in the input markets, as well as the competitive environment in the output mar-
kets across many industries. As our results show, the currency in which a rm's imports are invoiced
and the currency in which its competitors price are key determinants of an exporting rm's currency
choice, and hence this shift could dramatically change the optimal invoicing patterns for exporting
 rms. Despite the persistence in currency use that we observe, the fact that the currency choice is an
endogenous rm-level decision means that such a major shock to the long-run equilibrium environ-
ment can lead to abrupt changes in the optimal invoicing patterns. Our empirical estimates, combined
with a general-equilibrium international macro model, allow for a quantitative counterfactual analysis
of such tectonic shifts in the global pricing system.




                                                   38
A     Additional Figures and Tables

                                Figure A1: Firm size and import currency invoicing

          (a) All import sources (ex-eurozone)                            (b) Excluding US and dollar pegs




Note: Import currency invoicing shares by employment size bins of rms. Unlike for exports (see Figure 2), the incidence of
currency use in imports does not robustly change with rm size.




                                           Table A1: Firm-size distribution
  Employment size bins        <50     50­100     100­200     200­350     350­550      550­850     850­2000     2,000
  Number of rms              1,948      299        246          115         60           36           23          12
  Share in total exports      6%        7%         11%          10%         7%          10%          13%         35%
  Share in total imports      5%        3%         8%           9%          7%          10%           8%         50%
Note: We sort rms by employment into 8 size bins, roughly corresponding to the rst 7 deciles of export revenues and the
last one combining the top three deciles (containing only 12 rms, which together account for 35% of Belgian manufacturing
exports and 50% of imports).




                                                           39
                                                      Table A2: Summary statistics
                       Variable           Mean        St Dev.    5 pctl           Median     95 pctl          Count
                       Currency choice (Tables 2 and 3­5)
                       ikt       0.316   0.465        0                               0        1              741,570
                       i         0.139   0.133      0.003                           0.099    0.439            741,570
                       X i       0.052   0.080      0.000                           0.034    0.217            741,570
                       log Li    5.678   1.799      2.651                           5.730    7.874            741,570
                       Sik       0.268   0.327      0.001                           0.090    0.985            741,570
                       out-FDIi 0.498    0.500        0                               0        1              741,570
                       in-FDIi   0.469   0.499        0                               0        1              741,570
                       Mikt               0.632        0.482       0                  1        1              270,490
                       i                  0.266        0.219     0.000              0.225    0.676            270,490
                       X i                0.081        0.130       0                0.017    0.383            270,490
                         M
                       Sijk               0.137        0.270     0.000              0.007    0.909            270,490
                       D
                       ikt                0.545        0.498        0                    1      1             113,337
                       Exchange rate pass-through (Tables 6­7 and 8)
                       p ikt    0.043    0.364  -0.613       0.034                           0.712            265,841
                         
                       qikt     0.031    1.319  -2.055       0.012                           2.118            265,841
                       ekt      0.033    0.098  -0.130       0.025                           0.193            265,841
                       eDkt     0.043    0.096  -0.046       0.006                           0.213            265,841
Notes: The upper panel reports summary statistics for the variables used in the currency choice regressions, where the
observations are at the rm-product-country-month level for February 2017 to March 2019; the lower panel for the ERPT
regressions at the rm-product-destination-year level for 2012 to 2018.

                                  Table A3: ERPT into prices and quantities, reduced form
                                          (1)                              (2)                          (3)                 (4)
 Dep. var.:                    pikt
                                                  
                                                 qikt            pikt
                                                                                   
                                                                                  qikt        pikt
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                               qikt       pikt
                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                    qikt
                                                           
 ekt                           1.016            - 0.527            --               --          --               --         --        --
                               (0.014)           (0.096)

 ekt · i                      - 0.350            0.270          - 0.284          -0.023      - 0.293          -0.026     -0.114     0.412
                               (0.081)           (0.429)         (0.106)          (0.641)     (0.105)          (0.636)    (0.091)   (0.405)

 eD
  kt · i                       0.391             0.426           0.319            0.822       0.320             0.766       --        --
                               (0.075)           (0.455)         (0.112)          (0.675)     (0.111)          (0.668)

 ekt · Sik                    -0.051            -0.006          -0.065           -0.141         --               --         --        --
                               (0.036)           (0.129)         (0.074)          (0.258)

 eD
  kt · Sik                    -0.010            -0.169           0.006           -0.317         --               --         --        --
                               (0.035)           (0.139)         (0.068)          (0.237)

 ekt · ikt                    - 0.359            0.466          - 0.259           0.464      - 0.262            0.453    - 0.166 0.257
                               (0.037)           (0.121)         (0.050)          (0.165)     (0.049)          (0.163)    (0.045)   (0.133)

                                                                                                     
 eD
  kt   ·   D
           ikt                 0.324            -0.253           0.234           -0.201       0.234           -0.202        --        --
                               (0.041)           (0.167)         (0.050)          (0.223)     (0.049)          (0.222)

 # obs.                       240,188           240,188         200,595          200,595     200,595           200,595   221,564    221,564
 Fixed E ects:
    rm
  destination
  industry×destination
  industry×destination×year

Notes: Each column reports (a) the rst stage regression of the corresponding column in Table 8, where the dependent variable
is the log change in destination price p  ikt ; and (b) the reduced form OLS speci cation where the dependent variable is the
                                  
log change in export quantity qikt   . The observations are at the rm-CN8 product-destination-year level for 2012-2018. The
explanatory variables are as described in Tables 6 and 7. All regressions are clustered at the destination-year level.




                                                                    40
B    Dynamic of Pass-through
Consider a simple dynamic Calvo model of price setting with a desired price in the destination currency
that follows:
                                              ~
                                              p it = i et ,

where et is the producer-destination exchange rate (following a random walk), and i = 1 - i - i ,
                                                                             ~it = (i - 1)et .
as a special case of Lemma 3. The desired price in producer currency is thus p
    The rm sets prices either in local (LCP) or producer (PCP) currency, and adjusts them in any given
period with a Calvo probability (1 -  ) to a reset price:
                                              
                           ¯
                           p it = (1 -  )                    ~
                                                     ( )j Et pt+j = i et ,
                                              j =0
                                              
                           ¯it = (1 -  )
                           p                         ( )j Et p
                                                             ~t+j = (i - 1)et ,
                                              j =0

for the LCP and PCP cases respectively, where we use the assumption of a random walk in exchange
rate, namely that Et et+j = et . For an LCP rm, the realized destination-currency price is given by
pL     L                            L    ¯
 it = pi,t-1 with probability  and pit = pit with probability 1 -  . For a PCP rm, the realized
destination-currency price is pP     P               P     P                            P
                               it = pit + et , with pit = pi,t-1 with probability  and pit = p
                                                                                             ¯it with
probability 1 -  .
    Observing a large number of symmetric rms with i , some of which adjust prices on a given date,
while others do not, we record an average price pL    L            p        P  = pP + e with
                                                 t = pt-1 + (1 -  )¯it and pt     t    t
pP    P
 t = pt-1 + (1 -  )¯
                   pit , for LCP and PCP subsets of rms respectively. With this, we have that
pL      P
 t and pt both follow an AR(1) process with persistence  and iid innovations (1 -  )i et and
(1 -  )(i - 1)et respectively.
   We are interested in the regression coe cients of h pL        L     L             P      P      P
                                                         t = pt - pt-h and h pt = pt - pt-h
on h et = et - et-h , which we denote   ^L and ^P respectively. We calculate (see the Proof in the end
                                          h          h
of this appendix):

           cov(pL      L
      ^L =      t - pt-h , et - et-h )             1 
       h                               = i 1 -           (1 -  h ) ,                               (A1)
                 var(et - et-h )                   h1-
           cov(pP          P
                t + et - pt-h - et-h , et - et-h )                   1 
      ^P =
                                                   = 1 + (i - 1) 1 -     (1 -  h ) .               (A2)
       h
                       var(et - et-h )                               h1-

Note that at h = 1, ^L = i (1 -  ) and ^P = 1 - (1 -  )(1 - i ), with ^P - ^L =  , re ecting the
                     1                  1                              1    1
fraction of rms that do not adjust on impact (in the rst month). Over time, the gap between the two
pass-through elasticities closes:

                        ^(h)  
                              ^L - ^P = 1  (1 -  h )  0               as     h  .
                               h    h
                                        h1-

At h = , we have ^P = ^L = i , that is both elasticities converge to the desired-price pass-through.
                       
    Note that at each horizon h, the fraction of prices that have not yet adjusted is  h , and 1 -  h is


                                                         41
respectively the fraction of prices that adjusted at least once. The impulse response of prices to the
exchange rate shock (theoretical pass-through elasticity) is (see the Proof below):

                                                h-1
                      L      pLt+h
                      h =           = i (1 -  )      j = i (1 -  h ),                                        (A3)
                              (et )
                                                        j =0

                             pP  
                      P        t+h
                      h =           = 1 + (i - 1)(1 -  h ) = i +  h (1 - i ),                                (A4)
                              (et )

so that ^(h)   L -  P =  h .
                 h     h
    Note that for h = 1, ^(1) = ^(1) =  , while for any h > 1 we have ^(h) > ^(h) =  h . This is
because the empirical pass-through regression has to aggregate both short-run and long-run responses
to estimate a medium-run response, and therefore estimates a larger gap in ERPT (or equivalently, a
slower decline in this gap) than exhibited by the theoretical impulse response.
   Lastly, we discuss the role of i . The currency choice between LCP and PCP is endogenous to i ,
and rms with a higher i are more likely to select into PCP. Therefore, in the regressions, we control
for the exible-price determinants of pass-though, which proxy for i . With a perfect measure of i ,
one fully controls for selection by including the interaction term 1 - ^(h) (1 - i )h et in the pass-
through regression (recall (12)), and still recovers ^L and ^P , and thus ^(h), which captures the causal
                                                      h      h
e ect of foreign-currency price stickiness.

                                                               h-1
Proof: For the calculations, note that et - et-h =             j =0 t-j ,         where t is the iid exchange rate
                                      L                 h-1   L
innovation. Furthermore, prices pL
                                 t - pt-h =             j =0 pt-j with

                                                                        h-j -1
                                  h-j    
                          pL
                           t-j =      pL
                                       t-h + (1 -  )i                             t-j - .
                                                                          =0

Therefore:
                                                                                            
                                         h-1            h-1               h-j -1
             L
   cov(pL
        t - pt-h , et - et-h ) = cov
                                                t-j ,          (1 -  )i             t-j - 
                                         j =0           j =0                =0
                                                                                    
                                            h-1              h-1
                                                                                                  (1 -  h ) 2
                               = i cov               t-j ,          (1 -  j +1 )t-j  = i h -                e ,
                                                                                                   1-
                                              j =0           j =0

      2 = var( ) = var(e ). Using the fact that var(e - e
where e                                                           2
              t         t                            t   t-h ) = he results in (A1), and a similar
calculation applies in the PCP case to obtain (A2).
   Finally, (A3) follows directly from the expansion for pL 
                                                          t-j after noticing that et = t is an iid
innovation, and similarly for (A4).




                                                         42
References
A      , M., O. I       ,     J. K      (2014): "Importers, Exporters, and Exchange Rate Disconnect," American
    Economic Review, 7(104), 1942­1978.
         (2019): "International Shocks, Variable Markups and Domestic Prices," Review of Economic Studies, 6(86),
    2356­402.
A          , A.,   A. B          (2008): "Trade Costs, Pricing-to-Market, and International Relative Prices," Amer-
    ican Economic Review, 98(5), 1998­2031.
A     , R., A. T. B       ,    S. L   (2020): "Exchange Rates and Prices: Evidence from the 2015 Swiss Franc
    Appreciation," American Economic Review, forthcoming.
B            , P.,   E.     W         (2000): "Does Exchange-Rate Stability Increase Trade and Welfare?," Amer-
    ican Economic Review, 90(5), 1093­1109.
         (2005): "A Theory of the Currency Denomination of International Trade," Journal of International Eco-
    nomics, 67(2), 295­319.
B          , O. (2020): "The Valuation E ects of Trade," https://obarbiero.github.io/ les/VET.pdf.
B         , O., E. F  , G. G         ,      O. I            (2019): "The Macroeconomics of Border Taxes," in NBER
    Macroeconomics Annual 2018, vol. 33. forthcoming.
B        , N., P. M       ,    T. M        (2012): "How do di erent exporters react to exchange rate changes?,"
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(1), 437­492.
B       , C.,     M. D           (2000): "Exchange Rate Dynamics in a Model of Pricing-to-Market," Journal of
    International Economics, 50(1), 215­44.
B             , S. (2009): "Optimal currency denomination of trade: Theory and quantitative exploration," https:
    //sites.google.com/site/bhattaraisaroj/.
B    , E., G. G         ,      M. P            M        (2017): "Global Trade and the Dollar," NBER Working Paper
    No. 23988.
B       , C.,    D. W            (2006): "Globalization and the Gains from Variety," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    121(2), 541­85.
B         , A.,     G. G          (2013): "International Prices and Exchange Rates," in Handbook of International
    Economics, ed. by G. Gopinath, E. Helpman, and K. Rogo , vol. IV.
C       , C., F. J. D , G. G          ,      P. O. G            (2016): "Dominant Currency Paradigm," NBER Work-
    ing Paper No. 22943.
C      , V., P. K     ,     E. M G          (2002): "Can Sticky Price Models Generate Volatile and Persistent
    Exchange Rates?," Review of Economic Studies, 69(3), 533­63.
C      , N., W. C    ,     D. N           (2018): "Vehicle Currency Pricing and Exchange Rate Pass-Through," CEPR
    Discussion Papers No. 13085.
C        , W. (2016): "Imported inputs and invoicing currency choice: Theory and evidence from UK transaction
    data," Journal of International Economics, 99, 237­250.
C          , G., M. A. C       ,    L. H (2020): "Invoicing and Pricing-to-market: Evidence on international
    pricing by UK exporters," CEPR Discussion Paper No. 13282.
C          , G.,     P. P       (2004): "Endogenous Pass-Through and Optimal Monetary Policy: A Model of
    Self-Validating Exchange Rate Regimes," CEPR Working Paper No. 8737.
        (2007): "The Simple Geometry of Transmission and Stabilization in Closed and Open Economies [with
    Comments]," NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics, pp. 65­129.
C         , J. (2017): "Exchange Rates, Aggregate Productivity and the Currency of Invoicing of International


                                                           43
    Trade," https://sites.google.com/a/umich.edu/javiercravino/.
D          , M.,     C. E        (2003): "Monetary Policy in the Open Economy Revisited: Price Setting and Ex-
    change Rate Flexibility," Review of Economic Studies, 70, 765­84.
D         , M., C. E      ,     P. S          (2004): "Endogenous Pass-through when Nominal Prices are set in
    Advance," Journal of International Economics, 63(2), 263­291.
D          , M. B., W. D     ,     B. T       (2017): "Importers and exporters in exchange rate pass-through and
    currency invoicing," Journal of International Economics, 105(C), 187­204.
D            , M. B.,     S. S   (2013): "Vehicle Currency," International Economic Review, 54(1), 97­133.
D              , R. (1976): "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal of Political Economy, 84(6), 1161­
    1176.
            (1987): "Exchange Rate and Prices," American Economic Review, 77(1), 93­106.
D        , A., R. K         ,      D. P     (2019): "Currency Choice in Contracts," http://www.andresdrenik.com/
    research/.
D       , A.,       D. P      (2018): "Pricing in Multiple Currencies in Domestic Markets," http://www.
    andresdrenik.com/research/.
E        , K.,    D. M              (2020): "Optimal Policy under Dollar Pricing," https://sites.google.com/site/
    dmitry0mukhin/.
E       , C. (2003): "Expenditure Switching and Exchange Rate Policy," in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2002,
    vol. 17, pp. 231­272.
         (2006): "Equivalence Results for Optimal Pass-Through, Optimal Indexing to Exchange Rates, and Opti-
    mal Choice of Currency for Export Pricing," Journal of European Economic Association, 4(6), 1249­60.
F      , E.,    M. M           (2017): "A Model of the International Monetary System," The Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, 133(1), 295­355.
F          , D., A. S        ,     M. W             (2012): "`Natural hedging' of exchange rate risk: The role of
    imported input prices," http://www.alexandria.unisg.ch/publications/citation/Martin_Wermelinger/.
F          , R. C., P. L , M. O         ,    K. N. R   (2018): "In Search of the Armington Elasticity," The Review
    of Economics and Statistics, The Review of Economics and Statistics(1), 135­150.
F         , J. M. (1962): "Domestic nancial policies under xed and oating exchange rates," IMF Sta Papers No. 9,
    pp. 369­379.
F        , R. (1998): "In which currency should exporters set their prices?," Journal of International Economics, 45,
    59­76.
F            , M. (1953): "The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates," Essays in Positive Economics.
G     , J. (2008): Monetary Policy, In ation and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to the New Keynesian Framework.
    Princeton University Press.
G         , L. S.,       C. T       (2008): "Vehicle currency use in international trade," Journal of International
    Economics, 76(2), 177­192.
         (2009): "Macroeconomic interdependence and the international role of the dollar," Journal of Monetary
    Economics, 56(7), 990­1003.
         (2016): "Micro, macro, and strategic forces in international trade invoicing: Synthesis and novel patterns,"
    Journal of International Economics, 102, 173­187.
G            , G. (2016): "The International Price System," Jackson Hole Symposium Proceedings.
G          , G., E. B , C. C   , F. J. D , P. O. G            ,    M. P                 M         (2020): "Dominant
    Currency Paradigm," American Economic Review, 110(3), 677­719.


                                                          44
G         , G.,      O. I          (2010): "Frequency of Price Adjustment and Pass-through," Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, 125(2), 675­727.
G           , G., O. I      ,      R. R         (2010): "Currency Choice and Exchange Rate Pass-through," Amer-
    ican Economic Review, 100(1), 306­336.
G          , G.,     R. R          (2008): "Sticky Borders," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(2), 531­575.
G           , G.,    J. C. S     (2020): "Banking, Trade, and the making of a Dominant Currency," Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
G            , P. O. (2019): "The Dollar Hegemon? Evidence and Implications for Policymakers," the 6th Asian
    Monetary Policy Forum, Singapore.
H , Z., A. K               ,       K. M          (2019): "A Model of Safe Asset Determination," American Economic
  Review, 109(4), 1230­62.
I        , E., C. M. R      ,      K. S. R       (2019): "Exchange Arrangements Entering the Twenty-First
    Century: Which Anchor will Hold?," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134(2), 599­646.
I         , O. (2020): "The Story of the Real Exchange Rate," http://scholar.princeton.edu/itskhoki/.
K         , P. R. (1980): "Vehicle Currencies and the Structure of International Exchange," Journal of Money, Credit
    and Banking, 12, 513­26.
         (1987): "Pricing to Market when the Exchange Rate Changes," in Real Financial Linkages among Open
    Economies, ed. by S. Arndt, and J. Richardson, pp. 49­70. MIT Press, Cambridge.
M           , M., B. N      ,   J. S           (2020): "International Currencies and Capital Allocation," Journal of
    Political Economy, forthcoming.
M       , J.,     I. M         (2012): "Invoicing Currency, Firm Size, and Hedging," http://www.isabellemejean.
    com/publications.html.
M        , D. (2017): "An Eqilibrium Model of the International Price System," https://sites.google.com/site/
    dmitry0mukhin/.
M          , R. A. (1963): "Capital mobility and stabilization policy under xed and exible exchange rates," Cana-
    dian Journal of Economics and Political Science, 29(4), 475­485.
N            , E.,     J. S         (2008): "Five Facts about Prices: A Reevaluation of Menu Cost Models," Quar-
    terly Journal of Economics, 123(4), 1415­1464.
O          , M.,     K. R         (1995): "Exchange Rate Dynamics Redux," Journal of Political Economy, 103, 624­
    60.
         (2000): "New Directions for Stochastic Open Economy Models," Journal of International Economics, 50,
    117­153.
R , H. (2001): "International Trade and Currency Exchange," Review of Economic Studies, 68(2), 443­464.




                                                          45
