                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             OPTIMAL FOREIGN RESERVES AND CENTRAL BANK POLICY
                          UNDER FINANCIAL STRESS

                                     Luis Felipe Céspedes
                                       Roberto Chang

                                      Working Paper 27923
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27923


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2020




We thank Fernando Broner, Filippo Occhino, Jaume Ventura, Bernardo Pagnoncelli, Alep
Simsek, and seminar participants at the BIS, PUC de Chile, Central Bank of Chile, NBER IFM
Program Meeting, Universidad de Chile, and Universidad Católica del Perú for useful comments
and suggestions. Any additional input will be greatly appreciated. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Luis Felipe Céspedes and Roberto Chang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Optimal Foreign Reserves and Central Bank Policy Under Financial Stress
Luis Felipe Céspedes and Roberto Chang
NBER Working Paper No. 27923
October 2020
JEL No. E5,F3,F4

                                           ABSTRACT

We study the interaction between optimal foreign reserves accumulation and central bank
international liquidity provision in a small open economy under financial stress. Firms and
households finance investment and consumption by borrowing from domestic financial
intermediaries (banks), which in turn borrow from abroad. Binding financial constraints can
cause the domestic rate of interest to rise above the world rate and the real exchange rate to
depreciate, leading to inefficiently low investment and consumption. A role then emerges for a
central bank that accumulates reserves in order to provide liquidity if financial frictions bind. The
optimal level of international reserves in this context depends, among other variables, on the term
premium, the depth of financial markets, ex ante financial uncertainty and the precise way the
central bank intervenes. The model is consistent with both the increase in international reserves
observed during the period 2004-2008 and with policy intervention after the Lehman bankruptcy.


Luis Felipe Céspedes
Universidad de Chile
Departamento de Economía
lfcespedes@fen.uchile.cl

Roberto Chang
Rutgers University
Department of Economics
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
chang@econ.rutgers.edu
1         Introduction

The period surrounding the recent global ...nancial crisis, which peaked around the Lehman
bankruptcy in September 2008, has motivated lively and important debates on macroeconomic
policy. Two observations have attracted particular attention, especially in emerging economies.
First, prior to the crisis, several central banks had accumulated signi...cantly high amounts
of international reserves. A justi...cation for such accumulation, often mentioned by central
bankers, was the need to build a "war chest" of international liquidity, to be available in case
of sudden outows of capital, similar to those experienced in the late 1990s. Second, when the
global crisis did erupt, those same central banks were in a good position to mitigate its impact,
in particular by providing foreign currency liquidity that compensated the foreign credit crunch,
prevented the collapse of the ...nancial sector, and calmed the markets.1
        The ...rst observation has motivated a recent literature that focuses on accounting for the
observed levels of foreign reserves accumulation. That literature has served to identify variables,
such as the probability of a "sudden stop" or the degree of ...nancial development, that are key
determinants of optimal levels of reserves and were ignored by older treatments which tied
optimal reserve levels to international trade considerations. At the same time, the second
observation has spurred a host of studies on central bank responses to ...nancial crunches and
sudden stops, especially on the so called "unconventional policies" designed to increase the
availability of credit in a ...nancial crisis.
        While these two literatures have delivered important and useful lessons, they have evolved
mostly in parallel. It is not hard, however, to argue that the two issues, optimal foreign
reserves accumulation and policy responses to crises, are intimately connected. For one thing,
as mentioned, central bankers often say that they hoard reserves because they plan to use them
to ...nance liquidity assistance in case of a crisis. For another, reserves accumulation may a¤ect
private sector behavior, inducing domestic agents to borrow more, and potentially placing the
...nancial system in a more fragile situation. Finally, it may be the case that the probability
    1
        For a discussion of Latin American experiences, see Céspedes, Chang, and Velasco (2014).


                                                         2
of crisis itself may be a¤ected by the level of international reserves and by the existence and
nature of liquidity policies that the central bank implements during crises.
   Accordingly, this paper analyzes the interaction between optimal reserves accumulation
and central bank liquidity policies under ...nancial duress, in a small open economy in which the
probability of ...nancial crisis is endogenously determined. This exercise yields several interesting
lessons about the bene...ts and costs of international reserves, their link to the precise details of
ex post central bank responses to crises and of ...nancial intermediation.
   We develop our arguments in a small open economy model that extends that of Céspedes,
Chang, and Velasco (2017, hence CCV). In the model, domestic agents cannot borrow directly
from international lenders, but instead they can obtain credit from ...nancial intermediaries or
banks, which in turn can borrow from abroad. Because of incentive or enforcement problems,
however, banks' foreign debts are limited to a multiple of their net worth. The collateral
constraint may or may not bind in equilibrium. If it does, there is a credit crunch that causes
the domestic interest rate to rise above the world rate, the real exchange rate to depreciate,
and investment to fall.
   Our model departs from that in CCV in two key respects. First, the severity of the collateral
constraint can be a¤ected by exogenous shocks, which can be thought of as exogenous "sudden
stops" of international capital ows. Second, whether the collateral constraint binds or not
also depends on inherited debt, which is determined by households' initial consumption and
borrowing decisions, and is therefore endogenous. As a consequence, under laissez faire, crises
can occur with a probability that depends on the basic parameters of the economy.
   In this setting, we allow the central bank to accumulate international reserves that can
be used to ...nance liquidity assistance to domestic agents if there is a crisis. Speci...cally, the
central bank has the option of borrowing long term in order to acquire short term international
assets. Such option can come at a cost, but enables the central bank to provide liquidity to
domestic agents in case of need. Because liquidity provision in a crisis reduces ine¢ ciencies in
investment, it can be welfare improving for the central bank to take advantage of the option


                                                 3
and hoard some reserves, even if they involve some ...nancial cost.
   Signi...cantly, the central bank has a role because, as we show, domestic banks would not ...nd
it individually optimal to issue long term debt to buy short term assets. This occurs because
individual banks would not internalize that the increase in short term assets would result in
a lower interest spread and more e¢ cient investment when ...nancial constraints bind. In this
sense, a central bank policy of reserves accumulation is socially necessary.
   It is also the case in our model that, in equilibrium, reserves accumulation and the ensuing
central bank credit provision in crises can provide incentives for households to take more debt
initially, which in turn reduces the e¤ectiveness of liquidity provision. But such e¤ects do not
generally eliminate the bene...ts of reserves and ex post credit policy.
   We derive several additional implications. As stressed, a policy of building reserves to
provide liquidity when ...nancial constraints bind can be welfare improving. This is in spite
of the fact that reserves are costly and, as stressed in CCV, liquidity provision is ine¤ective
when ...nancial constraints do not bind. Such a policy implies, in particular, a reduction in the
probability of crisis.
   On the other hand, while it is possible to eliminate crises completely by building a large
enough chest of reserves, it is not optimal to do so if reserves have a cost. This is because, in
this model, when reserves are substantial, the probability of a crisis becomes too small, and the
bene...ts of an additional unit of reserves are outweighed by its ...nancial cost.
   Given these ...ndings, we identify the welfare maximizing amount of reserves and its determ-
inants. The optimal level of reserves turns out to depend on the economy'
                                                                        s fundamentals and
also, and more novel, on the details about the speci...c liquidity policy that the central bank
implements in a crisis. We show, for example, that the optimal level of reserves increases when
their cost falls. This is as expected, of course, but underscores that the model is consistent with
the view that one of the factors behind the observed reserves buildup in the last decade was
the ample availability of international liquidity prior to the global crisis. Also, we ...nd that an
increase in uncertainty easily implies that optimal reserves are higher. This is consistent with


                                                 4
arguments often advanced by central bankers to justify reserves accumulation.
   As for the impact of policy details, we show that optimal reserves depend on whether the
central bank policy in a crisis takes the form of lending to banks (liquidity facilities, in the
terminology of Gertler and Kiyotaki 2010) or to ...rms and households (direct lending). This
result follows because the bene...ts of reserves are given by their e¤ectiveness in alleviating
...nancial constraints when they become binding and, as demonstrated by CCV, direct lending
is less e¤ective than liquidity facilities because of leverage. On the other hand, we also ...nd that,
with direct lending, optimal reserves can be smaller or larger than under liquidity facilities. This
reects the fact that the optimal level of reserves is determined not by their net value (which is
unambiguously smaller under direct lending) but by their marginal value (which can be smaller
or larger, depending on fundamental elasticities).
   Our paper is closely related to a large body of literature that focuses on the optimal amount
of international reserves. An classic contribution is Heller (1966),in which shocks to the trade
balance, such as a fall in foreign demand, are the main motive to hold external reserves. The
optimal level of international reserves is given by the amount that minimizes the total cost of
adjustment taking into consideration the cost of holding liquid international reserves and the
probability that there will be a need for that level of reserves. Our paper is in the same spirit,
but does not assign as big a role to trade factors. Instead, ...nancial frictions take center stage.
   The role of reserves in mitigating the impact of ...nancial shocks has been a focus of recent
studies. A prominent and inuential one is Jeanne and Ranciere (2011) which builds a model in
which the accumulation of reserves is viewed as an insurance device against a sudden stop. They
...nd that the optimal level of reserves then depends on the probability of the sudden stop, the
consumer´s risk aversion, and the opportunity cost of holding reserves. Their model, however,
takes several variables, such as consumption and savings, and the probability of a sudden stop,
as either exogenous or ad hoc functions of reserves policy. In our model, consumption, savings,
and investment are derived as equilibrium outcomes, which must then reect expectations
about central bank policy and reserves accumulation. In addition, the probability of crisis is


                                                  5
endogenous, and interacts with private decisions, accounting in particular for the possibility of
self insurance.2
   Our paper is also related to recent studies on policy responses to ...nancial crises, and espe-
cially to the literature on "unconventional" central bank policy. An early survey is Gertler and
Kiyotaki (2010), which compares the di¤erent kinds of liquidity provision policies implemented
by advanced country central banks in the midst of the global crisis. For emerging econom-
ies, CCV develops a similar comparison, emphasizing the importance of occasionally binding
...nancial constraints. CCV also show the equivalence between sterilized foreign exchange in-
tervention and liquidity provision, thus connecting the analysis of unconventional policy with
an ongoing reconsideration of the implications of foreign exchange intervention.3 Relative to
this literature, our paper emphasizes that it is often the case, in emerging economies, that the
ability of central banks to alleviate crises depends on their access to international liquidity,
which they cannot themselves produce and, therefore, they must arrange for in advance, by
hoarding reserves.
   The present paper'
                    s perspective on the bene...ts of reserves accumulation contrasts with the
one suggested by CCV and recently developed by Bocola and Lorenzoni (2018). In the models
of CCV and Bocola and Lorenzoni, there may be multiple equilibria ex post. The central bank
can then eliminate bad equilibria by implementing an appropriate lending of last resort policy.
But the latter is only credible if the central bank has accumulated a large enough stock of
international reserves
   As discussed, in our paper foreign exchange reserves are seen as a "war chest" that central
banks can use in case of a ...nancial crunch. This perspective complements recent studies on ex
ante taxes or subsidies on international borrowing, leverage constraints, foreign borrowing lim-
its, and other macroprudential policies. Notable contributions include Bianchi (2011), Bianchi
and Mendoza (2018), and Korinek and Simsek (2016). For a useful discussion between ex ante
   2
     Other noteworthy recent contributions include Caballero and Panageas (2004) and Durdu, Mendoza, and
Terrones (2009).
   3
     For further development, see Chang (2018).



                                                   6
and ex post policies, see Benigno, Chen, Otrok, Rebucci, and Young (2013) and Jeanne and
Korinek (2017).
    Section 2 describes the model that serves as the setting for the analysis. Section 3 derives
equilibrium under laissez faire. Reserves accumulation that ...nances liquidity provision is intro-
duced in section 4. Section 5 discusses the determinants of the optimal level of reserves. Some
...nal remarks are collected in section 6.



2     The Model

To convey our main ideas, we study a simple small open economy whose main features are
described in this section. There are three periods and two goods, one tradable and another
nontradable. The real exchange rate is de...ned as the relative price of nontradables in terms
of tradables. The economy is inhabited by a representative household that owns domestic
...nancial intermediaries (banks) and ...rms. Initially, households borrow from the home banks in
order to ...nance consumption; in turn, banks ...nance their loans by borrowing from international
capital markets. In the second period, households roll over their debts and ...rms buy productive
capital, ...nancing investment borrowing from domestic banks. Banks then borrow further from
world capital markets to repay their previous debt and ...nance their new loans to households
and ...rms. Crucially, in the second period, banks'international debt is limited by a collateral
constraint that depends on their own net worth. The constraint may or may not bind. If it
does, the domestic interest rate rises above the world rate, and the exchange rate depreciates.
In that case, investment turns to be ine¢ ciently low. In addition, initial consumption and debt
depend on the likelihood of binding ...nancial constraints, as they determine the expected cost
of credit to households.




                                                7
2.1    Households

Households consume only tradables, and only at t = 0 and t = 2: Preferences are given by
expected utility, given by:
                                           U (C0 ) + E (C2 )

where Ct denotes consumption in period t;                 is a discount factor, U (:) is (for simplicity) a
CRRA function, and E (:) is the expectation operator.
   To express budget constraints, we take tradables as the numeraire. We assume that the
only sources of income for households are pro...ts from ...rms and banks, which are paid only
at t = 2: Hence, to ...nance consumption at t = 0, households borrow from domestic banks an
amount Lh
        0 = C0 at an interest rate R0 : In period t = 1; households re...nance their debts at

interest rate R1 ; borrowing Lh       h
                              1 = R0 L0 : Finally, in period t = 2 households receive pro...ts from

                                b          f
banks and ...rms (denoted by        and        ), repay their debts, and consume, so


                                                  b        f
                                      C2 =            +        R1 Lh
                                                                   1




   Finally, because there are no frictions in intermediation in the initial period, in any equilib-
rium the domestic interest rate R0 must equal the world rate, denoted by R0 . Combining these
considerations, the household'
                             s budget constraint can be written as:


                                                               b       f
                                     R0 R1 C0 + C2 =               +                                        (1)


                                                                                              b         f
   The household takes as given the interest rates R0 and R1 as well as pro...ts                  and       : In
equilibrium, the interest rate at which the household will have to roll over its debt in period
1; R1 , will be random. Denoting its expectation by E (R1 ); the ...rst order condition for initial
consumption is:
                                          U 0 (C0 ) = R0 E (R1 )                                            (2)

   The interpretation is the usual one: the household chooses initial consumption and debt by

                                                      8
equating the marginal utility of initial consumption to its discounted expected price. Here, the
relevant price is given by the two period interest rate, R0 R1 : Note that an increase in E (R1 )
leads to smaller initial consumption and borrowing.


2.2    Firms

At t = 2; competitive domestic ...rms produce Y2 tradable goods with capital K2 via a Cobb
Douglas function:
                                            Y2 = AK2

where 0 <       1:
   For production at t = 2; a typical ...rm purchases capital at t = 1; ...nancing the purchase
with a loan from domestic banks at rate R1 : Letting Q1 denote the price of capital, the ...rm
must then borrow from domestic banks an amount Lf
                                                1 given by:




                                            Lf
                                             1 = Q 1 K2




   At t = 2; ...rms repay their debts to domestic banks, and send pro...ts to the household, so:


                                       f
                                           = Y2       R1 Lf
                                                          1


                                           = AK2         R1 Q1 K2


   Hence the pro...t maximizing demand for capital is given by:


                                                  1
                                           AK2        = R1 Q1                                 (3)


   The interpretation is again standard: investment equates the marginal product of capital to
its cost. But note that the cost of capital includes not only its price Q1 but also the associated
...nancial cost, given by the domestic interest rate R1 .



                                                  9
2.3    Capital production

Capital is produced in period 1 via a CES aggregator function:

                                h                                                    i   =(   1)
                                    1=    (    1)=                      (      1)=
                         K2 =            IH          + (1         )1= IW

where IH and IW denote inputs of nontradables and tradables,                             is the elasticity of substitution
between them, and     is a constant in [0; 1]. As usual, we assume that                            > 0; and that   = 1 is
the Cobb Douglas case:
                                                        1
                                               K2 = IH IW

with   = 1=   (1     )1 :.
   Recalling that tradables is the numeraire, if                6= 1; the price of capital is then:


                                                                        1=(1     )
                                    Q=         X1     + (1          )


where X is the price of nontradables in terms of the tradable, which we will refer as the real
exchange rate. For   = 1;
                                                     Q=X                                                              (4)

   The optimal input of nontradables is then given by:


                                                            Q
                                              IH =                 K2
                                                            X

while the demand for tradables is given by:


                                              IW = (1           )Q K2




                                                        10
2.4     Banks

As indicated before, in each period t = 0; 1; domestic banks borrow from world capital markets
at rates Rt ; and lend to domestic households and ...rms at rates Rt . We assume that banks
are competitive. Financial intermediation is frictionless at t = 0; so equilibrium requires that
R0 = R0 , as mentioned. In contrast, banks are subject to a collateral constraint at t = 1: This
problem was discussed at length in CCV: we summarize its implications here.
   At t = 0; banks borrow some amount D0 from world capital markets and lend to households.
At t = 1; banks roll over loans to households, lend to ...rms, repay their own debts, and borrow
further from the world market to ...nance domestic loans. Also, banks receive endowments T
and N of tradables and nontradables respectively.
   Hence, the amount of loans that the bank can extend at t = 1 is given by:


                            L1 = T + X1 N + D1 + R0 Lh
                                                     0             R0 D0

                                = T + X1 N + D1


the last equality being warranted because, in any equilibrium, Lh
                                                                0 = D0 and R0 = R0 :

   Finally, at t = 2; banks collect debt repayments from households and ...rms, repay their own
debts, and send pro...ts to households:


                                          b
                                              = R1 L1   R1 D1


   As mentioned, at t = 1; also, banks face the ...nancial constraint


                                     R1 L1      R1 D1     R 1 L1                               (5)


where   is a random variable realized at period t = 1. This constraint can be justi...ed in various
ways. For example, one can assume that in period t = 1 domestic bankers can default on their
foreign debt and divert a fraction   of the payments made to the bank by ...rms. International

                                                  11
lenders will then only accept contracts that satisfy the above constraint. From this perspective,
a high realization of   may reect an exogenous tightening of international ...nancial conditions.
This can be seen as a sudden stop.
   The assumption that is random is a key departure from CCV. For concreteness, we assume
                                          (s)
that     can take n values, denoted by          ; s = 1; :::n; each with probability    s   > 0; and that this
                                                                           (1)                    (n)
is the only source of uncertainty in the model. We also impose                   =    > 0 and           =   < 1:
(Note that, to alleviate notation, the superscript s will be omitted when it is not needed.)
   The collateral constraint may or may not bind in equilibrium. If it does, we will sometimes
say that there is a ...nancial crisis. As we will see, a ...nancial crisis will be more likely when
turns out to be high. Importantly, however, the ...nancial constraint may not bind even if                    is
high; in other words, a sudden stop does not necessarily lead to a ...nancial crisis.
   If     is such that the collateral constraint does not bind, the cost of borrowing R1 must be
equal to R1 . In that case, the incentive constraint reduces to L1               D1    L1 , the bank makes
zero pro...ts, and lends any quantity less than or equal to the multiple 1= of its net worth:

                                                 1
                                         L1 2 [0; (T + X1 N )]


   If the collateral constraint binds, R1 > R1 : Combining the budget constraint of the bank
with the binding collateral constraint, the bank´s supply of loans is:

                                                    1
                                  L1 =                       (T + X1 N )
                                          1       (1     )

where     = R1 =R1 is the interest rate spread. Loan supply is a multiple of the bank´s net worth:
the leverage ratio,1= (1   (1    ) ), is greater than one and ...nite in equilibrium (assuming that
  < 1=(1       )). The previous expression indicates that banks leverage their capital to ...nance
loans.
   As in CCV, a real exchange rate depreciation (a fall in X1 ) reduces bank´s net worth and, in
a more novel aspect, an increase in the spread will increase the leverage ratio. As we will discuss


                                                        12
in the next section, a real exchange rate depreciation will increase the spread and therefore, the
leverage ratio.



3     Laissez Faire Equilibrium

In this section we describe equilibrium under laissez faire. As the only source of uncertainty
is ; it is convenient to start with the analysis of the continuation equilibrium, from t = 1;
which depends not only on the realized value of               but also on the economy'
                                                                                     s inherited debt
D0 . It turns out that, given     and D0 ; the collateral constraint may or may not bind. Hence
the distribution of continuation outcomes, and in particular of R1 ; depends on D0 : In turn,
D0 is determined by initial consumption and savings choices which, as we have seen, reect
expectations about R1 : Equilibrium is then determined by a ...xed point problem. The solution
has no closed form but is not too hard to illustrate numerically, as we do at the end of this
section.


3.1    Continuation Equilibrium
                                                        (s)
Consider the economy from t = 1 on, after          =          is realized. At this point, the economy has
an initial level of debt D0 = C0 . From then on, the continuation economy is essentially the
same as in CCV, so their results apply here. For convenience, here we describe CCV'
                                                                                  s analysis
for the case      = 1: Extending the analysis to       6= 1 is straightforward.
                                                                                          1
    With   = 1;the demand for nontradables is given by IH = (Q=X )K2 = X                      K2 , while the
supply of nontradables is equal to the bank'
                                           s endowment N . Equilibrium in the nontradables
market in period t = 1 is then given by IH = N; which implies a key link between investment
and the real exchange rate:


                                                   N       1
                                         K2 =             X1                                            (6)

    But recall that the demand for capital depends on its price, Q, and the domestic interest

                                                   13
rate R1 , as given by (3). Combining (3) with the preceding equation, and using (4), we obtain:

                                                                1       (1   )
                                              1            1
                               R1 = A                                                        (7)
                                          N                X1

   This is a key expression that connects domestic interest rates and the real exchange rate.
An increase in R1 reduces the demand for capital, and therefore, the demand for nontradables.
The fall in the demand for nontradables generates a real exchange rate depreciation (a fall in
X1 ).
   To complete the solution, we turn to the market for domestic loans. The demand for loans
in period t = 1 is given by the value of investment plus the amount of debt D0 = C0 that
households must roll over:
                                L1 = Lf    h
                                      1 + L1 = Q1 K2 + R0 C0


   From (6) and (4), however, we know that the value of investment depends on the real
exchange rate:
                                                       N
                                       Q1 K2 =                 X1

   Combining the last two expressions we see that loan demand is given by:

                                                           N
                                    L1 = R0 C0 +                X1


   Intuitively, a depreciation of the real exchange rate reduces loan demand in equilibrium. In
addition, higher initial consumption in t = 0 increases loan demand in period t = 1.
   The supply of loans depends on whether the credit constraint binds or not. To proceed,
note that if the credit constraint does not bind, the domestic interest rate must equal the world
rate, i.e. R1 = R1 : Then (7) gives the equilibrium exchange rate, denoted by X1f :

                                                                    1   (1   )
                                              1         1
                               R1 = A
                                          N            X1f



                                                  14
   It is easy to see that X1f is also the frictionless equilibrium exchange rate, i.e., the one that
would obtain in the absence of the collateral constraint (5). Likewise, the price of capital and
investment will be at their frictionless equilibrium values, which we denote with an f subscript.
   These observations and those of the previous section now imply that, when the ...nancial
constraint does not bind, the supply of loans must be given by any L1 such that:

                                                1
                                        L1 2 [0; (T + X1f N )]


   If the collateral constraint binds instead, R1 > R1 ; and the bank´s supply of loans will be:

                                                    1
                                   L1 =                          (T + X1 N )
                                            1     (1        )

where    = R1 =R1       1 is the spread between the domestic loan rate and the world rate. Noting
that, by (7),   is a function of the real exchange rate, the preceding equation gives loan supply
as a function of X1 :
   It follows that, when ...nancial constraints bind, the real exchange rate must be given by:

                                        N                         1
                            R0 C0 +             X1 =                        (T + X1 N )         (8)
                                                        1       (1      )

with
                                                                      +(1   )(1   )
                                                        X1f
                                      = R1 =R1 =
                                                        X1

   Finally, we see that the collateral constraint will not bind in the continuation equilibrium
if, at frictionless values, the demand for loans does not exceed the bank'
                                                                         s credit limit:

                                                                1
                                  R0 C0 + Q1f K2f                   (T + X1f N )




                                                        15
i.e. if     ^; where the threshold ^ is given by:


                                       ^=       T + X1f N
                                                                                                (9)
                                             R0 C0 + Q1f K2f

    Summarizing, if      ^; the continuation equilibrium is the frictionless outcome. But if   > ^;
investment, the domestic interest rate, and the exchange rate all adjust for the economy to sat-
isfy the collateral constraint. Intuitively, when the collateral constraint binds, investment falls
below its frictionless value, the interest rate spread widens, and the exchange rate depreciates.
This looks, in other words, like a crisis.

    As mentioned, the analysis here replicates that in CCV. But in this model, and crucially,
^ is determined endogenously. In particular, we see that ^ falls, and the probability of a crisis

increases, with C0 . This reects, of course, that an increase in C0 increases the amount that
households must roll over and, hence, the economy'
                                                 s demand for external credit in t = 1.
    More generally, the continuation equilibrium depends on the realization of      and on initial
consumption C0 . In particular, in any continuation equilibrium,




                                     R1 = R1 if           ^

                                         =       (C0 ; ) if      >^


where (C0 ; ) is the value of R1 that solves (8) and ^ is given in (9).


3.2       Equilibrium and Implications

Initial consumption and debt are determined by the Euler condition of the household, (2),
which becomes:                               2                                3
                                                         X
                           U 0 (C0 ) = R0 4R1 F (^) +                (C0 ; ) s 5
                                                          (s)
                                                                >^




                                                  16
where, recalling our assumptions about the distribution of ;

                                                          X
                                                F (^) =             s
                                                          (s)   ^



is the probability of no crisis.
      Noting that ^ is a function of C0 (by (9)), the expression can be seen as an equation in the
single unknown C0 . Given a solution C0 ; the continuation equilibrium is determined as in the
preceding subsection. In particular, a solution C0 determines ^ and the probability of crisis,
which is therefore endogenous.
      Whether the probability of crisis is zero, one, or something in between, depends on the
parameters of the model, and especially on the distribution of : If the distribution of            is very
favorable (for instance, if ;        are close to zero), the collateral constraint never binds, and the
continuation outcome is the frictionless equilibrium, regardless of the realization of : In other
cases, the probability of crisis is positive, and it can be one if the distribution of    is su¢ ciently
adverse.
      In order to give a avor of the behavior of the model, we compute outcomes for particular
parametrizations. We parametrize the model so that the frictionless C0 is always equal to one.
The details of the parametrization are presented in section 5. In a baseline parametrization,
C0 in laissez faire is 0.9635.
      Aspects of the continuation equilibrium are depicted in Figure 1.4 The ...gure shows that,
in the continuation equilibrium, ...nancial constraints do not bind if       is low, that is, if      ^=

0:3527: In that case, the real exchange rate, the domestic interest rate, and investment are all
at their frictionless values. For values of         larger than ^; ...nancial constraints bind. In that
region, the exchange rate depreciates, investment falls, and the interest spread increases. As
expected, these e¤ects are stronger the larger is :
      The laissez faire equilibrium depends on the parameters of the model in an intuitive way.
  4
      Figures are placed at the end of the paper.




                                                      17
To illustrate, Figure 2 describes the equilibrium crisis probability, the expected interest rate
(E (R1 )) and initial debt and consumption, as functions of the expected value of , keeping the
dispersion of   constant (i.e. taking   = E( )    h; = E ( ) + h; the ...gure describes equilibrium
outcomes as we vary E ( ); keeping h constant).
    As expected, if the mean value of      is small enough (less than 0:3 in the ...gure), ...nancial
constraints never bind. In this case, R1 is always equal to R1 = 1; so that E (R1 ) = 1: Initial
debt is then equal to its frictionless value (one). As the mean value of      rises, the probability
of binding ...nancial constraints goes up. Consequently, the equilibrium distribution of R1 shifts
to the right, and E (R1 ) goes up. Finally, initial consumption and debt go down, as expected
future domestic interest rates increase.
    Interestingly, an increase in ex ante uncertainty can result in an increase in the probability
of crisis. This is depicted in Figure 3, which displays equilibrium outcomes as functions of h;
keeping E ( ) constant. For this parameterization, if uncertainty is su¢ ciently small (i.e. h is
less than 0:01), ...nancial constraints never bind, and crisis do not occur. If, on the contrary,
uncertainty is large enough, crises happen with positive probability. E (R1 ) goes up, reecting
this fact.
    Notably, the ...gure shows that initial debt and consumption fall in response to an increase
in uncertainty. This is in response, of course, to higher expected interest rates. A crucial fact
is that the endogenous fall in initial debt is not su¢ cient, by itself, to eliminate the country'
                                                                                                 s
exposure to crises.



4     Optimal Reserves and Ex Post Policy

In our model economy, binding ...nancial constraints can cause the domestic rate of interest
to rise above the world rate. This implies that investment can be too low ex post, and also
that initial consumption and debt can be ine¢ ciently small. As noted in CCV, the resulting
ine¢ ciencies can be mitigated if the central bank provides liquidity when there is a ...nancial



                                                 18
crisis. However, in order to do so, the central bank must have ready access to the necessary
international liquidity.
   Arguably, considerations of this kind have been a main motivation for the accumulation of
international reserves in emerging economies. Hence it is of interest to examine the implications
of reserves accumulation in our model, and to ask about the determinants of the optimal
quantity of reserves. We turn to this question in the rest of the paper.


4.1      Equilibrium With Reserves Accumulation

To allow for the accumulation of reserves, we assume from now on that the government or
central bank has access to long term loans in the world market at t = 0: if it borrows F dollars
at t = 0; it must repay (1 + )R0 R1 F dollars at t = 2; where         0 is a "term premium". (It
will become clear that the more interesting case is    > 0).
   The central bank can invest its F reserves in the world market and earn Rt in periods t = 0
and t = 1: Therefore, in our setup, the central bank invests its international reserves in "liquid
instruments", as central banks do in reality.
   In this context, in period t = 1; it has the option to use the reserves to enact a policy aimed
at alleviating ...nancial frictions. To simplify the discussion, we assume that, if the ...nancial
constraint binds at t = 1; the central bank can lend but not borrow at that point.
   In this setting, several questions emerge: What are the implications of reserves accumulation
for equilibrium? What is the optimal level of reserves, and what are its determinants? Inter-
estingly, as we will see, the answers depend on the policies that the central bank implements
at t = 1: We initially focus on the case in which, at t = 1; the central bank provides a loan, of
size M    R0 F , to domestic banks (in terms of Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010), the central bank
provides liquidity facilities ). In CCV we showed that liquidity facilities are more e¤ective than
providing loans directly to households or ...rms, and that sterilized foreign exchange intervention
is equivalent to liquidity provision of one or the other kind (depending on the nature of the
sterilizing credit operation). The implications of di¤erent types of ex post policy for optimal


                                                19
reserves accumulation are discussed in the next section.
     As in CCV, we assume that central bank loans to domestic banks carry the world interest
rate R1 and that the repayment of these loans can be enforced perfectly. This means that the
banks'collateral constraint changes to


                              R1 L1     R1 (D1 + M )       R1 L1    R1 M


which implies that loans'supply is now constrained by

                                               1
                                L1                     (T + X1 N + M )
                                       1     (1    )

     Intuitively, there may be two cases. One can conjecture that the central bank might choose
F large enough to be able to eliminate completely the possibility of ...nancial frictions. This is
indeed possible if F is large enough.
     To see how large F needs to be to eliminate crises, note that if crises never occur, C0 = C0f ;
that is, the initial consumption and debt must be at their frictionless level. Since investment
and capital will also be at their frictionless levels, it follows that loan demand in period 1 will
be R0 C0f + Q1f K2f ; and the exchange rate will be X1f : Now, the minimum F that eliminates
crises, which we will denote by F ; must be such that the collateral constraint just binds when
 is at its highest possible value, which we have denoted by : This requires that,

                                               1
                             R0 C0f + Q1f K2f = (T + X1f N + R0 F )


or
                            R0 F = (R0 C0f + Q1f K2f )        (T + X1f N )

     Clearly, then, if the central bank accumulates F = F reserves, then crises will not occur.
But this may be too costly if         > 0: In fact, it is easy to check that such a policy results
in expected utility given by EUf           R0 R1 F ; :where EUf is expected utility in the frictionless

                                                    20
equilibrium. This utility level falls with     and F , and suggests that other choices of F < F
result in higher welfare.
   More generally, we will ask what is the optimal level of reserves for a central bank that
chooses F (and M ) to maximize the household'
                                            s expected utility, taking into account the cost
of reserves accumulation (in the spirit of Heller (1966)).
   First, we formally argue that the optimal level of reserves is less than F :


Proposition 1 If the term premium          = 0; it is optimal to choose F = F , driving the probab-
ility of crisis to zero. If   > 0; it is not optimal to eliminate crises completely.


   The proof of the proposition is obvious if          = 0: In the case     > 0; start by noting that,
in any continuation equilibrium, at t = 2 the central bank receives R1 M from banks, and
R1 (R0 F    M ) from investing the remainder in the world market. It therefore makes a loss of
 R1 R0 F; which we assume is covered with a lump sum tax on households. Since the tax does
not depend on M; we can assume without loss of generality that M = R0 F:
   Now, taking into consideration the aforementioned tax, it is straightforward to check that
that in any continuation equilibrium,


                          C2 = AK2      R1 Iw + R1 T      R1 R0 C0      R0 R1 F


   In the above expression, K2 ; Iw ; and C0 are seen as functions of F , determined by the
resulting equilibrium. Keeping this in mind, the expected value of choosing F is


              V (F ) = U (C0 ) + EC2

                      = U (C0 )       R1 R0 C0 + E [AK2        R1 (Iw     T )]    R0 R1 F




                                                  21
       If K2 ; Iw ; and C0 are di¤erentiable with respect to F; V (F ) will have a derivative given by:

                                                   dC0      d                 dIw
               V 0 (F ) = [U 0 (C0 )       R1 R0 ]     + E     [AK2 R1 Iw ] :                         R0 R1
                                                   dF      dIw                dF
                                                   dC0              dIw
                       = [U 0 (C0 )        R1 R0 ]     + E (R1 R1 )            R0 R1
                                                   dF               dF

the second equality being justi...ed by the fact that, in any continuation equilibrium, d(AK2 )=dIw =
R1
       This expression gives the marginal value of international reserves, and it is quite instructive.
A marginal increase in F will, in this model, help reducing R1 at times of crisis and, hence,
induce an increase in C0 : The impact on the household'
                                                      s utility is then given by dC0 =dF
times the "wedge" U 0 (C0 )              R1 R0 ; which is a measure of the cost of the distortion in initial
consumption. In addition, the increase in F and fall in R1 leads to an increase in borrowing
for investment. The marginal bene...t is given by dIw =dF multiplied by the wedge between the
marginal product of tradables input, given by R1 ; and the world cost of borrowing tradables,
R1 :
       Now consider the behavior of V 0 (F ) as F is close to F : It is easy to see that there must
be an " > 0 such that, if F is in the interval (F                    "; F ), ...nancial constraints bind only if
         (n)
  =            = : By the Implicit Function Theorem, one can then show that V (F ) is continuous
and di¤erentiable on the semi open interval (F                   "; F ]; the derivative being given by

                                                                                    n
                                                          dC0                     dIw
                       V 0 (F ) = [U 0 (C0 )    R1 R0 ]           n
                                                              + (R1      R1 )           n     R0 R1
                                                          dF                      dF

                          (n)                                           (n)
where Rn = (C;                         n
                                ) and Iw the value of Iw when       =         :
       Recall that, if F = F ; then U 0 (C0 ) = U 0 (C0f ) = R0 R1 and R1 = R1 : The Appendix also
        n
shows dIw =dF exists and is ...nite at F = F : Hence V 0 (F ) =                         R0 R1 < 0; and it cannot be
optimal to set F = F :

       The above argument is similar to others in international trade and public ...nance: at F = F ;


                                                            22
the bene...t of reducing F by a marginal amount is positive, while the cost, in terms of allowing
for a crisis to occur with small probability, is zero to ...rst order.
      The situation is depicted in Figure 4. The upper panel graphs the probability of crisis as a
function of F: As F increases, the probability falls, and it becomes zero if F is large enough.
The lower panel is a graph of V (F ); that is, of expected utility as a function of reserves. It is
apparent that the optimal level of reserves is less than F ; which allows for a positive probability
of crisis (about one half, in the ...gure). This is because the marginal bene...t of reserves becomes
smaller than their cost, given by the term premium.


4.2         Solving for Equilibrium

For        > 0; and 0 < F < F ; the analysis of equilibrium involves a straightforward extension of
the laissez faire case. Fix F in that range 0 < F < F : In equilibrium, there is ^ in ( , ) such
that ...nancial constraints bind if    > ^: This ^ must then satisfy:


                                                 1
                                R0 C0 + Q1f K2f = (T + X1f N + R0 F )
                                                 ^

recalling that Q1f ; K2f ; and X1f refer to frictionless values. Note that ^ depends on F and also
on C0 . We now show how to ...nd C0 , given F:
      In the continuation equilibrium, given              ^; ...nancial frictions do not bind, and ...nal

consumption is
                           C2 = AK2f     R1 (Iwf     T)       R1 R0 C0f   R0 R1 F

      If    > ^; the loan market equilibrium exchange rate is determined by

                                                     1
                            R0 C0 + Q1 K2 =                    (T + X1 N + R0 F )
                                              1    (1     )

with Q1 ; K2 ; Iw ; ; and R1 are determined once X1 is given, as discussed in the previous section.
      So, given C0 and F; one can compute ^ and the continuation equilibrium, including R1 : To



                                                     23
complete the derivation, C0 is pinned down by the Euler equation:


                                            U 0 (C0 ) = R0 ER1


     This analysis allows us to ...nd equilibrium and expected utility associated with any 0 <
F < F:
     It is instructive to study the condition for the optimal amount of reserves: rewrite V 0 (F ) = 0
as
                                                                    Iw        dC0
                [U 0 (C0 )      R1 R0 ]    R0 E [(R1           X
                                                        R1 ) ElD         ]        =     R0 R1 ;
                                                                   R0 C0      dF
        X          C0 dX1
where ElD =        X1 dC0
                             is the elasticity of the exchange rate X with respect to the initial debt
D0 = C0 , and      is the elasticity of substitution between home and foreign goods in the produc-
tion of capital.
     The previous expression it is clear that an optimal amount of reserves must balance, on the
one hand, the impact of an additional unit of international reserves on initial consumption and,
on the other hand, the e¤ect of the necessary increase in external debt on relative prices and
investment.
     In this model, the central bank accumulates reserves in order to provide international li-
quidity if ...nancial frictions bind. The availability of reserves and central bank policy a¤ects
private decisions, and in particular it can lead households to increase their initial consumption
and debt. This can be optimal, in spite of the fact that, if                 turns out to be large, the in-
creased inherited debt exacerbates ...nancial distortions and reduces the amount of investment.
In this sense, optimal reserves accumulation must balance underborrowing ex ante against the
possibility of ex post overborrowing.


4.3      The Role of the Government

Before leaving this section, it is worth emphasizing that, in this model, government intervention
is necessary, in the sense that the private sector would be unable to accomplish the same

                                                       24
outcomes.
         Suppose that domestic banks have access to the same international options as the govern-
ment. That is, any bank can borrow, say F 0 ; for two periods, at interest cost (1 + )R0 R1 : This
option would enable the bank to increase its loans in t = 1 by R0 F 0 : On the other hand, its
pro...ts at t = 2 are reduced by the service of the long term debt, so:


                         b
                             = R1 L1    R1 D1    (1 + )R0 R1 F 0

                             = R1 L1    R1 (L1   (T + X1 N + R0 F 0 ))      (1 + )R0 R1 F 0

                             = (R1     R1 )L1 + R1 (T + X1 N )       R0 R1 F 0


         This expression makes it clear that borrowing F 0 cannot increase bank pro...ts, and must
reduce them if          > 0: This is clear in states of nature in which R1 = R1 ; as then pro...ts reduce
          b
to            = R1 (T + X1 N )   R0 R1 F 0 : If R1 > R1 ; there is an additional, negative impact, in that
increases F 0 reduces the binding credit limit on L1 :5
         We conclude that no individual bank would set F 0 > 0: The private banking sector would
not accumulate liquidity in this model, even if doing so may turn out to be collectively bene...cial
ex post.



5             Determinants of the Optimal Level of Reserves

In this section we explore some determinants of the optimal level of reserves, emphasizing those
that have not been identi...ed in previous work (such as Jeanne and Ranciere 2011). For the
analysis, we resort to numerical exercises.
         We parametrize the model in order to illustrate its qualitative implications, rather than
providing quantitative lessons, for which this model is not yet ready. Most of the parameters
are set at conventional values. For example, we choose a baseline value of one for the world real
     5
    The collateral constraint becomes R1 L1      R1 D1    (1 + )R0 R1 F 0   R1 L1 ; which leads to L1   (1=(1
 (1   ))[T + X1 N      R0 F 0 ]:



                                                         25
interest rate Rt , t = 0; 1: The elasticity of substitution between tradables and nontradables in
capital production, ; is set to 1:4, while the share of the nontradable good in the production of
capital,    , is set to 0:5. The capital share   is assumed to be 0:8. In the baseline parametrization
we assume that       is distributed uniformly between 0.36 and 0.44 and , the term premium, is
equal to 0.02. We assume that U (C ) = C 1       =(1     ); with    = 2: The nontradable endowment is
equal to one while the tradables endowment is assumed to be zero. Choices for other parameters
are discussed below.


5.1    The Term Premium

In this model, an increase in the term premium            will generally lead to a fall in the optimal
amount of reserves, and hence an increase in the probability of crises. This is illustrated by
Figure 5.
   In the ...gure, the solid line graphs expected utility as a function of reserves F in the absence
of a term premium or, equivalently, assuming that            = 0. If      > 0; total expected utility is
just the vertical di¤erence between the solid graph and            R0 R1 F: The optimal level of reserves
is then given by the point on the solid graph that has slope             R0 R1 : The dashed (green) ray
in the graph has that slope for       = Rt = 1 and       = 0:02; while the dotted (red) ray assumes
  = 0:04: In each case, the optimal value of F is that which maximizes the distance between the
solid line and the corresponding ray. It is then obvious that an increase in          leads to a smaller
value for the optimal F: This accords with intuition and the previous results of e.g. Jeanne and
Ranciere (2011).
   Interestingly, as noted in the introduction, during the period 2004-2008 there was a signi-
...cant decrease in the term premium in global ...nancial markets. Our model then suggests that
that decrease may have been a main factor underlying the observed increase in foreign reserves
before the global crisis.




                                                    26
5.2    Mean Value of Shocks

An increase in the expected value of , keeping the dispersion of       constant, typically increases
the probability of binding ...nancial constraints. One would then expect the bene...ts of liquidity
provision in crises become stronger, and the optimal amount of reserves to increase.
   Figure 6 provides an illustration. The solid line (blue with circles) graphs V (F ) for E ( ) =
0:38; while the dashed dotted (green) line is V (F ) for E ( ) = 0:40: As anticipated, for any
F , expected utility is higher when E ( ) is lower. Also, for F su¢ ciently high, the two lines
converge. This is because a su¢ ciently large F completely eliminates crises in both cases, and
secures the same outcome (the frictionless one).
   For this parametrization, the ...gure also tell us that optimal reserves are higher for higher
E ( ): It should be noted, however, that this result may not be general since, as apparent from
the ...gure, it depends on details about the curvature of V (F ) or, more precisely, on how V 0 (F )
changes with E ( ): This underscores the crucial point that the optimal level of reserves depends
not on their total bene...ts, but on their marginal bene...ts, relative their marginal cost.
   For a suggestive interpretation, one can take smaller E ( ) as a characteristic of more de-
veloped ...nancial markets. In this sense, the model is consistent with the view that ...nancial
development justi...es smaller international reserves accumulation. Evidence for such a view is
presented by Dominguez (2010).


5.3    Impact of Ex Ante Uncertainty

Now consider the case of a mean preserving spread of : We have assumed that             is uniformly
distributed in [ ; ]; with    = E( )      h, and      = E ( ) + h. Intuitively, for given E ( ), an
increase in h must increase the probability of crisis, and justify higher reserves. An illustration
is given by Figure 7, which ...xes E ( ) (at 0:4) and plots V (F ) for h = 0:04 (solid blue line) and
h = 0:06 (broken green line). The analysis of the ...gure is the same as that of changes in E ( ):
In this case, higher uncertainty justi...es increased accumulation of reserves.
   In our model, increased ex ante uncertainty raises the probability of crises. In response,

                                                 27
it is optimal for the central bank to accumulate more reserves, so as to be ready to provide
liquidity to domestic markets in case the crisis actually occurs. This story is quite consistent
with observed increases in international reserves in the period prior to the Lehman bankrupcy.
In fact, the increase in uncertainty regarding future ...nancial conditions was stated by central
banks as a crucial element to accelerate international reserves accumulation.


5.4    Reserves accumulation and ex post tools

In our model, the reason for the central bank to accumulate reserves, even if reserves are costly,
is to alleviate ...nancial constraints, if they bind, using reserves to provide credit to domestic
agents. It follows that the optimal quantity of reserves should depend on the e¤ectiveness of
government intervention and the precise way the central bank intervenes.
   In order to illustrate this point, consider the implications of changing the way the central
bank provides liquidity in a crisis. So far we have assumed that, when the collateral constraint
binds, the central bank lends its reserves to domestic banks (liquidity facilities). Instead, assume
a policy of direct lending : in a crisis, the central bank lends directly to households and ...rms.
   In any continuation equilibrium, the analysis of CCV applies, and implies that direct lending
is less e¤ective than liquidity facilities. The argument is as follows: we assume that at t = 1;
the central bank increases the domestic supply of credit by its reserves R0 F ; in period t = 2,
the government collects R1 F in debt repayments and pays its foreign debt. Extending the
arguments of previous sections, it can be shown that if R1 = R1 , total loan supply is given by


                                          1
                                  L1 2 [0; (T + X1f N ) + R0 F ]

while, if R1 > R1 ; loan supply is the sum of domestic bank loans plus government loans:

                                           1
                              L1 =                 (T + X1 N ) + R0 F
                                     1   (1    )

   Under direct lending, each dollar of reserves is used at t = 1 to increase loan supply by one

                                                   28
unit. In contrast, with liquidity facilities, loan supply in a crisis is (T + X1 N + R0 F )=[1 (1   ) ]
and, therefore, larger for any given F: This reects leverage: under liquidity facilities, each dollar
in reserves is lent to banks, which then leverage it to borrow 1=[1       (1    ) ] > 1 dollars in the
world market. Hence direct lending is less e¤ective, and results in lower welfare than liquidity
facilities, for any given amount of reserves.
    The implications for the optimal amount of reserves, however, are ambiguous. This is (again)
because, while welfare is lower under direct lending than under liquidity facilities for any F , the
di¤erence in the optimal level of reserves depends on the comparison of the marginal bene...t of
reserves under each policy, relative their cost.
    This is illustrated by Figure 8. The upper panel plots V (F ) under liquidity facilities (solid
line) and direct lending (broken line), under the assumption             = 0:02: As implied by our
analysis, the two policies deliver the same expected welfare for F = 0 (i.e. no intervention)
and F large enough (since crises are eliminated in both cases). For intermediate values of F;
liquidity facilities deliver higher welfare than direct lending. Also, in that case, the optimal
level of reserves is higher with a direct lending policy.
    The lower panel of Figure 8 assumes a higher            = 0:04: One can check that, for any F;
the height of each curve in that panel is lower than the corresponding one in the upper panel.
The key observation, however, is that the optimal level of reserves is now smaller under direct
lending. The intuition is that, if    is higher, reserves under both policies must fall because of
the higher cost. However, the fall is more pronounced under direct lending, which is the less
e¤ective policy.



6     Final Remarks

Our analysis can obviously be extended in several interesting and potentially fruitful directions.
One is to allow for endogenous currency mismatches. In our model we could, for example,
assume that in the initial period the household can borrow in either tradables or nontradables.



                                                   29
In such a situation, real exchange movements would redistribute wealth between domestic
banks and households, altering equilibrium outcomes when ...nancial frictions bind. While this
extension is then straightforward, the solution is involved, so we leave it for future work.
   A second direction would be to develop a multiperiod version of our model and examine
implications for dynamics. Such an extension would also allow the model to be calibrated or
estimated. This would also be a substantial project.
   Finally, it may be of interest to introduce nominal rigidities so one can examine the in-
teraction of reserves accumulation not only with unconventional central policy but also with
conventional policy. It may be the case, for example, that reserves are instrumental in giving
the central bank additional policy tools in case the conventional tool, the policy interest rate,
falls to its lower bound of zero. These ideas seem worth pursuing in future research.




                                               30
References

 [1] Benigno, Gianluca, Chris Otrok, Alessandro Rebucci, and Eric Young, 2013, "Financial
    Crises and Macro Prudential Policies", Journal of International Economics, 89, 2, 453-470

 [2] Bianchi, Javier, 2011, "Overborrowing and Systemic Externalities in the Business Cycle",
    American Economic Review 101, 7, 3400-3426

 [3] Bianchi, Javier, and Enrique Mendoza, 2018, "Optimal Time Consistent Macroprudential
    Policy", Journal of Political Economy 126, 2, 588-633

 [4] Bocola, Luigi, and Guido Lorenzoni, 2018, "Financial Crises, Dollarization, and Lending
    of Last Resort in Open Economies", Working Paper, Northwestern University

 [5] Caballero, Ricardo J. & Panageas, Stavros, 2004. "Contingent Reserves Management: An
    Applied Framework" NBER Working Paper 10786.

 [6] Céspedes, Luis Felipe, Roberto Chang, and Andrés Velasco. 2017. Financial Intermedi-
    ation, Exchange Rates, and Unconventional Policies in an Open Economy. Journal of
    International Economics, 108, S76-S86.

 [7] Céspedes, Luis Felipe, Roberto Chang, and Andrés Velasco. 2014. "Is Ination Targeting
    Still on Target?", International Finance 17(2): 185-208.

 [8] Chang, Roberto, 2018, "Foreign Exchange Intervention Redux", NBER Working Paper
    22463

 [9] Dominguez, Kathryn, 2010, "International Reserves and Underdeveloped Capital Mar-
    kets", in NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2009, edited by Lucrezia Reich-
    lin and Kenneth West, University of Chicago Press for the NBER, 193-221.

[10] Durdu, Bora, Enrique Mendoza, and Marco Terrones, 2011, "Precautionary demand for
    foreign assets in Sudden Stop economies: An assessment of the New Mercantilism", Journal
    of Development Economics 89, 194-209

                                             31
[11] Gertler, Mark, and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, 2010, "Financial Intermediation and Credit Policy
    in Business Cycle Analysis,"In: Handbook of Monetary Economics 3A, Benjamin Friedman
    and Michael Woodford (editors), Elsevier

[12] Jeanne, O. and A. Korinek, 2017, "Macroprudential Regulation Versus Mopping Up After
    the Crash", working paper, Johns Hopkins, NBER and CEPR

[13] Jeanne, O., and R. Ranciere, 2011, "The Optimal Level of Reserves for Emerging Market
    Countries: A New Formula and Some Applications", Economic Journal, 121, 905-930

[14] Korinek, Anton, and Alep Simsek, 2016, "Liquidity Trap and Excessive Leverage", Amer-
    ican Economic Review 106, 3, 699-738




                                            32
   Appendix
   Here we prove the claims at the end of the proof of Proposition 1 in the text. It will be
useful to de...ne some terms with more precision. Under our assumptions, for given F          0; a
competitive equilibrium is given by:


     an initial debt/consumption value C0

     continuation equilibrium values, summarized by the real exchange rate X1s and interest
     rate R1s ; s = 1; ::n

     a cuto¤ value ^ such that such that ...nancial constraints do not bind if         ^; but they

     bind if   >^


   These values must solve:


  1. The cuto¤ property:

                                                1
                               R0 C0 + Q1f K2f = (T + X1f N + R0 F )
                                                ^


  2. Optimal initial consumption:
                                                       "                    #
                                                            X
                                                            n
                                       u0 (C0 ) = R0              R1s   s
                                                            s=1



  3. Continuation equilibrium equations: if      s     ^;


                                                 R1s = R1



   and, if not, R1s and X1s solve:


                               N                   1
                     R0 C0 +         X1s =                       (T + X1s N + R0 F )
                                             1   (1     )    s


                                                 33
      with
                                                                        +(1         )(1        )
                                                                X1f
                                      s   = R1s =R1 =
                                                                X1s

      As in the text, F be the value of reserves at which all constraints cease to be binding. It is
obvious from the above equations that there is some " > 0 such that, for any F in (F                                    "; F );
                                            n
constraints only bind when            =         :This means that, for any F in (F                          "; F ); C0 and the
continuation equilibrium in state s = n satisfy the following three equations:


                                      C0     = R0 R1 [(1               n)   +       n n]



                                  N
                       R0 C0 +             X1n [1       (1        )    n]       T         X1n N = R0 F

                                                                 +(1    )(1     )
                                                     X1f
                                             n   =
                                                     X1n

      Importantly, these equations are also satis...ed at F = F : The Implicit Function Theorem
then implies that we can de...ne (C0 ; X1n ;         1n )   as functions of F in (F                   "; F ], and also examine
their derivatives at each such F; by examining the above equations.
      Now, regarding C0 and      n    as functions of X1n (using the ...rst and third equations of the
preceding system), we can see the left hand side of the second equation as a function of X1n ; say
                                                                                           0
 (X1n ): The derivative of X1n with respect of F then exists if                                (X1n ) is not zero at X1n = X1f
(and F = F ). It is straightforward to show that this is the case.
      (In case, here is a proof of the last assertion: the derivative is

                           N
                                  N
                                d n                         N                                       dC0
                           +               R0 C0f +              X1f (1               ) + R0
                               dX1n                                                                 d n

                                                                                                                      d n
where we have used that, at F = F , all variables are at their frictionless values, and                              dX1n
                                                                                                                            and
dC0
d n
      are evaluated at frictionless values as well.




                                                            34
   Now, from
                                 X1n d n
                                         =      ( + (1           )(1         ))
                                  n X1n

it follows that, at frictionless values,

                                  d n                                        1
                                      =    ( + (1         )(1          ))
                                 dX1n                                       X1f

   In turn, since
                                            n dC0         1
                                                  =             n
                                           C0 d n

it follows that, at frictionless values,

                                           dC0        1
                                               =          n C0f
                                           d n

   Combining all of this, the derivative can be written as


                    0               1
                        (X1n ) = N [ ( + (1        )( + (1          )(1           )    1]
                                                               R0 C0f                           1
                                 +( + (1        )(1       ))          (1              )+    n
                                                                X1f

                                                                                                    0
   It is straightforward to check that both terms are strictly positive. Hence                          (X1n ) > 0;
which means that dX1n =dF > 0 and ...nite, as claimed.)
                                                                  n
   The existence of dX1n =dF obviously implies the existence of dIw =dF: This completes the
proof.




                                                   35
               1.9

               1.8




  xrate
               1.7

               1.6

               1.5
                     0.33       0.34   0.35    0.36   0.37   0.38   0.39   0.4
                                              Theta
Spread         1.1



           1.05



                1
                     0.33       0.34   0.35    0.36   0.37   0.38   0.39   0.4
                                              Theta
                3
  Investment




               2.9


               2.8


               2.7
                     0.33       0.34   0.35    0.36   0.37   0.38   0.39   0.4
                                              Theta




                            Figure 1: Continuation Equilibrium




                                              36
                                               Probability of Crises




  Crisis Probability
                        1



                       0.5



                        0
                             0.3       0.32    0.34                  0.36   0.38   0.4   0.42
                                                    E(Theta)
                                              Expected Interest Rate
                   1.15

                       1.1
E(R1)



                   1.05

                        1
                             0.3       0.32    0.34                  0.36   0.38   0.4   0.42
                                                       E(Theta)
                                                      Initial Debt
                        1

                   0.98
C0




                   0.96

                   0.94
                             0.3       0.32    0.34                  0.36   0.38   0.4   0.42
                                                       E(Theta)




                                   Figure 2: Equilibrium and E ( )




                                                      37
                                                       Probability of Crises




 Crisis Probability
                       1



                      0.5



                       0
                            0   0.01   0.02   0.03   0.04       0.05       0.06   0.07   0.08   0.09   0.1
                                                               h
                                                     Expected Interest Rate
                  1.06
E(R1)
                  1.04

                  1.02

                       1
                            0   0.01   0.02   0.03   0.04       0.05       0.06   0.07   0.08   0.09   0.1
                                                                  h
                                                            Initial Debt
                  1.01

                       1
C0




                  0.99

                  0.98
                            0   0.01   0.02   0.03   0.04       0.05       0.06   0.07   0.08   0.09   0.1
                                                                 h




                                Figure 3: Equilibrium and Uncertainty




                                                             38
                                1.2

                                  1




          Crisis Probability
                                0.8

                                0.6

                                0.4

                                0.2

                                  0

                               -0.2
                                      0   0.05   0.1   0.15   0.2        0.25   0.3   0.35   0.4   0.45
                                                                     F

                           0.656

                           0.654
    Expected Utility



                           0.652

                               0.65

                           0.648

                           0.646

                           0.644

                           0.642
                                      0   0.05   0.1   0.15   0.2        0.25   0.3   0.35   0.4   0.45
                                                                     F




Figure 4: Reserves, Crisis Probability, and Expected Utility




                                                                    39
0.665




 0.66




0.655




 0.65




0.645




 0.64
        0   0.05    0.1   0.15   0.2        0.25   0.3   0.35   0.4   0.45




                   Figure 5: The Term Premium




                                       40
                   0 .6 5 8

                                                                                            L o w E xp e c te d T h e ta
                                                                                            H ig h E xp e c te d T h e ta
                   0 .6 5 6




                   0 .6 5 4




Expected Utility   0 .6 5 2




                    0 .6 5




                   0 .6 4 8




                   0 .6 4 6




                   0 .6 4 4




                   0 .6 4 2
                          0   0 .0 5       0 .1   0 .1 5                    0 .2   0 .2 5       0 .3                0 .3 5

                                                           R e s e rv e s




                                       Figure 6: Reserves and E ( )




                                                           41
                   0.656
                                                                                            Low Dispersion
                                                                                            High Dispersion
                   0.654



                   0.652



Expected Utility    0.65



                   0.648



                   0.646



                   0.644



                   0.642



                    0.64



                   0.638
                           0   0.05       0.1   0.15   0.2              0.25   0.3   0.35     0.4             0.45
                                                             Reserves




                                      Figure 7: The Impact of Uncertainty




                                                             42
                            0.656
                                                                                                                    Direct Lending
                                                                                                                    Liq Facilities
                            0.654



                            0.652



                                   0.65




     Expected Utility
                            0.648



                            0.646



                            0.644



                            0.642



                                   0.64



                            0.638
                                             0         0.1     0.2    0.3    0.4      0.5     0.6    0.7     0.8       0.9              1
                                                                                   Reserves




                                           0.655
                                                                                                                   Direct Lending
                                                                                                                   Liq Facilities
                                            0.65



                                           0.645
                        Expected Utility




                                            0.64



                                           0.635



                                            0.63



                                           0.625



                                            0.62



                                           0.615
                                                   0     0.1    0.2    0.3   0.4      0.5     0.6   0.7    0.8       0.9            1
                                                                                   Reserves




Figure 8: Optimal Reserves and Ex Post Policies,                                                                             = 0:02; 0:04




                                                                                   43
