                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 TRENDS IN US INCOME AND WEALTH INEQUALITY:
                      REVISING AFTER THE REVISIONISTS

                                       Emmanuel Saez
                                       Gabriel Zucman

                                     Working Paper 27921
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27921


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2020




We thank Danny Yagan, Owen Zidar, and Eric Zwick for helpful discussions and comments.
Funding from the Center for Equitable Growth at UC Berkeley, the Sandler foundation, and the
Stone foundation is thankfully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Emmanuel Saez and Gabriel Zucman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Trends in US Income and Wealth Inequality: Revising After the Revisionists
Emmanuel Saez and Gabriel Zucman
NBER Working Paper No. 27921
October 2020
JEL No. D31,E25,H26

                                          ABSTRACT

Recent studies argue that US inequality has increased less than previously thought, in particular
due to a more modest rise of wealth and capital income at the top (Smith et al., 2019; Smith,
Zidar and Zwick, 2020; Auten and Splinter, 2019). We examine the claims made in these papers
point by point, separating genuine improvements from arguments that do not appear to us well
grounded empirically or conceptually. Taking stock of this body of work, and factoring in other
improvements, we provide a comprehensive update of our estimates of US income and wealth
inequality. Although some of the points raised by the revisionists are valuable, the core
quantitative findings of this literature do not appear to be supported by the data. The low capital
share of private business income estimated in Smith et al. (2019) is not consistent with the large
capital stock of these businesses. In Smith, Zidar and Zwick (2020), the interest rate assigned to
the wealthy is higher than in the datasets where both income and wealth can be observed, leading
to downward biased top wealth shares; capitalizing equities using almost only dividends
dramatically underestimates the wealth of billionaires relative to the Forbes 400. In Auten and
Splinter (2019), business profits earned by the top 1% but not taxable (due in particular to
generous depreciation rules) are classified as tax evasion; tax evasion is then allocated to the
bottom 99% based on an erroneous reading of random audit data. Our revised series show a rise
of inequality similar to Saez and Zucman (2016) and Piketty, Saez, and Zucman (2018) while
allowing for a more granular depiction of the composition of wealth and income at the top.


Emmanuel Saez
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
saez@econ.berkeley.edu

Gabriel Zucman
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
530 Evans Hall, #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
zucman@berkeley.edu
1     Introduction
By how much has inequality increased in the United States? And what is the contribution of
capital to the dynamic of top-end inequality? A recent series of studies argues that inequality
has increased less than previously thought, in particular due to a more modest increase of wealth
and capital income at the top. Smith, Zidar and Zwick (2020) write that the rise of the top 0.1%
share of wealth is "half as large as prior estimates." Classifying "three-quarters of pass-through
profit as human capital income," Smith, Yagan, Zidar, and Smith (2019) find that labor income
is more prevalent at the top than in the estimates of Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2018). Auten
and Splinter (2019) argue that the top 1% income share has not increased at all on a post-tax
basis since the 1960s.
    This paper makes two contributions. First, we examine the claims made in these papers
point by point, separating genuine improvements from arguments that do not appear well-
grounded empirically or conceptually. Second, taking stock of this body of work, and factoring
in numerous other improvements, we update our estimates of US income and wealth inequality.
In so doing, we provide a comprehensive reconciliation between the revisionists and the findings
in Saez and Zucman (2016) and Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2018).
    Empirically, we draw on all available public data sources about income and wealth in the
United States, including new sources which had not been exploited before in this context, such
as business income statements and balance sheets, and foundation tax returns. Conceptually, we
clarify key aspects of the methodology involved in distributing the totality of household wealth
and national income, what we call distributional national accounts. In particular, building
on the heterogeneous returns model in Saez and Zucman (2016, Section IV), we discuss how
the capitalization method should be applied to estimate wealth from reported income when
rates of return are heterogeneous within an asset class. Building on the prototype distributional
national accounts of Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2018), we discuss the sources of the gap between
taxable business income and the true economic income of businesses, and how this gap should
be allocated.
    Our main findings can be summarized as follows. Although some of the points raised by the
revisionists are valuable, the core quantitative findings of this literature are not supported by the
data. First, the low capital share of private business income estimated in Smith et al. (2019) is
not consistent with the large capital stock of these businesses. Classifying 25% of pass-through
business income as deriving from capital income implies an implausibly low rate of return to
capital in these businesses, especially in large firms. Second, in Smith, Zidar and Zwick (2020),


                                                 1
the interest rate assigned to the wealthy is higher than in the datasets where both income and
wealth can be observed, leading to downward biased top wealth shares. Moreover, equities
are capitalized using almost only dividends, which dramatically underestimates the wealth of
billionaires relative to the Forbes 400 list. Last, in Auten and Splinter (2019), business profits
earned by the top 1% but not taxable (due in particular to increasingly generous depreciation
rules) are classified as tax evasion; tax evasion is then allocated to the bottom 99% based on an
erroneous reading of random audit data.
   There are also well-founded results in the studies we consider. Smith, Yagan, Zidar, and
Zwick (2019) show that not 100% of S-corporation profits should be seen as capital income,
as is standard practice (e.g., in the official national accounts). Smith, Zidar and Zwick (2019)
provide evidence that business wealth is more important at the top than estimated in Saez
and Zucman (2016), in particular because the official Financial Accounts estimates of private
business wealth are conservative. Auten and Splinter (2019) raise a valuable point about the
allocation of untaxed pension income.
   Taking stock of these findings, and factoring in many other improvements--reflecting newly
available or updated source data, improved estimation procedures, and a greater harmonization
of methods across countries (Alvaredo et al. 2020)--we provide a comprehensive revision of
our estimates of the distribution of US income, wealth, taxes, and government spending. Our
revised series show a rise of inequality similar to Saez and Zucman (2016) and Piketty, Saez,
and Zucman (2018), while allowing for a more granular depiction of the composition of wealth
and income at the top. Figure 1 compares our revised estimate of the 0.1% wealth share to
the original series printed in Saez and Zucman (2016). Figure 2 compares our revised estimate
of the top 1% share of pre-tax national income to the original series printed in Piketty, Saez
and Zucman (2018). The top 1% pre-tax income share has increased by 8.5 points from 1978
to 2014 (the last year printed in Piketty, Saez and Zucman, 2018), as opposed to 9.4 points in
the original printed series. Since all our estimates are anchored to the official national account
totals, differences between the revised and original series reflect in part (especially for recent
years) the effect of revisions that have been made to the national accounts themselves--such
as the 2020 comprehensive revision of the National Income and Product Accounts (Bureau of
Economic Analysis, 2020) and a recent increase in the estimate of the value of real estate in the
Financial Accounts (Gallin et al. 2019). Other differences reflect methodological improvements,
as documented point by point in the last section of this paper. As shown in Figures 1 and 2,
the original and revised series track each other closely.
   The three most notable differences are the following. First, our revised wealth series incorpo-

                                                2
rate a higher interest rate for the wealthy than for the average household since 2008, consistent
with the evidence from matched estates-income tax data from 1997 to 2012 analyzed in Saez
and Zucman (2016) and extended to 2016 in Smith, Zidar and Zwick (2019). As a result, in
our revised series interest-bearing assets play a smaller role in the portfolios of the rich than
previously reported. Interest-bearing assets account for 25% of the wealth of the top 1% in
2018, consistent with the asset composition seen in the official Federal Reserve Distributional
Financial Accounts. Second, private business assets play a more prominent role at the top, fol-
lowing new estimates in Saez and Zucman (2020) of the labor/capital split of business income.
This revision also improves consistency with official Federal Reserve data from the Survey of
Consumer Finances. Last, our revised income series include an improved allocation of untaxed
pension income, leading to less pension income going to the top 1%.
   Two active areas of research--and sources of potential future revisions--deserve to be noted.
First, in the Financial Accounts to which our wealth estimates are anchored, the valuation of
private business wealth is conservative. If and when the Federal Reserve upgrades its estimates of
business wealth, and since this form of wealth is highly concentrated, our top wealth shares will
rise. Second, in the national income and product accounts, tax evasion is included on the basis
of random individual income tax audits. Random audits, however, are currently not designed
to detect tax evasion occurring in pass-through businesses and via foreign legal and financial
intermediaries. Recent work suggests that incorporating these forms of evasion is important to
improve the accuracy of tax gap and income distribution estimates (Alstadsæter et al., 2019;
Guyton et al., 2020). For these reasons, our updated inequality estimates should also be seen
as conservative.
   More broadly, we stress the need for more and improved public statistics on inequality. We
could and should do better to measure US wealth inequality than rely on a triennial survey
of 6,200 families (the Survey of Consumer Finances) or indirectly infer asset ownership based
on income flows (the capitalization method). There is a growing gap between the richness of
individual data collected by corporations (such as Google, Facebook, Visa or Mastercard) for
private commercial purposes and the paucity of what is available to governments for public
statistical purposes. A merit of a well-administered wealth tax is that it would provide better
information on the distribution of wealth, one of the most hotly debated issue in democratic
societies (Saez and Zucman, 2019). Even without a wealth tax, the tax administration could
collect information on assets and debts from third parties (banks, pension funds, brokers, etc.),
as is already done for income, and ownership of closely held corporations. These data could
be used to estimate individual wealth--as done in a country like Denmark--and allow for the

                                                3
construction of more accurate Distributional National Accounts.
        The rest of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses the wealth inequality estimates
of Smith, Zidar and Zwick (2020). Section 3 discusses the income inequality estimates of Auten
and Splinter (2019). Section 4 discusses the capital vs. labor income share estimates of Smith
et al. (2019). In Section 5, we present our revised series of wealth and income inequality. These
updated series are posted online, along with the list of improvements implemented since the
publication of the original Saez and Zucman (2016) and Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2018) series.
Section 6 draws some conclusion from our experience responding to these studies.


2         Estimating Wealth Inequality By Capitalizing Income
Smith, Zidar and Zwick (2020),1 henceforth SZZ, present estimates of US wealth inequality using
the same data (income tax returns) and methodology (income capitalization) as in Saez and
Zucman (2016), modifying the benchmark Saez and Zucman (2016) capitalization technique.
They find a more modest rise in the top 0.1% wealth share than in Saez and Zucman (2016).
        There are two main issues with the SZZ methodology. First, SZZ under-estimate the interest-
bearing assets of the wealthy because they assume the interest rate earned by the rich is much
higher than in the existing evidence. Second, the SZZ under-estimate billionaire equity wealth,
because they infer equity wealth based on dividend income despite the fact that the wealthiest
Americans often own equities that do not pay dividends. Once the conceptually correct interest
rate is used to capitalize interest and the SZZ estimates are fixed to match the estimates of
billionaire wealth from Forbes, the SZZ estimates are very close to the benchmark Saez and
Zucman (2016) series.

2.1        Consistency Check
Before 2001, the SZZ and original Saez and Zucman (2016) estimates are very close in level
and trend.2 The estimates diverge starting around 2001. The top 0.1% wealth share (among
adults, with wealth equally shared between spouses) has increased by 4.1 points from 2001 to
2016 according to the original Saez and Zucman (2016) estimates as opposed to 0.9 points in
SZZ.
        To assess whether the modifications of the Saez and Zucman (2016) methodology favored
    1
     "Top Wealth in the United States: New Estimates and Implications for Taxing the Rich," 24 April
2020. This section is a revised and abridged version of detailed comments on SZZ available online at http:
//gabriel-zucman.eu/files/SZ2020CommentsOnSZZ2.pdf.
   2
     Between 1978 and 2001, the SZZ top 0.1% wealth share rises 6.9 points vs. 8.0 points in the benchmark



                                                     4
by SZZ are well-founded, it is useful to compare the SZZ results to the existing evidence about
the dynamic of top-end US wealth since 2001.
    According to the public-use Survey of Consumer Finances data, the top 0.1% wealth share
has increased by 4.3 points between 2001 and 2016. The SCF by design excludes the Forbes
400. Appending the Forbes 400 to the public-use SCF data, the top 0.1% wealth share has
increased by 5.0 points. This increase is in line with the rise found using the Saez and Zucman
(2016) methodology, but not consistent with the quasi-stagnation in SZZ.
    Similarly, the SZZ estimates are not consistent with the rise in the top 1% wealth share
observed since the turn of the 21st century in the official Federal Reserve data on wealth in-
equality. According to the official SCF results,3 the top 1% wealth share rose 6.2 points between
2001 and 2016, and by 6.7 points when adding the Forbes 400. According to the Federal Re-
serve Distributional Financial Accounts, the top 1% wealth share rose 5.2 points over the same
period.4 By contrast, according to SZZ the top 1% wealth share rose only 1.4 points.
    The SZZ estimates are also inconsistent with the level of top-end wealth observed in the SCF.
Figure 3 shows the amount of wealth owned by tax units with more than $50 million in net
wealth in the public-use SCF 2016 micro-file, appended to the 2016 Forbes 400 list--following
SZZ who also focus on this $50 million threshold to assess the revenue potential of a wealth tax.
As shown by Figure 3, SZZ under-estimate the wealth of tax units with more than $50 million
by a factor of 1.7 compared to existing sources. SZZ have both less billionaire wealth than in
Forbes, and less wealth for tax units with wealth between $50 million and $1 billion than in the
SCF, in both cases by a factor of 1.7. By contrast, as shown by Figure 3, the benchmark Saez
and Zucman (2016) methodology is consistent with the level of wealth above $50 million found
in both Forbes and the SCF.
    Methodologically, there are two main differences between SZZ and Saez and Zucman (2016).
The first involves the choice of the interest rate used to capitalize interest income for the wealthy.
The second involves the weight to put on dividends vs. capital gains when estimating equity
wealth. We discuss these two issues conceptually and empirically in turn.


Saez and Zucman (2016) series, starting from the same level in 1978.
   3
     By official SCF results, we mean the results as published in the Federal Reserve Bulletin, e.g., here box 3
pp. 10-11, Figure B. These official results are based on the internal-use SCF files, which slightly differ from the
public-use files.
   4
     The Distributional Financial Accounts do not report statistics for the top 0.1%.




                                                        5
2.2     Interest Rate Capitalization
Saez and Zucman (2016) and SZZ both infer interest-bearing assets by capitalizing interest in-
come. In the benchmark Saez and Zucman (2016) series, income is capitalized homogeneously.
Within an asset class, the same rate of return--e.g., for interest-bearing assets, the same interest
rate--is assumed across the distribution. The choice to rely on homogeneous capitalization for
benchmark series was motivated by the fact that this method generally produces correct esti-
mates of top wealth shares in the data sources where both income and wealth can be observed:
the Survey of Consumer Finances, linked income and estates tax data, and tax returns of pri-
vate foundations. In the Saez and Zucman (2016) appendix series, interest income is capitalized
heterogeneously: the wealthy are assigned a higher interest rate than average.5 This was moti-
vated by the fact that in matched estates-income tax data, an interest rate premium for the rich
seemed to have appeared at the top after the Great Recession (Saez and Zucman, 2016, Figure
V.B). Bricker et al. (2018) also construct series of wealth inequality by capitalizing income tax
returns using heterogeneous interest rates, for instance assigning the 10-year Treasury yield to
the top 1% interest-income earners.
    SZZ depart in two ways from the sensitivity analysis conducted in the Saez and Zucman
(2016) appendix series. First, in addition to assuming that the top 1% earns the 10-year
Treasury yield, they assume that the top 0.1% earns an even higher rate, the Moody's long-
maturity corporate bond Aaa rate. Second, unlike Saez and Zucman (2016) who rank tax units
by total income or estimated wealth, SZZ apply heterogeneous interest rates to tax units ranked
by interest income, as in Bricker et al. (2018, Figure 4).
    The difference in SZZ relative to earlier work is to use the Moody's Aaa rate at the very
top. The Moody's Aaa rate is an index of high-quality corporate bonds with maturity of at
least 20 years. It has averaged 6.0% over 2000­2009 and 4.2% over 2010­2016. As one moves
up the wealth distribution, all tax units end up being in the top 0.1% of the interest income
distribution (e.g., virtually all the top 0.01% by wealth ends up in the top 0.1% by interest, a
group 10 times more numerous) and thus all the wealthiest tax units in the SZZ methodology
end up having the Moody's Aaa rate.6


   5
     Appendix Tables B40, B41, B41b in Saez and Zucman (2016) assign the 10-year Treasury yield to the top
1% by income; Appendix Table B41c assigns the interest premium seen in matched estates-income tax data to
the top 0.1% by wealth; the results are discussed in Saez and Zucman (2016, pp. 549-551).
   6
     Section 2.2.4 below discusses re-ranking when moving from the interest to the wealth distribution in detail.




                                                       6
2.2.1      Evidence on the Interest Rate of the Wealthy

Do the wealthiest investors earn the Moody's Aaa yield on average on their interest-bearing
assets? A systematic investigation of all the available evidence on this issue delivers a clear
answer: "no."


Linked estate and income tax returns. The only administrative data where both income
and wealth can be observed is estates tax returns matched to income tax returns. Saez and
Zucman (2016) linked estates tax returns filed over the period 1997­2012 to the income tax
return of decedents the year prior to death, and used this dataset to study how interest rates
vary with wealth. SZZ successfully replicate this analysis and extend it to 2016. Figure 4 shows
the result from the Saez and Zucman (2016) analysis extended by SZZ.7 It also depicts the
macro interest rate, obtained by dividing total taxable interest income by the stock of assets
paying taxable interest.8 For comparison, the figure depicts the Moody's Aaa rate and the
10-year Treasury rate. Over the 2001-2016 period, the interest rate observed among the largest
estates was always much below the Moody's Aaa rate. It was also almost always below the
10-year Treasury yield.
       One potential concern with matched estates-income tax data is that decedents may not be
representative of the entire population. This issue is addressed in the SZZ series by weighting
estate data by the inverse mortality rate by age and gender to be representative of the entire
population. This is a valuable addition compared to Saez and Zucman (2016) who did not
weight by the inverse mortality rate (see Saez and Zucman, 2016, pp. 549, and SZZ footnote
43). Interest rates in the weighted decedent sample are virtually identical to the interest rate in
the unweighted sample used by Saez and Zucman (2016), showing that young decedents have
low interest rates like elderly decedents.


Survey of Consumer Finances. The SCF provides information on interest income (as re-
ported on tax returns) in addition to wealth asset by asset. Thus one can estimate how interest
rates vary with wealth in the survey. As a previous literature has established, there is no evi-
dence in the SCF that the wealthy earn the Moody's Aaa interest rate. Bricker, Henriques and
Hansen (2018, Table 1, col. 2) found interest rates for the top one percent richest households
of 3.0% on average for the 2001, 2004, and 2007 waves of the SCF (close to the average SCF
   7
     The estimates are taken from Saez and Zucman (2016, Appendix Table C6b) for 2000­2011 and from SZZ
Appendix Figure A.15 Panel A for 2012­2016.
   8
     Relative to Saez and Zucman (2016), this aggregate interest rate is revised to exclude bond mutual funds
from the denominator, as such bonds pay taxable dividends and not interest.


                                                     7
interest rate of 2.8% over these 3 years), and slightly higher-than-average interest rates at the
top in the 2010, 2013 and 2016 SCF (2.0% for the top one percent wealthiest households vs.
1.5% on average in the SCF, a difference of a factor of 1.3), in all cases way below the Moody's
Aaa rate. Saez and Zucman (2019, Figure 3) also showed that the interest rate of the top 1%
wealthiest is only moderately higher than the aggregate interest rate in the SCF, and always
below the Moody's Aaa rate.
       This earlier evidence did not perfectly map interest income to interest-bearing assets. We
have re-examined SCF data to provide the tightest connection possible between taxable interest
income and asset classes generating taxable interest. First, we have removed all fixed-income
claims held through mutual funds (money market mutual funds, bond mutual funds, the portion
of balanced mutual funds in bonds, and other mutual funds), as interest received from such
mutual fund is called a dividend-interest and reported as (non-qualified) dividend income on
tax returns.9 Second, we have removed checking accounts and pre-paid cards, as such assets
generally do not pay interest. In Saez and Zucman (2016), these assets are estimated based on
their observable distribution in the SCF, not by capitalizing interest. Third, we have added the
portion of trusts invested in interest-bearing assets.10
       Last and more importantly, our re-analysis of the SCF has uncovered a key issue when
estimating interest rates in this survey. It is not possible in the SCF to identify the fixed-
income claims held by pass-through businesses (the bank deposits, notes receivable, bonds,
loans, repurchase agreements, etc., owned by S-corporations and partnerships). These assets
generate taxable interest for their owners in the SCF, because interest flows to their individual
income tax return, and respondents are asked about interest as reported on their individual
income tax return. But these assets are typically counted as business assets in the SCF--not
as bank deposits, bonds, loans, etc., owned by households. This means that interest rates
estimated in the SCF are upward biased.11 Moreover, because partnerships and S-corporation
assets are highly concentrated, SCF interest rates are more upward biased at the top.
       Consider for example a hedge fund manager, who owns a stake of $100 million in her fund
(a partnership), half of which is invested in fixed-income claims with a yield of 1.5%.12 She also
   9
     In turn, in our revised wealth inequality series, we now estimate holdings in such mutual funds by capitalizing
non-qualified dividends instead of interest as originally in Saez and Zucman (2016).
  10
     Before 2004, there is no breakdown of trust assets into fixed-income claim vs. equities in the SCF. We
classify 50% of trust assets as fixed-income claims (as about half of trust assets are in fixed-income claims when
such breakdown is available starting in 2004).
  11
     This also implies that the SCF business asset category includes fixed-income claims (and other securities) that
are not classified as such in the Financial Accounts, an important point recently made by Bricker and Volz (2020).
  12
     According to Federal Reserve balance sheets published in September 2020 (Financial Accounts Table
B.101.f), US domestic hedge funds held about $2 trillion in financial assets in 2016, of which $1 trillion in fixed-


                                                         8
directly owns certificates of deposits worth $10 million with an interest rate of 1.0%. In the SCF,
$100 million in business wealth and $10 million in fixed-income claims are recorded. In that
person's tax return like in the SCF, there is $850,000 in interest income (corresponding to the
pro-rata interest earned by the fund, $50 million times 1.5%, plus interest earned on certificates
of deposits). In the SCF this person thus has an observed interest rate of 8.5% ($850,000 / $10
million), much higher than her true interest rate of 1.4% ($850,000 / $60 million).
    This issue is quantitatively significant because interest flowing from pass-through businesses
is large and has been rising fast. Figure 5 shows that about 30% of taxable interest flows
from partnerships and S-corporations in 2016, up from 10%­15% in the 1990s.13 If all the
corresponding assets are classified as business wealth in the SCF, average SCF interest rates are
over-stated by a factor of 1.4, more so at the top where pass-through income is prevalent, with
a bias rising over time.
    Figure 6 depicts the interest rate earned on average and by the top 1% wealthiest households
in the SCF after taking into account these considerations. This is the interest rate on assets
that generate taxable interest.14 We partially address the issue of pass-through businesses by
subtracting interest earned via pass-throughs from reported interest income, using the aggregate
ratio of interest earned from pass-throughs to total interest (Figure 5) and assuming that this
ratio is constant across the wealth distribution. By construction this correction has no effect
on interest rate differentials observed in the SCF (it only affects the level of interest rates). As
shown by Figure 6, and consistent with earlier analysis (Bricker et al., 2018; Saez and Zucman,
2019) the interest rate of the rich follows the average interest rate, except over the 2007-2016
period when a small interest rate premium arises at the top. The interest rate of the top
1% wealthiest households is consistently 1.4 times higher than the overall interest rate after
the Great Recession. Taking into account the fact that interest earned via pass-throughs is
likely concentrated among the wealthy would reduce the small interest rate premium of wealthy
income claims, half of which were zero- or low-yield instruments (foreign currency, deposits, cash and other cash
equivalents, money market fund shares, repurchase agreements, and Treasury securities).
   13
      In 2011, Cooper et al. (2016) report that about $22 billion was paid as taxable interest by partnerships to
individuals (around 7% of all partnership income paid to individuals is interest (Figure 8), and about 35% of
partnership income is paid to individuals (Figure 3), so out of a total of $895 billion in partnership income in
2011 (p. 122), 0.07 x 0.35 x $895 = $22 billion was paid as interest to households). In addition, according to IRS
statistics, an extra $11 billion was distributed by S-corporations as taxable interest, for a total of $33 billion in
pass-through interest income, i.e., 28% of the total taxable interest income in forms 1040 line 8a ($120.1 billion
in 2011).
   14
      Such assets include saving accounts ("saving"), money market accounts ("mmda"), call accounts at brokerage
firms ("call"), certificate of deposits ("cds"), saving bonds ("savbnd"), all bond directly held ("bond") that are
not tax exempt ("notxbnd"), and fixed-income claims held through trusts. It excludes all fixed-income claims
held through mutual funds as such assets pay dividends and not interest for tax purposes.



                                                         9
households in the SCF. The interest rate of the rich is always well below the Moody's Aaa
rate.15


Foundation tax returns. Another source of information on the rate of return of very wealthy
investors comes from public foundation tax returns. In these tax returns, interest from bonds is
lumped with dividends from equities, and thus it is not directly possible to compute the interest
rate on fixed-income claims. However, a number of foundations, including the Bill and Melinda
Gates foundation, publish holdings on a security-by-security basis, which makes it possible to
separate interest from dividends.
       We focus here on the wealthiest foundation (the Gates foundation); a comprehensive analysis
of all other foundations is provided in Section 2.2.3 below. We merged each equity position of the
Gates foundation to its dividend yield (from Morningstar), allowing us to estimate separately
the dividends and interest received by the foundation. We find that the interest rate of the
Gates Foundation was 1.6% in 2016. Specifically, the Gates foundation owned $12.3 billion in
bonds and other interest-bearing assets (other than saving and temporary cash investments),
covering a wide range of issues and maturities--US government bonds, foreign government
bonds, mortgage-backed securities, corporate bonds; long term and short term. The foundation
earned $207 million in interest on this portfolio, i.e., an interest rate of 1.7%. Moreover, the
Gates foundation owned $636 million in saving and temporary cash investments (which are
recorded separately in foundation tax returns), which yielded 0.14% ($0.8 million in interest).
Combining bonds with saving and temporary cash investments, the overall interest rate earned
by the Gates foundation on all its interest-bearing assets was 1.6% in 2016--way below the
Moody's Aaa rate of 3.67%.


Publicly listed corporations. To further assess the plausibility of the hypothesis that the
wealthiest Americans earn the Moody's Aaa interest rate on their fixed-income claims, as in the
SZZ methodology, it is useful to look at the interest rate earned by the largest private holders
of fixed-income claims: publicly listed corporations. Figure 7 shows the average interest rate
earned by listed companies on their interest-bearing assets (cash, deposits, and fixed-income
portfolio securities), as estimated in Compustat. Figure 8 shows this graph separately for four
of the largest holders of fixed-income claims: Apple, Microsoft, Alphabet (Google), and Pfizer.
In each case, the interest rate of large listed corporations is very close to the aggregate interest
  15
    The interest rate of the top 0.1% in the SCF is more erratic, sometimes lower and sometimes higher than
the interest rate of the top 1%. This is most likely due to sampling noise, since there are only about 300 SCF
households in the top 0.1% of the wealth distribution.


                                                     10
rate used in the benchmark Saez and Zucman (2016) capitalization method, and much below
the Moody's Aaa rate.
       Consider, for example, the case of Apple. According to its 2016 annual 10-K, Apple earned
$4.0 billion in interest. The company owned $237.5 billion in cash, cash equivalent, and mar-
ketable securities (of which $132 billion in corporate bonds, $42 billion in US Treasury bonds,
$19 billion in mortgage and asset-back securities, $8.6 billion in cash). The interest rate earned
by Apple on this portfolio of fixed-income claims was thus 1.7%, much below the Moody's Aaa
yield of 3.67%. In most years, Apple's interest rate has been usually close to the aggregate
interest rate used in the benchmark Saez and Zucman (2016) capitalization method. The same
patterns can be observed for the other major holders of fixed-income claims (Figure 8).


S-corporations. Another source of information on how interest rates vary with wealth comes
from the tax returns of S-corporations. Using publicly available SOI tabulations of S-corporations
tax returns, we compute interest rates by dividing taxable interest by the sum of cash, US gov-
ernment obligations, loans to shareholders, and mortgage & real estate loans. The results are
presented in Figure 9. In 2016, S-corporations had an average interest rate of 1.0%. This inter-
est rate rose from 0.5% for the smallest S-corporations (with less than $1 million in total assets)
to 1.3% for S-corporations with assets in between $10 and $100 million, before falling back to
1.0% for the S-corporations with more than $100 million in total assets.16
       We can also focus on S-corporations which are holding companies. These S-corporations
are akin to incorporated wealthy households. They owned $109 billion in fixed-income claims
generating taxable interest, and earned 1.4 billion in taxable interest, a rate of return of 1.3%.
       These interest rates should be seen as upper bound, as our measure of interest-bearing assets
excludes notes receivables (which cannot be isolated from account receivables) and the fraction
of other current assets invested in fixed-income securities (which cannot be isolated from other
current assets). Even this upper bound delivers low interest rates, including for the largest
S-corporations and for holding companies that are the legal owners of the portfolios of very rich
households.


Summary. There is no data source where wealthy investors earn an average interest rate
remotely close to the Moody's Aaa rate, no matter how wealthy the investor. As shown by
Figure 10, whether one looks at matched-estates income tax (covering individuals with wealth
  16
    S-corporations with more than $100 million in total assets had on average $77 million in interest-bearing
assets.



                                                     11
in the tens and hundreds of millions of dollars), S-corporations (with wealth in the hundreds
of millions of dollars), listed corporations (with wealth in the billions of dollars), the wealthiest
foundation (with wealth in the tens of billions of dollars), or the wealthiest corporation (with
wealth in the hundreds of billions of dollars), the interest rate is in a range of 1.0%­1.7% in
2016. In the revised Saez and Zucman (2016) series presented in this paper, we assume that
the wealthiest individuals have the interest rate premium seen in matched estates-income tax
data, i.e., an interest rate of close to 1.5% in 2016.
       Why do the wealthiest investors earn less than the Moody's Aaa rate on average? The
Moody's Aaa rate is only representative of a small share of all interest-bearing assets. First, it
only includes corporate bonds; it excludes government bonds that pay lower yields for a given
maturity. Second, it only includes corporate bonds with a maturity of 20 years or more. Bonds
with a shorter maturities pay an interest rate significantly lower. This explains why the Moody's
Aaa rate is higher than other corporate bond benchmarks that include shorter maturities. For
example, the ICE Bank of America AAA US Corporate Index yield was 2.57% in 2016. Third,
wealthy investors own (directly and indirectly through partnerships) interest-bearing assets
other than bonds, such as saving accounts, certificates of deposits, and repurchase agreements,
which pay lower interest rates. Wealthy investors value the liquidity and low price risk of
short-term assets, explaining why they invest only a fraction of their fixed-income portfolio into
long-term corporate bonds.17
       SZZ justify the use of a very high interest rate to capitalize interest income as follows. They
note that although the interest rate they assume is higher than the interest rate r of people
at the top of the wealth distribution, it is similar to the interest rate r
                                                                          ¯ of people at the top of
the interest income distribution. From there, SZZ assume that using r
                                                                    ¯ and ranking by interest
income is the appropriate way to capitalize interest when returns are heterogeneous. SZZ do
not formally demonstrate that capitalizing interest using r
                                                          ¯ leads to unbiased estimates, or even
informally discuss why this might be the case, or what the biases with such a method might
be.18 The fact that top-interest income earners have a high interest rate r
                                                                          ¯, higher than r, is
  17
     Note that the relatively low average interest rate of the wealthiest investors is consistent with the high rates
of return recorded by certain fixed-income investments funds. For instance, a hedge fund can borrow money
and invest in low-yield bonds. With a high enough leverage, the return from such an investment strategy can
be high, despite the fact that the fund only holds low-yield securities. For the capitalization method, what
matters is the interest rate on assets and the interest rate on liabilities separately, because interest received and
interest paid by hedge funds both pass through to investors, and hedge funds' assets and liabilities both show
up separately in the household balance sheet of the Financial Accounts.
  18
     SZZ defend their approach in their appendix J by arguing that it is "more practically useful" to apply
heterogeneous returns to bins of interest income, since interest income is observable in the data and wealth is not.
But this argument conflates two issues--what is the conceptually correct return to apply, and how, practically,
to implement the capitalization method. Conceptually, as we show below, the interest rate to apply is the


                                                         12
unsurprising. It's selection: people are at the top of the interest income distribution because
they have high interest rate. It's also a consequence of measurement errors. In the 2001 SCF,
for example, the top 0.1% interest income earners have a 20% interest rate--an implausibly high
rate due to data inconsistencies, such as mis-classification of non-interest income as interest or
under-reporting of interest-bearing assets (as in the hedge fund example described above).
    We now show conceptually and empirically that using the interest rate of top interest earners,
r
¯, to capitalize interest income when interest rates are heterogeneous is conceptually incorrect
and generates a first-order downward bias in top wealth shares.

2.2.2    Capitalizing Interest Using r vs. r
                                           ¯: Model

Saez and Zucman (2016) formally discuss biases in the capitalization method when returns are
idiosyncratic (Section IV.A), biases when returns are correlated with wealth (Section IV.B),
and how theoretical biases change with multiple asset classes. Building on this earlier work, we
provide here a model that allows one to consider these three issues simultaneously. We then
examine theoretical biases that arise when using the rate of return of the wealthy vs. the rate
of return of high interest earners.
    To preview the conclusion: using as SZZ the rate on return of high interest earners, r
                                                                                         ¯,
generates a downward bias in estimated top wealth shares that is first order in the share of
bonds in the wealth of the wealthy. By contrast, using the rate of return of the wealthy, r,
generates an upward bias that is only second order in the share of bonds in the wealth of the
wealthy. Therefore, zero first-order bias requires using r, the interest rate of the wealthy, as in
the updated Saez and Zucman (2016) series presented in this paper.


Formal model and assumptions. In a population of size one, individual i has wealth Wi .
We assume that Wi is Pareto distributed above percentile p0 so that

                               P r(Wi  W ) = 1 - F (W ) = p0 · (Wp0 /W )a

with Wp0 the wealth threshold at percentile p0 (think of p0 as the top 5%). The goal is to
estimate the share of wealth shp owned by the top p percentile (where p is a percentile above
p0 , for example the top 1% or top 0.1%).
    We assume that there are two asset classes: interest-bearing assets and other assets. For
interest rate of the wealthy. Practically, one can apply this rate to the wealthy by proceeding by iteration, as
explained in Bricker et al. (2018, pp. 17-18) and done in the updated Saez and Zucman (2016) series presented
in this paper (see section 5.1 below). Capitalizing interest using the rate of top-interest earners is conceptually
incorrect; ranking people by interest is not more practically useful than alternatives.


                                                        13
short, we call interest-bearing assets simply "bonds". Individual i's share of bonds in her wealth
Wi is denoted by i . To zoom in on the issue of how to estimate bond wealth, we assume that
returns on bonds are heterogeneous while the other asset class can be estimated perfectly (either
because the rate of return is constant for these other assets or because the value of these other
assets is observed perfectly). Let ri be the rate of return on bonds of person i. Bond wealth of
person i is i Wi and interest income is ri i Wi .
       Denote by r the average rate of return of the wealthy within percentile p and by r
                                                                                        ¯ the rate of
return of top interest earners (those in the top p percentile of the interest income distribution).
Empirically, based on matched estates-income tax data and the SCF, r
                                                                   ¯ is much higher than r,
around 2-3 times as high in recent years. The bias in SZZ precisely arises because of a large
gap between r and r
                  ¯.
       In the general population, Wi , i , and ri may be correlated in complex ways. It is natural,
however, to assume that the distribution of i and ri conditional on wealth Wi converges at
the top of the wealth distribution. Let us further assume for tractability that i and ri are
iid within the top p percentile of the wealth distribution.19 To prove our results the following
lemma is necessary:


Lemma: Suppose Wi is Pareto distributed with Pareto parameter a (above percentile p0 ). Let
Wi be a transformation of Wi such that Wi = ei Wi that preserves means (EWi = EWi ) and
such that 0  ei  e
                 ¯ is bounded and independent of Wi (within the top p0 percentile of Wi ).
Then Wi = ei Wi is also Pareto distributed with parameter a at the top (above e
                                                                              ¯Wp0 ) and the
top shares of Wi and Wi (above percentile p of their respective distributions) are related by
                                                                     1
                                               shp = shp · (Eea
                                                              i) .
                                                                a



In words, the top wealth share for W  is corrected with the power mean of ei with coefficient a.

Proof. Let F  (W  ) denote the distribution of Wi . We have:
                                           e
                                           ¯                                      e
                                                                                  ¯
  1 - F  ( W ) = P r ( e i Wi  W ) =             P r(Wi  W/ei )dE (ei ) =                p0 · (ei Wp0 /W )a dE (ei ).
                                         ei =0                                   ei =0

where the second equality uses the assumption that Wi is Pareto distributed and independent
of ei .20 Therefore, we have:
                                                        e
                                                        ¯
                   1 - F  (W ) = p0 · (Wp0 /W )a ·             ea                             a
                                                                i dE (ei ) = (1 - F (W )) · Eei .
                                                       ei =0
  19
      To obtain closed-form formulas, we do not need to assume that i is uncorrelated with ri but this assumption
is needed to sign biases.
   20
      Note that as ei is bounded above, Wi /ei will fall in the top tail p0 as long as Wi /e
                                                                                           ¯  Wp0 .

                                                       14
Therefore Wi is also Pareto distributed with the same parameter a (and this calculation goes
                      ¯Wp0 ). Since a Pareto distribution is a power function, any multiplica-
through as long as W  e
tive disturbance factors out multiplicatively. From this, it follows that the percentile p of Wi
                                                   1                                                                     1
                       
and Wi are related by Wp = (Eea
                              i ) · Wp and therefore that shp = shp · (Eei ) as stated.
                                 a
                                                                         a a            21



       Suppose we capitalize interest using r, the average interest rate of the wealthy--the method
we favor. Bond wealth of person i is i Wi , interest income of person i is ri i Wi which capitalizes
into ri i Wi /r. Other wealth (1 - i )Wi is observed or perfectly estimated. Hence, estimated
wealth for person i is Wi = (i ri /r + 1 - i )Wi . Applying the lemma with ei = i ri /r + 1 - i ,
we obtain:


Top wealth share using the average interest rate r of the wealthy:
                                                                                   1
                         shSZ                              a a
                           p = shp · (E [(1 - i + i ri /r ) ])  shp , with r = Eri                                                     (1)

There is an upward bias because the power mean of (1 - i + i ri /r) is higher than the straight
mean itself equal to 1, a point made formally by Saez and Zucman (2016, p. 540) in the special
case i  1.
       Suppose instead we capitalize interest using r
                                                    ¯, the average interest rate of high interest earn-
ers, as in SZZ. In this case, estimated wealth for person i is Wi = (i ri /r
                                                                           ¯ + 1 - i )Wi . Applying
                          ¯ + 1 - i , we obtain:
the lemma with ei = i ri /r


Top wealth share using the interest rate r
                                         ¯ of high interest income earners:
                                                                                                      a
                                                                            1                      Eri
                    shSZZ
                      p                              ¯)a ]) a , with r
                          = shp · (E [(1 - i + i ri /r               ¯=                             a-1 > r = Eri                      (2)
                                                                                                  Eri
                     a    a-1
Proof. Proving r
               ¯ = Eri /Eri   goes as follows. Let yp be the p percentile threshold in the
distribution of interest income yi = ri i Wi . Then:

                                 r i  i W i y p
                                                  ri i Wi         ri ,i
                                                                          ri i     Wi yp /(ri i )
                                                                                                    Wi dF (Wi )
                          r
                          ¯=                                =
                                  r i  i W i y p
                                                   i Wi            ri ,i
                                                                           i     Wi yp /(ri i )
                                                                                                  Wi dF (Wi )
                     a
with dF (Wi ) = p0 aWp 0
                         /Wi1+a Paretian and independent of ri and i in the upper tail. Hence
                                                                 a a                a-1 a                 a           a-1
routine computations show that r
                               ¯=                      ri ,i
                                                                ri i /     ri ,i
                                                                                   ri  i =          ri
                                                                                                         ri /   ri
                                                                                                                     ri   where the latter
equality uses the fact that i and ri are independent at the top (if they are not, one can only
use the first equality).
                                                                                                         1                              1
  21                                                           a
       Formally, 1 - F (Wp ) = p = 1 - F  (Wp
                                            
                                              ) = p0 · (Wp0 /Wp ) · Eea            a a        a                  a a
                                                                      i = p0 · ((Eei ) Wp0 /Wp ) = 1 - F (Wp /(Eei ) )



                                                                    15
   Equations (1) and (2) provide a simple way to estimate the relative biases of the two methods.
                                                            ¯ = r for all i and both methods
Obviously, if ri is homogeneous in the population then ri = r
                                                                                     a-1
generate no bias. Theoretically with dispersion, r
                                                 ¯ is the average of ri weighted by ri   that are
                            ¯ > r. Empirically, r
larger for large ri so that r                   ¯ is two to three times higher than r since the
highest interest earners are also selected on high ri .
   Capitalizing interest using r, the method we favor, uses the same r as the ri in the expectation
so ri /r averages to one. The SZZ method, by contrast, uses a much higher r
                                                                          ¯ than the average
ri so that ri /r averages to r/r
                               ¯ which is typically below 1/2, creating downward bias. In words,
the SZZ method attributes too little bond wealth at the top because it uses too high a rate of
return. The formulas, however, do not have a straight mean but a power mean with coefficient
a. As a > 1, the power mean is more than the straight mean, creating an upward bias in both
cases.
   To assess the magnitude of the net bias, it is useful to consider the case of a small bond
share (so that i which averages to  is fairly small relative to 1 and is independent of ri ).
In that case, the bias when capitalizing using r is second order in  . By contrast, the bias is
first order in  when capitalizing using r
                                        ¯ as in SZZ. Formally, with i small, when capitalizing
using r we have (1 - i + i ri /r)a  1 + ai (ri /r - 1) and hence [E (1 - i + i ri /r)a ]1/a 
(1 + aE (ri /r - 1))1/a = 1. There is no first-order bias. By contrast with the SZZ methodology
using r                         ¯)a  1 + ai (ri /r
      ¯, we have (1 - i + i ri /r                                                   ¯)a ]1/a 
                                                 ¯ - 1) and hence [E (1 - i + i ri /r
             ¯ - 1)]1/a = 1 -  (1 - r/r
[1 + aE (ri /r                        ¯). There is a first-order bias in the share of bonds  .
Intuitively, when the share of bonds is small, ranking with or without estimated bonds is pretty
much the same, and therefore to a first approximation the SZZ method just creates a straight
downwards bias, as it uses too high a return.


Simple illustrative and calibrated example. Suppose the individual rate of return ri is
either r
       ¯ > 0 with probability  or 0 with probability 1 - . Only a fraction  of the wealthy
has interest income. The average rate is r = r
                                             ¯ while the rate on high interest earners is r
                                                                                          ¯.
Suppose that i =  is constant. In this case, it is easy to show that:

                                                                             1
                                                                         a
                                                                             a
                     shSZ
                       p    = shp · (1 - ) · (1 -  )a +  · 1 -  +                ,
                                                                  

                                                                   1
                              shSZZ
                                p   = shp · ((1 - ) · (1 -  )a + ) a .
                      1
              
so that Wp = Wp /(Eea
                    i) .
                      a




                                                 16
       Take  = 0.5 (i.e., r
                          ¯ = 2 · r) and a = 1.5. For  = 20% (a number close to SZZ's preferred
estimates), then shSZ
                   p  = 1.01 · shp : the power mean upper bias is second-order, only 1%. By
contrast, shSZZ
            p   = 0.902 · shp , so that the bias is almost exactly due to imputing only half of
the bond wealth to the wealthy (10% instead of 20%) because of using a rate of return twice
too high. For  = 40%, shSZ
                        p = 1.04 · shp : the power mean upper bias grows four times as large

to 4% (as it is second-order in  ). By contrast, shSZZ
                                                   p   = 0.812 · shp so that the first order bias
(of 20%) continues to largely dominate.
       To sum up: When interest rates are heterogeneous and higher on average among the wealthy,
capitalizing interest income using the interest rate of top-interest income earners r
                                                                                    ¯ generates
a large downward bias in estimated top wealth shares. Thus, the SZZ methodology produces
downward-biased top wealth shares by construction.

2.2.3      Capitalizing Interest Using r vs. r
                                             ¯: Empirical Illustration With the Case of
           Foundations

We now confirm this theory by applying it to US foundations. Foundation data are more
adapted than the SCF, because, as we have seen, it is impossible to measure the value of all
assets generating taxable interest in the SCF.
       Foundations are required to report assets and income on their annual 990 tax forms.22
On the asset side, they report the balance on all interest-bearing saving deposits. On the
income side, they report interest income earned specifically on such accounts.23 We assume that
wealth excluding this savings deposit component is perfectly observed. We can then estimate
savings deposits balances using interest income and the various capitalization strategies we have
discussed.
       Figure 11 depicts the interest rate on savings accounts of US foundations from 1990 to 2016.
The first series in dark blue circles depicts the interest rate when using all foundations (total
interest earned summed across all foundations divided by total savings accounts, i.e., interest
rate weighting by savings account size). The second series in orange diamonds depicts the
interest rate of the top 1% wealthiest foundations (this is r of the theory). These two series
track each other very closely: wealthy foundations do not earn a higher interest rate on savings
accounts than average. The third series in grey straight line depicts the revised Saez and Zucman
(2016) interest rate used to capitalize interest income on individual income tax returns. This
  22
     These data are available at
https://www.irs.gov/statistics/soi-tax-stats-private-foundations-harmonized-microdata-files-ascii.
  23
     Unfortunately, while foundations report separately on the asset side (1) government bonds, (2) corporate
bonds, (3) mortgage and notes, (4) equity, on the income side, they report jointly interest and dividends earned
on these asset classes (see above).

                                                   17
series tracks fairly closely the interest rate earned by foundations (overall and wealthy ones)
on their savings accounts. The fourth series in yellow triangles depicts the interest rate of the
top 1% interest-earning foundations (this is r
                                             ¯ of the theory). This interest rate is much higher
due to selection as high interest income selects both on savings accounts size and interest rate.
It is comparable in magnitude to the Moody's Aaa interest rate (depicted in dashed line as
the fifth series). This graph is similar to the SCF results presented by SZZ showing that top
interest-earners have a much higher interest rate than the wealthy. It has the advantage of being
cleaner, as the interest reported by foundations corresponds exactly to the asset class of savings
deposits, allowing us to provide a compelling test of the various capitalization methodologies.24
       Next, we can apply the various capitalization methods for savings accounts. Figure 12
depicts the share of total foundation wealth owned by the top 1% foundations, ranked by size
of net wealth. The first series in solid black line is the true wealth share using net wealth
reported on the foundations' tax returns. The next three series report the top 1% wealth
shares obtained using different methodologies to estimate saving accounts based on reported
interest income for this specific asset class. All other asset classes are estimated using actual
reported wealth (as in the situation described in our theory). In the dark-blue-circles series,
interest is capitalized using the average interest rate across all foundations, as in the benchmark
Saez and Zucman (2016) methodology. In the orange-diamonds series, interest of the top 1%
wealthiest foundations (ranked by wealth excluding savings accounts) is capitalized using the
average interest rate of the top 1% wealthiest foundations, as in the updated Saez and Zucman
(2016) series presented in this paper. Finally, in the yellow-triangles series, interest of the
top 1% interest-earning foundations is capitalized using the average interest rate of the top 1%
interest-earning foundations, as in SZZ. In the last two series, the interest rate used to capitalize
interest income for the remaining 99% foundations is computed as a residual to match total
savings account, as in the SZZ and revised Saez and Zucman (2016) methodologies.
       As Figure 12 shows, both the original and revised Saez and Zucman (2016) methods provide
accurate estimates. The original Saez and Zucman (2016) methodology works well because the
interest rate of wealthy foundations is similar to the average interest rate of all foundations
(Figure 11). In contrast, the SZZ method underestimates top wealth shares. It underestimates
savings accounts at the top as predicted by our theory. The bias is more severe in recent years
  24
    It is possible that the high interest rate for top interest-earning foundations is driven in part by measurement
error (e.g., foundations reporting interest from bonds in the wrong box) rather than heterogeneity in true interest
rate across savings accounts. As discussed above, the same issue arises in the SCF, and measurement error is
even larger in the SCF because of the imperfect correspondence between interest income and interest-bearing
asset classes.



                                                        18
when the interest rate is lower (and hence the ratio r
                                                     ¯/r is higher). The bias is modest relative
to total wealth because savings accounts account for a small fraction of total foundation wealth
(generally below 5%). But the bias is large relative to the share of wealth invested in saving
accounts ( in the theory), as predicted.

2.2.4      Magnitude of the Bias in SZZ

How large is the bias caused by capitalizing interest income using r
                                                                   ¯ in SZZ? There are a number
of ways to quantify it.
       First, we can compare the amount of fixed-income claims owned by the top 1% according to
SZZ and according to the Federal Reserve Distributional Financial Accounts in 2016 (Figure 13).
In both cases, fixed-income claims include checkable deposits and currency, time deposits and
short-term investments, money market fund shares, debt securities, loans, and the fraction of
mutual fund assets invested in bonds and loans, minus fixed-income claims held in individual
retirement accounts (which are part of pension wealth). In both cases, the same aggregate
($15.0 trillion in mid-2016, i.e., the official Financial Accounts total for fixed-income claims)
is distributed across the population. The SZZ series (which are among equal-split adults) can
be directly compared to DFA estimates (which are based on households), because the share of
wealth owned by the top 1% wealthiest adults is very close to the share of wealth owned by
the top 1% households.25 As shown by Figure 13, SZZ only capture 68% of the fixed-income
claims owned by the top 1% recorded in the Distributional Financial Accounts. The $2.2 trillion
gap represents 2.9% of household wealth in 2016. This gap explains the bulk of the difference
between the SZZ top 1% wealth share and the DFA top 1% wealth share.26
       Since the Distributional Financial Accounts are obtained by applying the SCF distributions
to the Financial Accounts aggregates, the SZZ distribution of fixed-income claims is inconsistent
with the distribution of these assets in the SCF. Note that because the Survey of Consumer
Finances has significantly less fixed-income claims than the Financial Accounts, by a factor
of about half (Batty et al., 2019, Table 1), comparing the absolute amount of fixed-income
claims in SZZ (which distribute the official Financial Accounts aggregates) and in the SCF is
not informative. The SCF has less fixed-income claims than in the Financial Accounts in part
because the fixed-income claims owned by hedge funds and private equity funds are recorded
  25
     The top 1% households include about 1.26 million households. Given that about 90% of people in the top
1% are married, this corresponds approximately to about 2.38 million adults, i.e., 1% of the 238 million adults.
  26
     SZZ Fig. 14 Panel C report $5.8t in fixed-income claims in DFA (instead of $6.7 trillion, the true number)
because SZZ exclude bonds held through mutual funds (about $1 trillion) in their DFA fixed-income series. We
correct this here.



                                                      19
as business assets in the SCF but as fixed-income claims in the Financial Accounts.27
       Second, we can use the theoretical formulas established in Section 2.2.2 to quantify the bias
caused by using r
                ¯. In 2016, the average interest rate of the wealthy (estates above $20 million)
in matched estates-income tax data r is 1.4%, the rate used by SZZ to capitalize interest at
the top is the Moody's rate r
                            ¯ = 3.67%, so that with a share of fixed-income claims in wealth
 = 0.25 there is a first-order bias of 1 -  (1 - r/r
                                                   ¯) = 0.85. Starting from the SZZ top 0.1%
wealth share of 14.3%, getting rid of the bias by capitalizing interest using the conceptually
correct rate, r = 1.4%, increases the estimated top 0.1% wealth share to 14.3%/0.85 = 16.9%,
i.e., it adds 2.6 points of total wealth.
       In practice, SZZ use an r
                               ¯ which is below the Moody Aaa rate. This is because SZZ do not
apply the Moody's Aaa rate to all top 0.1% interest-income earners. SZZ treat differently interest
earned outside of trusts, and interest earned and retained in trusts.28 To compute ranks in the
interest income distribution, SZZ disregard interest in trusts, while to capitalize interest, SZZ
include all interest. Individuals who are in the top 0.1% of the total interest income distribution
(including trusts) but in the bottom 99% of the interest income distribution excluding trusts
are assigned the interest rate of the bottom 99%, which is very low in recent years, around
0.25% in 2016. These individuals are few in number, but because they are assigned such a low
interest rate, they significantly reduce r
                                         ¯. In 2016, the interest rate assumed by SZZ to be earned
by people in the top 0.1% of the total interest rate distribution (i.e., SZZ's actual r
                                                                                      ¯) is 3.0%,
as opposed to the Moody's Aaa rate of 3.67%. The gap between r
                                                             ¯ and the Moody's Aaa rate
grows over time, because the gap between the Moody's Aaa rate and the rate assumed by SZZ
to be earned by the bottom 99% increases from a factor of 2 in 2000 to a factor of 15 in 2016.29
                                            ¯ = 3.0%, there is a bias of 1 -  (1 - r/r
Recalibrating the theoretical formula using r                                        ¯) = 0.867
in SZZ. Getting rid of this bias by capitalizing interest using the conceptually correct rate, r,
adds 2.2 points of total wealth to the top 0.1%.
       Third, we can compute the interest rate of the wealthy implied by the SZZ methodology
and compare it to the available evidence. SZZ do not report the interest rate of the wealthy
  27
      In 2016, according to IRS tabulations of partnership tax returns, financial partnerships owned $729 billion in
cash, $190 billion in trade notes and accounts receivable, $150 billion in US government obligations, $71 billion
in mortgage and real estate loans, and $2 trillion in other current assets (listed equities, corporate and foreign
bonds, etc.). Assuming one-third of other current assets were interest-bearing, financial partnerships had $1.8
trillion in taxable-interest-bearing assets.
   28
      Source: communications with the authors. This point is not discussed in SZZ.
   29
      Treating interest in trusts differently from other interest earned by the wealthy is not justified. A growing
fraction of interest is earned through trusts. According to IRS statistics, $16 billion of taxable interest was
earned through trusts in 2001, the equivalent of 8% of the total taxable interest reported in 1040s. This fraction
rose to 11% in 2014. This is inconsistent with the view that fixed-income claims held through trusts have a very
low yield as assumed by SZZ.


                                                        20
generated by their model and their code is not publicly available. We replicate their model by
using our own updated code (which among other things has more business wealth concentration
than in our original estimates; see Section 5.1), estimating equity wealth as in SZZ (i.e., with
a weight of 10% on capital gains and 90% on dividends, see below) and capitalizing interest
as in SZZ. According to these computations, the top 0.1% ranked by wealth using the SZZ
methodology has an interest rate of about 2.5% in 2016.30 This rate is slightly lower than the
¯ used by SZZ (3.0%) because of re-ranking when moving from the interest income distribution
r
to the wealth distribution. As shown by Figure 14, after re-ranking, the interest rate of the
top 0.1% by wealth is still much higher than the interest rate actually earned by the top 0.1%
wealthiest Americans according to the existing evidence analyzed above. According to the
matched estates-income tax data analyzed by Saez and Zucman (2016) and extended to 2016
by SZZ, Americans who died with more than $20 million in wealth (a threshold close to the top
0.1% threshold) had an interest rate of 1.4% in 2016, 1.8 times lower than the interest rate of
the top 0.1% by wealth in the SZZ methodology. Thus, SZZ under-estimate the fixed-income
claims owned by the top 0.1% by a factor of about 1.8 in 2016.
       Fourth, we can compute top wealth share using the conceptually correct interest rate (i.e.,
the interest rate of the wealthy, r, as proved in Section 2.2.2), and then keeping everything
else the same, implement instead the SZZ methodology of ranking by interest and applying the
conceptually incorrect r
                       ¯. Specifically, we run our updated income capitalization code which,
among other things, applies heterogeneous interest rates to tax units ranked by estimated wealth
iteratively and at the top uses the observed r of the top 0.1% by wealth (as seen in matched
estates-income tax data); see Section 5.1. We find that implementing the SZZ method (in lieu of
this conceptually correct method) to estimate fixed-income claims reduces the top 0.1% wealth
share by close to 2.0 points in 2016, consistent with the theoretical predictions. This explains
half of the 4 points gap between SZZ and the updated estimates of Saez and Zucman (2016).31

2.3       Estimation of Equity Wealth
The second key difference between SZZ and the benchmark Saez and Zucman (2016) methodol-
ogy involves the estimation of equity wealth. Saez and Zucman (2016) and SZZ both estimate
equity wealth by capitalizing dividends and capital gains. But SZZ capitalize equity wealth
using almost entirely dividends (90% weight on dividends, 10% weight on capital gains) in-
  30
     This is consistent with private communications with the authors, who write that "in our data, [the interest
rate of the top 0.1% by wealth is] somewhere in between the Moody's Aaa [3.67% in 2016] and 10-year Tresury
yield [1.84% in 2016], and is closer to the 10-year Tresury yield in 2016."
  31
     This 2 points gap is reduced by about a third when estimating fixed-income claims held through mutual


                                                      21
stead of using a combination of dividends and realized capital gains as in Saez and Zucman
(2016) benchmark series. Saez and Zucman (2016) extensively analyzed this issue and reported
supplementary series using only dividends (Appendix Tables B36, B37 and B37b discussed pp.
534­535). Saez and Zucman (2016) chose a "mixed method" of using dividends only to estimate
wealth for ranking and dividends plus capital gains to estimate wealth shares based on a careful
analysis of private foundation data (Appendix Figure C5 discussed in p. 542) where this "mixed
method" proved to be the best. It was also the method that came closest to match the wealth
of the Forbes 400. The key reason this mixed method works best is because capital gains are
often realized in a lumpy way (e.g., selling a business at retirement). Averaging them out for
each fractile smooths this lumpiness.
    Estimating equity wealth based on dividend income as done by SZZ does not allow one to
capture top-end wealth accurately, because the wealthiest Americans often own equities that
do not pay dividends. For instance, 5 of the top 10 richest Americans--Jeff Bezos (Amazon),
Mark Zuckerberg (Facebook), Warren Buffett (Berkshire Hathaway), Sergey Brin (Alphabet),
and Larry Page (Alphabet), collectively worth more than $250 billion in 2016--were the main
shareholders of corporations that did not pay dividends in 2016. The SZZ methodology assigns
them a negligible amount of wealth relative to their true wealth.
    SZZ under-estimate billionaire wealth by about 40% relative to the existing evidence. Ac-
cording to SZZ (2020, p. 32) billionaires owned $1.7 trillion in wealth in 2016. According
to Forbes, the top 400 wealthiest Americans (who had wealth above $1.7 billion) owned $2.4
trillion in 2016. Billionaires with more than 1 billion and less than $1.7 billion add close to
an extra $600 billion, for a total billionaire wealth of around $3 trillion.32 As shown by Fig-
ure 15, the benchmark Saez and Zucman (2016) capitalization method captures close to 100%
of the amount of billionaire wealth implied by Forbes. By contrast, the SZZ methodology, which
under-estimates top-end equity wealth, under-estimates billionaire wealth by almost 50%.
    Forbes is certainly not perfect. However, to learn about the wealth of the richest American,
the Forbes approach of looking at ownership in large businesses to figure out the true wealth of
Jeff Bezos, Mark Zuckerberg, Warren Buffett, Sergey Brin, Larry Page, Elon Musk, Michael Dell,
funds using non-qualified dividends, instead of interest as in the SZZ methodology and original Saez and Zucman
(2016) methodology.
  32
     There are two ways to arrive at the $600 billion number for non-Forbes 400 billionaire wealth. First, one
can make the classical assumption that the tail of the wealth distribution is Pareto distributed. As the average
wealth of the Forbes 400 in 2016 ($6.0b) was 3.5 times the threshold to belong to the Forbes 400 ($1.7b), the
corresponding Pareto parameter is a = 3.5/(3.5 - 1) = 1.4. Standard calculations imply that the wealth between
$1bn and $1.7bn is [(1.7/1)(a-1) - 1] = 23.6% of the wealth above $1.7bn, i.e., $567 billion. Second, one can
look at SCF data: the public-use 2016 SCF file, which by construction excludes the Forbes 400, has $583 billion
in billionaire wealth (with by construction wealth below 1.7 billion).


                                                      22
etc., is obviously superior to trying to infer wealth from dividends that haven't yet materialized.
Saez and Zucman (2016) opted for a method with a higher weight on capital gains precisely
because it did a good job at matching Forbes.
    SZZ justify their methodology by pointing out that in the Survey of Consumer Finances,
putting a weight of 10% on capital gains minimizes mean-square error. There are two issues
with this argument. First, mean-square error is not the relevant statistic to assess the reliability
of various capitalization methods. If only billionaires own a lot of equities that pay no dividends,
putting a 90% weight on dividends can minimize mean-square-error for a given person's wealth in
the SCF, while severely under-estimating the equity wealth of billionaires, who own about 40% of
the equity wealth of the top 0.1%. Second, as noted above for interest, there is an inconsistency
between income flows and assets in the SCF. Equities held via pass-through businesses (e.g.,
hedge funds) are typically not recorded as equities but as business assets. However, the dividends
and capital gains these equities generate are recorded as such. Dividends flowing from pass-
throughs are relatively small (about 14% of all dividends reported on 1040s), but capital gains
flowing from pass-throughs are large, about a third of all capital gains reported on 1040s.33 Since
a large fraction of capital gains arise from assets that are not classified as corporate equities
(but as business wealth), capital gains in the SCF may not be as predictive of equity ownership
as they actually are.

2.4     Other Differences and Reconciliation
2.4.1    Business Wealth

The methodology used by SZZ to estimate business wealth (other than equity in listed equities)
at the top has two downward biases.
    First, there is a conceptual issue in the estimation of equity in large pass-through businesses.
SZZ estimate equity in pass-through businesses (S-corporations, partnerships) by capitalizing
business profits, assets, and sales, using capitalization factors observed for listed firms in the
same sector. In their benchmark methodology, they divide reported pass-through profits by 4,
following Smith et al. (2019) who found that three-quarters of pass-through business profits
reflect labor income. However, the main estimates of Smith et al. (2019) are based on an equal-
weighted sample of pass-through businesses, in which a doctor's practice enters with the same
weight as a businesses with $1 billion in assets. As we show in Section 4, there is little empirical
  33
     In 2011, about $73 billion in capital gains were distributed to individuals by partnerships: capital gains
accounts for close to 25% of partnership income received by individuals (Cooper et al., 2016, Figure 8B), and
individuals received $297b from partnerships. An extra $52 billion flew from S-corporations, for a total of $125
billion, or 33% of taxable capital gains in forms 1040s line 13.


                                                      23
reason to believe that in large pass-through businesses, which for all intents and purposes are
similar to large listed corporations where profits are pure capital income, three-quarters of
business profits are disguised wages.
   For example, consider the case of Bloomberg L.P. According to press reports based on dis-
closures made when Michael Bloomberg was running for mayor of New York City, this business
is an S-corporation. We do not know the profits of Bloomberg L.P., which are not public. As-
sume for illustrative purposes that this company made $4 billion in profits in 2016, and that
comparable listed firms had a price/earnings ratio of 15. This would call for valuing Bloomberg
L.P. at $60 billion ($54 billion after applying a 10% discount for illiquidity as SZZ do). However,
SZZ divide Bloomberg's profits by 4, leading to an income-based valuation of $15 billion before
discount. This valuation is then averaged with the valuation based on sales and assets, so that
the final value is reduced by a factor of about 0.75 compared to a valuation capitalizing all
profits. There is no indication, however, that Bloomberg L.P. was less profitable when Michael
Bloomberg gave up his title of CEO to serve as mayor between 2002 and 2013. There is thus
no reason to divide Bloomberg L.P.'s profits by four. This issue is likely to explain part of the
gap between the SZZ estimates of billionaire wealth and Forbes.
   Second, there is a specific issue with the estimation of equity in real estate pass-through
businesses. For the purpose of capitalizing profits, profits are defined by SZZ as one quarter
of business income, plus interest paid, plus depreciation. In the real estate sector, the bulk
of interest and depreciation is not reported on forms 1120S (for S-corporations) or 1065 (for
partnerships), but expensed on form 8825. However, SZZ do not include interest or depreciation
expensed on form 8825 to compute real-estate pass-through profits (while such interest and
depreciation is included for listed firms). Figure 16 shows that for real-estate S-corporations,
the SZZ measure or profits (and thus the SZZ income-based valuation) is too low by a factor of
5. A similar problem arises for the sales-based valuation. For the purpose of capitalizing sales,
sales are defined as business receipts as reported on forms 1120S and 1065. However, in the real
estate sector a large fraction of sales is gross rents, which are not on form 1120S or 1065 but on
form 8825. This issue matters quantitatively because real estate S-corporations and especially
real-estate partnerships are large and their ownership highly concentrated.

2.4.2   Reconciliation

There is a gap of 4.3 points between the top 0.1% wealth share estimated by SZZ (14.3% among
equal split adults in 2016) and the original Saez and Zucman (2016) estimate (18.6% among
equal-split adults in 2016). After the revision we implement in this paper (see Section 5.1), the

                                                24
gap is reduced to 4 point. This remaining gap can be reduced to zero as follows.
       First, theory and evidence suggest that the fixed-income claims of the top 0.1% estimated
by SZZ are too low by about 2 points of total wealth. Second, the SZZ estimates of billionaire
wealth are lower than those implied by Forbes by 1.7 point. Finally, two identified downward
biases in business wealth lead to an under-estimation of the top 0.1% wealth share, by perhaps
0.5­1 point. Using the conceptually correct rate to capitalize interest income, upgrading the
values of real-estate and other pass-through businesses, and matching Forbes billionaire wealth
(should any gap remain after the first two corrections) would close virtually all the gap between
SZZ and the original and updated Saez and Zucman (2016) top 0.1% wealth share.


3        Distributing the Totality of National Income
Auten and Splinter (2019),34 henceforth AS, present estimates of US income inequality using
income tax returns and various assumptions on non-taxable income. AS find that the share
of pre-tax income earned by the top 1% has not increased much from 1962 (11.1%) to 2015
(14.1%), the last year in AS, and that the share of after-tax income earned by the top 1% has
not increased. Moreover, according to AS, the US tax system has become more progressive
since the early 1960s.
       As discussed in Piketty, Saez, and Zucman (2019), because the concentration of fiscal income
has increased so much, you need to assume that income not reported on tax returns has in reverse
become much less concentrated to replicate the AS results.
       There are three main issues with the AS methodology. First, AS classify income earned
by the top 1% but legally exempt from tax (importantly, business income reduced by generous
depreciation rules) as tax evasion. Second, AS allocate the vast majority of tax evasion to the
bottom 99% based on an erroneous reading of random audit data. Third, the allocation of
taxes in AS delivers a spurious increase in tax progressivity whenever businesses organize as
pass-through entities.
       Once legally exempt business income is allocated to the people who actually earn it, under-
reported income is allocated in accordance with IRS random audit studies, and the allocation
of taxes is fixed, the AS estimates are close to the benchmark Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2018)
series.


  34
    "Income Inequality in the United States: Using Tax Data to Measure Long-term Trends," 20 December
2019. We take all our AS numbers from the online files posted at http://davidsplinter.com, downloaded on
May 28, 2020.


                                                  25
3.1     The Allocation of Untaxed Income
AS under-estimate the top 1% pre-tax income share because of the interaction of two issues.
First, non-corporate business profits which are legally exempt from the individual income tax,
due in particular to generous tax depreciation rules, are classified by AS as tax evasion. Second,
tax evasion is allocated disproportionately to the bottom 99% based on an erroneous reading
of random audit data. The combination of these two issues explains about half of the level
difference between the top 1% pre-tax income share in AS and Piketty, Saez and Zucman
(2018) in recent years. It also explains most of the difference in the rise of this top share, as the
generosity of tax depreciation has dramatically increased since the turn of the 21st century.

3.1.1   Source of the Gap Between Fiscal Income and National Income

The goal of the national accounts is to provide a consistent measure of aggregate income that is
not affected by specificities of the tax law. There are thus numerous differences between income
as reported in tax returns and income in the national accounts. In particular, there is a large
gap between non-corporate business income (sole proprietorships and partnerships) recorded in
the national accounts, and sole proprietorship and partnership income recorded in individual
income tax returns. In turn, a large and growing fraction of this gap owes to deprecation.
   Since the turn of the 21st century, business income subject to taxation has been reduced by
increasingly generous tax depreciation rules. Bonus depreciation rules in force in 2001­2004 and
2008­2017 allowed businesses to deduct from taxable income a large percentage of the cost of
investments the year they made these investments. In 2018, the Tax Cut and Jobs Act doubled
the bonus depreciation deduction from 50% in 2017 to 100%. US tax law has moved toward full
expensing of business investment.
   In the national accounts, following international statistical standards, investment is not
subtracted from income; investment is capitalized and assets are depreciated over their useful
life. Whenever depreciation becomes more generous in the tax law and taxable business income
falls, an adjustment--called the capital consumption adjustment--is increased to neutralize this
fall and maintain a consistent measure of economic income.
   Figure 17 shows the capital consumption adjustment for partnerships and sole proprietor-
ships in the national accounts as a fraction of non-farm proprietor's income. In 2018, the capital
consumption adjustment represent the equivalent of 31% of proprietor's income, as opposed to
0% before 1980. The adjustment increased following the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981
which introduced accelerated depreciation rules, then with bonus depreciation in 2001­2004


                                                 26
and 2008­2017, and finally with 100% depreciation in 2018. In 2018, the capital consumption
adjustment amounts to $372 billion, i.e., 2.1% of national income; the adjustment was already
large before full expensing, e.g., 1.6% of national income in 2015. Virtually all of this adjust-
ment is for partnerships: sole proprietorships do not own a large asset stock, while a number of
large, capital intensive businesses are organized as partnerships, in particular in the real estate
sector, oil extraction, and pipeline transportation (see Section 5.1 below).35 Partnership income
is highly concentrated: in 2018 the top 1% of the fiscal income distribution earned about 90%
of taxable partnership income. The capital consumption adjustment should thus primarily be
allocated to the top 1%.
       AS do not allocate the capital consumption adjustment to the top 1%. Instead, AS treat
this income as tax evasion and allocate it primarily to the bottom 99%. Specifically, AS con-
struct an aggregate they call "underreported income." This aggregate includes the national
accounts estimate of how much business income is illegally hidden by taxpayers (based on IRS
random audit studies, more on this below), plus the capital consumption adjustment, plus nu-
merous other differences between taxable business income and business income in the national
accounts.36 AS call all of this "underreported income" and allocate this aggregate as if it was
tax evasion, using IRS random audit studies.
       AS proceed similarly for compensation of employees, rental income, S-corporation profits,
and farm income. For each of these components of national income, there are numerous concep-
tual differences between income defined in the tax law and recorded in the national accounts and
AS treat these difference as underreported income.37 AS thus end up with an aggregate amount
of underreported income in 2015 which is 1.7 times as large as the actual amount of underre-
ported income--based on IRS random audit studies--included in national income. Specifically,
the national accounts make an explicit allowance for underreported taxable individual income
  35
     For example, when bonus depreciation is introduced in 2008, depreciation reported by sole proprietorships
in IRS forms 1040 increases from 41.1 billion in 2007 to 42.9 billion 2008. Depreciation reported by partnerships
in forms 1065 and 8825 increases from $158.3 billion to $221.2 billion (+ $62.9 billion). The capital consumption
adjustment for non-farm proprietor income recorded in the NIPAs increases from $79.6 billion to $141.8 (+ $62.2
billion), in line with the rise in partnership depreciation.
  36
     These other adjustments include bad debt expenses (deducted from taxable income, not from national in-
come); adjustments to amortization (which is more generous for tax purposes); guaranteed payments to part-
ners (which are deducted from business income in business tax returns, but included in proprietor's income in
the national accounts); adjustments to meals and entertainment expenses (partially expensed in business tax
returns; fully expensed in the national accounts), etc.
  37
     AS, p. 15: "underreported income is estimated as the difference between amounts already in pre-tax income
and NIPA totals separately for wages and salaries, rental income, farm income, non-farm proprietor income,
and S-corporation net income." AS justify this methodology in their online appendix p. 14 by writing that
"this approach leads to similar amounts as BEA "misreported" income," which is incorrect. They support this
statement by referring to a 2000 study and a 2007 study, both written before the sustained boom in bonus
depreciation which started in 2008 (Figure 17).


                                                       27
for two income categories only: non-corporate business profits (NIPA Table 7.14 line 2) and
wages (NIPA Table 7.18 line 2).38 In the official NIPA data used by AS, underreported taxable
individual income adds up to 4.3% of national income in 2015; meanwhile, the AS aggregate of
"underreported income" is much larger, 7.2% of national income in 201539
       In brief: AS call tax evasion many conceptual differences between income subject to tax and
national income, chief among which is the large and growing amount of non-corporate business
income which is not subject to taxation because of the expensing of business investment.

3.1.2      The Distribution of Underreported Income

Having labeled 7.2% of national income as underreported income, AS then proceed to allocate
this aggregate across the distribution based on IRS random audits, as analyzed in particular in
Johns and Slemrod (2010). In so doing AS make a second mistake which leads them to allocate
too little income to the top 1%.
       Figure 18 shows Johns and Slemrod's (2010) Table 3. As explained by AS (p. 15) and
confirmed by their publicly available code,40 AS use column 2 in John and Slemrod's (2010)
Table 3 (in red) to allocate their aggregate "underreported income." This column shows under-
reported income by reported pre-audit income. When ranking people by their pre-audit income,
only 5% of under-reported income comes from the top 1%. But as shown by column 1 of the
same table (in blue), when ranking people by their true income (i.e., reported plus estimated
underreported income), 27% of underreported income comes from the top 1%. Why? Because
tax evaders are obviously richer once we account for their underreported income. Moreover, a
number of individuals who report negative taxable income (and hence show up at the bottom
of the reported income distribution) are found in random audits to have in fact high incomes.
For instance, these taxpayers may wrongfully declare large business losses; once these losses are
corrected by IRS auditors, the taxpayers are in fact in the top 1%. Johns and Slemrod (2010)
show that accounting for this re-ranking is key to paint an accurate picture of the distribution of
tax noncompliance. In other words, the fact that sizable noncompliance is found in tax returns
with negative incomes does not show that a lot of evasion is done by the poor, as AS seem to
believe. It shows that it is critical to rank people by their adjusted (post-audit) income when
studying the distribution of tax evasion.41
  38
     An allowance for S-corporation tax evasion is included as part of corporate profits, but is not separately
identified in the NIPAs.
  39
     I.e., $1,135bn: see, e.g., AS online Excel file, Table C10 col. AQ.
  40
     available at http://davidsplinter.com/Auten_Splinter_SAScode.txt
  41
     Obviously, a person with true negative income does not have strong incentives to under-report and make
their income even more negative.


                                                      28
       A similar issue happens when dealing with non-filers. AS allocate 15% of "underreported
income" to non-filers, who have zero reported income. But this does not mean that their
true income is low, as AS assume. Indeed a detailed investigation by the Treasury Inspector
General for Tax Administration (2020, p. 6) found that "high-income nonfilers, although fewer
in number, contribute to the majority of the nonfiler tax gap."
       AS are aware that re-ranking is a problem for their methodology and provide an ad hoc
correction. "Specifically, 50% of tax units in the bottom 95 percent and 10% of tax units in
the top 5 percent are selected to receive underreported business income" (AS, Appendix, page
16). This ad hoc correction does not address the problem. In their final series after re-ranking,
AS attribute 9% only of all "underreported income" to the top 1%,42 while Johns and Slemrod
(2010) find that 27% of underreported income among tax filers goes to the 1% after re-ranking
(see Figure 18).
       AS point out that the allocation of what they call "underreported income" is the most
important reason for the discrepancy between their findings and Piketty, Saez and Zucman
(2018). This is correct--but the AS allocation is not. Of the 7.2% of national income in 2015
in what AS call "underreported income," 2.9 points is legally exempt income. About 60%-70%
of this legally exempt income (primarily earned by partnerships) accrues to the top 1%. Of the
4.3 points of actual underreported income, about 27% is earned by the top 1% according to
random audit data. Thus, overall about 3 points out of 7.2 points should be allocated to the
top 1%. AS by contrast only allocate 0.6% of national income (9% of 7.2%) to the top 1%. The
2.4 points difference explains close to half of the gap between the top 1% pre-tax income share
estimated by AS and Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2018) for the year 2015.

3.2       The Allocation of Taxes
A core claim in AS is that the tax system is more progressive in 2015 than in 1960, when the
top marginal income tax rate was 91%, the top estate tax rate was 77%, the estate tax raised
three times more revenue relative to national income than in 2015, and the corporate tax almost
twice as much. However, there are four issues with the AS estimates of tax rates that invalidate
this claim.
       First, the effective tax rates estimated by AS at the top of the distribution in recent decades
are too high because AS assign too little income to the rich. As we have seen, AS treat business
  42
    AS online Excel file, sheet C1-incomes, columns DM minus DE gives the underreported income assigned to
the top 1% after re-ranking: 99 billion in 2015, i.e., 9% of the total "underreported income" of $1,135bn (col.
DJ minus DB).



                                                      29
income which is legally exempt from taxation (in particular due to bonus depreciation) as tax
evasion; they then allocate tax evasion primarily to the bottom of the distribution. Because
legally exempt business income is highly concentrated, the denominator used by AS to compute
effective tax rates at the top is too low: top-end effective tax rates are upward biased. Because
bonus depreciation was zero before 1981 and has increased dramatically since then (especially
since 2001), the trend in top-end effective tax rates is upward biased too. In the AS methodology,
whenever business income earned by the top 1% becomes legally exempt from taxation, the tax
rate of the top 1% does not change despite the fact that it should fall; the tax rate of the bottom
99% falls, despite the fact that it should not change.
       Second, the AS allocation of the corporate tax leads to a spurious trend of rising tax pro-
gressivity. AS distribute 25 percent of the corporate tax to wage earners and 75 percent to
shareholders and owners of interest-bearing assets. As a result, tax progressivity mechanically
rises whenever businesses choose to operate as pass-through entities. For example, if a C-
corporation becomes an S-corporation, taxes that were partly assigned by AS to workers now
are fully assigned to shareholders, who are higher up in the income distribution. The tax system
looks more progressive despite the fact that nothing has changed in the economy or in the tax
system. Because of the rise of pass-through businesses since 1986, and because pass-through
business income is highly concentrated, this bias is large.43
       Third, AS use a conceptually flawed income denominator to compute tax rates. While for
their income distribution analysis, AS focus on pre-tax or post-tax income matching national
income, for their tax rates computations, AS choose as denominator pre-tax national income
plus all cash and in-kind transfers (e.g., Medicare, Medicaid), i.e., a total substantially larger
than national income. This does not make sense conceptually: If one allocates more income
to people overall than there actually is in the economy, tax rates will appear lower than they
really are for at least some groups. Since cash and in-kind transfers go predominantly to the
bottom of the distribution, the bias is concentrated at the bottom. Including Medicare and
Medicaid as income at the denominator of effective tax rate computations is particularly hard
to comprehend. Because Medicare and Medicaid transfers have increased massively since the
1960s, the trends in the AS estimates of effective tax rates of low-income groups are downward
biased.
       Fourth, AS have an unsatisfactory treatment of indirect taxes. To compute the distribution
  43
    If AS believe that 25% of corporate taxes are "paid by" workers, they should allocate 25% of the individual
income tax paid by the owners of pass-through businesses to workers, leading to lower effective tax rates at the
top and higher tax rates at the bottom than what they report.



                                                      30
of national income, AS allocate indirect taxes proportionally to consumption. This allocation
inflates income levels proportionately more for the poor than for the rich, who consume a lower
fraction of their income. In turn, inflated incomes lead to downward biased tax rates at the
bottom.44 A more satisfactory treatment would involve allocating indirect taxes (for the purpose
of distributing national income) neutrally, i.e., proportionally to income, not consumption. It is
indeed purely conventional to include indirect taxes in national income (because nobody "earns"
sales taxes as an income); and thus the distribution of national income should be the same as
the distribution of factor-price national income (i.e., national income excluding indirect taxes).
Alternatively, one could compute tax rates as a fraction of factor-price national income.

3.3       Other Differences And Reconciliation
Retirement Income. AS raise a valuable point about the allocation of pension income. In
Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2018), pension distributions are allocated proportionally to taxable
and non-taxable distributions (e.g., Roth IRAs) as reported in individual income tax returns.
This is necessary to capture all pension income. However, Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2018) put
too high a weight on non-taxable distributions, especially in recent years, because non-taxable
pension income is inflated by rollovers. This led to allocating too much retirement income to the
top. In our revised series, consistent with the available evidence on the distribution of pension
wealth (see Section 5.2 below), we now allocate 10% of pension distributions proportionally to
non-taxable pension income, with a weight that is constant over time. The effect of rollovers is
thus neutralized. This revision closes about 10% of the gap between AS and Piketty, Saez and
Zucman (2018). We are grateful to AS for bringing this issue to our attention.
       While Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2018) had too much pension income going to the top, AS
have too little, because their implicit estimates of pension wealth are not consistent with the
evidence on this issue, namely the Survey of Consumer Finances (which only includes defined
contribution pensions) supplemented by the Sabelhaus and Henriques-Volz (2019) estimates of
defined benefit pensions. In these data, the top 1% by wealth owned $2.9 trillion in pension
wealth in 2016,45 which is 11% of all funded pension wealth and life-insurance reserves. The top
1% by income has a higher share of pension wealth than the top 1% by wealth. By contrast,
in AS, the top 1% by income has less than 10% of pension wealth (p. 22). More generally, the
  44
     For example, take a retiree who earns 100 in retirement income and consumes 100% of her income. Assume
the consumption tax rate is 20%. AS add $20 to income so income equals 120. The tax rate in the AS series is
20/120 = 16.7%; in reality the true tax rate is 20/100 = 20%.
  45
     Sum of retqliq variable in the SCF ($2.5T) and the defined benefit estimates of Sabelhaus and Henriques-
Volz (2019) ($0.4T) for the top 1% tax units.



                                                     31
computations in Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2019) show that the implicit wealth distribution
in AS is too equal and has not increased in line with the available evidence.46 By contrast, in
our updated series, the distribution of pension wealth is by design consistent with the share
of pension wealth owned by the top 10% and top 1% seen in the Federal Reserve data (see
Section 5.1 below). Fixing pension wealth in AS would close another 10% of the gap between
AS and Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2018).47


Ranking of individuals. AS use different definitions of income to rank tax units and to
compute their income. To rank tax units, AS use size-adjusted income, dividing tax unit
income by the square-root of the number of individuals in the unit. But to compute income
shares, they use the actual income of the tax unit, not adjusting for family size. Rich families
with kids are moved down the income ladder and assigned high incomes, increasing the bottom
99% income share. AS justify this procedure by noting that it aims at obtaining "a measure
more relevant to the distribution of economic welfare" (p. 11). In clear: since having kids is
costly, high-income families with many kids are in fact less rich than they appear; the effect is
non-linear since there are economies of scale within households (e.g., only one rent needs to be
paid), hence the use of a square root.
       This line of reasoning reflects a confusion between consumption and income inequality. The
use of equivalence scales is common for the study of consumption inequality. But as far as
the distribution of pre-tax national income is concerned, there is no conceptual basis for size
adjustments of this kind. The fact that having kids is costly is not relevant for the question of
how pre-tax national income is distributed. Dividing income by the square root of the number
of individuals in a tax unit makes it impossible to decompose economic growth by social group,
a key goal of distributing the totality of national income. It transforms income into a hybrid
notion of economic resources somewhere in between income and consumption. Both income
and consumption deserve to be studied (as both are relevant for economic theory and policy
making), but separately. Hybrid measures that blend elements of income and consumption
while calling the result "income" have, in our view, no merit: these measures play no role in
economic modeling and are confusing for policymakers and the public.48 For the study of income
  46
     Although AS need to implicitly estimate wealth to allocate income (e.g., investment income earned on
pension plans, corporate retained earnings), they do not report their wealth distribution.
  47
     One indication that there is a problem with the AS treatment of pension is that according to AS Table IV,
the AS treatment of pensions reduces the Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2018) top 1% pre-tax income share by 0.5
point in 1962. However both in the original and updated Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2018) series, the top 1%
earns less than 0.5% of national income in pension income in 1962 (see Appendix Table II-B.2b col. 22), so that
with the AS treatment the top 1% earns negative pension income.
  48
     Since income equals consumption plus saving and saving rates rise with income, hybrid measures of income


                                                      32
distribution, the top 1% should include the 1% units with the highest incomes, and nothing else.
    Altogether, the allocation of "underreported income," taxes, pension income, and size-
adjustments for ranking tax units explain virtually all the difference between the AS and Piketty,
Saez and Zucman (2018) estimates of pre-tax income inequality.


Government consumption. For post-tax income, a key difference is the allocation of gov-
ernment consumption expenditures. These expenditures have fluctuated around 18% of national
income since 1980 with no trend. Defense spending has declined while spending on prisons and
law courts has increased and spending on education has been stable at about 5.5% of national
income. Auten and Splinter (2019) allocate government consumption half per capita and half
by after-tax income; i.e., this spending is assumed to reduce inequality. In the AS methodology,
if the government funds a mass incarceration policy by a tax strictly proportional to income,
everything else equal, inequality falls.49
    AS also allocate the government deficit proportionally to federal taxes paid. The top 1%
pays about 25% of all federal taxes. The Congressional Budget Office projects an increase in
the government deficit of 13 points of national income in 2020 relative to 2019.50 In the AS
methodology, this will reduce the top 1% post-tax income share by about 3.3 points relative to
2019, leading to a collapse in the top 1% income share from around 9% (according to AS) to
about 5%­6% of national income, by far the lowest level ever recorded. In other words, on a
post-tax basis according to AS, the United States has never been as equal as in 2020. In the
Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2018) methodology, by contrast, the government deficit is allocated
50% proportionally to all taxes paid and 50% proportionally to government spending (other than
Social Security and unemployment insurance) received. Since the overall tax-and-transfer sys-
tem is slightly progressive (taxes--29% of national income--are roughly proportional to income,
collective consumption expenditures--18% of national income--are assumed to be proportional
to income, but non-Social Security individualized transfers--11% of national income--go pri-
marily to the bottom), this will result in a slight increase in inequality, partly offsetting the
equalizing effect of the increase in unemployment insurance and economic impact payments.
There is no perfect way to allocate the government deficit, but an extreme case such as the
large 2020 deficits highlights the meaning and usefulness of various methodologies.
that incorporate elements of consumption are more equally distributed than conceptually well-defined measures
of incomes, which might explain their popularity.
  49
     One might consider allocating public education spending on a per capita basis. However, because of the
differences in school quality and in college attendance by parental income, such an allocation has little empirical
justification.
  50
     See https://www.cbo.gov/publication/56542#_idTextAnchor011.


                                                        33
4       Labor and Capital Shares of Top Incomes
In "Capitalists in the 21st century" Smith, Yagan, Zidar, and Zwick (2019), henceforth SYZZ,
find that the majority of income earned in the top 1% derives from labor. They obtain this
finding by noting that pass-through business income is a key source of income at the top and
classifying 75% of this income as labor income as opposed to capital income. Their findings
suggest that Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2018) over-estimate the capital share of income among
the rich.51
    However, the low capital share of pass-through business income estimated by Smith et al.
(2019) is not consistent with the large capital stock of these businesses. Classifying 25% of pass-
through business profit as capital income implies an implausibly low rate of return to capital in
these businesses. Applying to the capital stock of pass-through businesses the rates of return
observed for listed corporations of similar size in the same sector suggests that about 50% of
pass-through business income derives from capital--and that a majority of income at the top
derives from capital, as in Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2018).

4.1     The Capital Share of Pass-Through Business Income
4.1.1    Evidence from Rates of Return on Assets

To assess the plausibility of the notion that 25% of S-corporation business income is capital
income, it is useful to start with macroeconomic statistics.
    According to the Federal Reserve, the market value of S-corporations equity was $2,988
billion at the end of 2014, the reference year in SYZZ. The Federal Reserve obtains this esti-
mate by starting with the book value of S-corporation equity (i.e., assets at book value minus
non-equity liabilities, as reported to the IRS on 1120S forms), applying the market-to-book
ratio observed for US listed firms in Compustat to the book value of S-corporation equity at
the 2-digit-NAICS-industry level, and applying a 25% discount for illiquidity. By construction,
this estimate only takes into account the non-human capital (i.e., the office space, equipment,
etc.) of S-corporations. We were able to reproduce this estimate using the same raw sources
and methodology as the Federal Reserve. We also obtained similar results at the 3-digit in-
dustry level. As argued in Smith, Zidar and Zwick (2020), the Federal Reserve valuation of
S-corporation equity should be seen as conservative.
   51
      "We classify 75% of pass-through income as human capital income. In contrast, Piketty, Saez and Zucman
(2018) assume a labor share of 0% for one type of pass-through income (S-corporation) and 70% for the rest
(partnership and other pass-through)... Under our approach, the top 1% labor share of imputed national income
in 2014 increases from 45.4% in Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2018) to 52.1%." (SYZZ, Introduction, p. 1680­1681).


                                                     34
       Using the Federal Reserve estimate of equity wealth, we can compute the return on S-
corporation equity implied by the SYZZ methodology. In 2014, US households reported $354
billion in S-corporation profit. According to SYZZ, only a quarter of this number, namely $88.5
billion, is capital income, the rest being labor income. S-corporations thus had a pre-tax rate
of return on equity of 3.0% ($88.5 billion / $2,988 billion). This rate of return is before income
tax and includes all profits, whether distributed or reinvested in the firm, since all the profits of
S-corporations flow through to shareholders. Excluding S-corporations with less than $250,000
in assets, which do not have to report balance sheets for tax purposes, the rate of return on
S-corporation equity was 2.3%.52
       These rates of return obtained when classifying 25% of S-corporation profits as capital in-
come are much lower than the rate of return on non-pass-through corporate equity. Accord-
ing to Compustat, the rate of return on equity for listed US companies was 6.5% in 2014.
The same number, 6.5%, can be obtained by using Financial Accounts and tax data for the
full C-corporation sector (including unlisted firms), mimicking the computation made above
for S-corporation.53 Excluding the largest listed firms that have few counterparts among S-
corporations, the return on equity for listed corporations was around 5.5%.54 This is about
twice as large as the return on S-corporation equity implied by the SYZZ methodology. It looks
prima facie as if S-corporations own too much capital to be consistent with the view that only
a quarter of their income derives from capital.
       To better understand this gap in returns, one needs to go beyond macroeconomic statistics,
since there are major sectoral difference between S- and C-corporations. Figure 19 considers the
10 largest 3-digit industries for S-corporations in terms of ordinary business income, excluding
offices of health practitioners and legal services, which do not have counterparts among listed
firms. These 10 industries account for 37% of all S-corporation profits. For each, we compute
  52
     In 2014, S-corporations with less than $250,000 in assets reported virtually 0 book equity but accounted for
23% of S-corporation business income. Note that firms with zero reported assets do own assets, as evidenced by
the fact that they reported $15.3 billion in portfolio income in 2014.
  53
     According to the Federal Reserve Financial Accounts, US households owned $10.7 trillion in equity in non-
pass through corporations (excluding equity held through pension funds and retirement accounts, shares in money
market funds, and shares in bond funds) at the end of 2014. US taxpayers reported $206 billion in dividend
income (excluding "non-qualified" dividends which mostly correspond to dividends paid by money market funds
and bond funds; and adding undistributed dividends received by trusts). For one $1 of dividend paid, non-
pass through corporations made on average $3.35 in pre-tax income (i.e., adding corporate income taxes paid
and retained earnings). Therefore, if non-pass through corporations were treated as pass-through entities, US
households would have reported around $690 billion in pre-tax equity income from these corporations, i.e., a
rate of return of 6.5%.
  54
     For example, with a 90% winsorization of profits and market values (neutralizing the influence of about
550 firms, corresponding roughly to the Fortune 500), the rate of return was 5.5%. Trimming the 5% listed
companies with the highest profits and 5% with the highest losses, the rate of return was 5.3%.



                                                       35
the return on assets using publicly available tabulations of S-corporations tax returns (form
1120S). We compare this return to the return observed for listed firms in the same 3-digits
industry, using SEC 10-K forms collected in Compustat. We consider a measure of income that
neutralizes the differences between tax and book accounting,55 namely operating income before
interest payments and net of book depreciation. Specifically, for S-corporations, income is 25%
of net income from a trade or business (following SYZZ), plus interest paid, minus net gains
on noncapital assets, plus tax depreciation, minus book depreciation (estimated by multiplying
assets by the within-sector ratio of book depreciation to assets observed for listed firms).56
For listed companies, income is operating income (variable OIBDP in Compustat) minus book
depreciation, and a 95% winsorization is applied to income and assets to remove the influence
of large listed firms that have few counterparts among S-corporations. Winsorizing income and
assets at 90%, trimming the top 5% of firms by sales, or trimming the top 5% and bottom 5%
of firms by income delivers identical results.
    As Figure 19 shows, in these 10 industries, the rate of return on S-corporation assets implied
by the SYZZ methodology is well below the rate of return observed in comparable listed firms.
Consider the largest 3-digit industry for S-corporations in terms of ordinary business income:
durable goods wholesale trade (NAICS 423). The ratio of net-of-depreciation operating income
to assets observed for winsorized listed firms in this industry is 8.3%, while it is 3.5% for S-
corporations when classifying 25% or ordinary business income as capital income. To arrive at
return on assets of 8.3% one needs to classify 70% of S-corporation business income as capital
income. These findings suggest that substantially more than 25% of S-corporation profit is
capital income. This is true even in sectors where the difference in returns on assets might
seem small, such as real estate. In this sector, the rate of return on assets for S-corporations
is 4.1% in 2014 when classifying 25% of business income as capital income, as opposed to 5.1%
for winsorized listed firms. But to arrive at a rate of return of 5.1%, one needs to classify 55%
of the ordinary business income of S-corporations as capital income, because for real estate S-
corporations, a significant fraction of the return shown on Figure 19 derives from rental income
(on top of ordinary business income) and interest payments.


  55
     The main difference between book income (as reported in 10-K forms) and taxable income (as reported in
business tax returns) involves depreciation, which can be more generous for tax purposes; other differences include
certain deductions that are not allowed for tax purposes or book accounting, and the treatment of capital gains.
  56
     For the sector "Securities, commodity contracts, other financial investments, and related activities" (NAICS
523), we include 100% of portfolio income (net of investment interest expenses) in operating income. Similarly
for real estate, we include 100% of rental income, as well as all interest and depreciation expensed on form 8825.




                                                        36
4.1.2   Evidence from Factor Shares of Value-Added

Another way to assess the plausibility that 25% of S-corporation profits is capital income is to
investigate what this classification implies for the capital share of value-added in S-corporations.
The capital share of value-added is capital income divided by the sum of labor and capital
income; it is the standard measure of the capital share.
   We compute capital and labor shares of value-added for both S- and C-corporations using
publicly available tabulations of income tax returns, harmonizing income to make the results
comparable across the two types of businesses. For S-corporations, capital income is equal
to 25% of ordinary business income (following SYZZ), plus interest paid, minus net gains on
noncapital assets. For C-corporations (excluding regulated investment companies and real es-
tate investment trusts), capital income is equal to income subject to tax, minus portfolio income
(which is not part of ordinary business income for S-corporations but flows through to sharehold-
ers), plus charitable contributions and domestic production deduction (which also flow through
to S-corporation shareholders), plus state income taxes paid (not paid by S-corporations), plus
interest paid, minus net gains on noncapital assets. For both S- and C-corporations, labor
income is the sum of wages and salaries, compensation of officers, employee benefit programs,
and pension, profit sharing, etc., plans. We find that if 25% of S-corporation profit was capital
income, then the capital share of S-corporations' value-added was 8% in 2014. By contrast, the
capital share of C-corporations' value-added was 23%. The low capital share of pass-through
business profit estimated by SYZZ implies an implausibly low capital share of value-added in
these businesses.
   To better understand this result, Figure 20 reports capital shares for C- and S-corporations
by asset size, with a zoom on mid-market firms (with assets in between $1 and $100 million),
which are the focus of SYZZ. As shown by Figure 20, within an asset bin, the capital share
of S-corporation value-added obtained when classifying 25% of S-corporation profit as capital
income is always below the capital share observed for C-corporations. The gap is small for firms
with a few million in assets and grows when moving up the asset distribution. For instance,
C-corporations with $50­$100 million in assets have a capital share of 20%, but if 25% of
S-corporation profit is capital income, S-corporations with $50­$100 million in assets have a
capital share of 9% only. In the SYZZ methodology, the capital share does not rise with assets,
so that even very large S-corporations have a low capital share of about 10%. This is at odds
with the patterns observed for C-corporations, for which the capital share rises with assets,
to reach around 25% for the largest firms. These results suggest that the SYZZ methodology


                                                37
under-estimates the capital share of mid-size and large S-corporations. To equalize the capital
share of C- and S-corporations with $50­$100 million in assets, for example, one needs to assume
that 65% of S-corporation profit is capital income.
   These observations motivate a systematic analysis of the balance sheets and income state-
ments of US businesses to estimate the capital share of private business income. Saez and
Zucman (2020) present such an analysis exploiting public tabulations of business tax returns
broken down at a fine sectoral level (3- or 4-digit level), implementing several estimation proce-
dures (imputation of a return to capital; imputation of a wage to business owners) and model
specifications. Across models and specifications, the capital share of S-corporation business in-
come is found to be around 50% (with a mild downward trends since the 1990s), and the capital
share of partnership is as high or higher.

4.1.3   Reconciliation with Estimates Based on Owner Death

SYZZ use an owner death/retirement methodology to estimate the capital share of pass-through
business income. They note that pass-through business profit falls by about 75% after owner
retirement or premature death, relative to control businesses. They conclude that 75% of pass-
through profits correspond to human capital income. How can we reconcile our estimates of
private business capital income shares with the estimates of SYZZ? Two amendments to the
SYZZ methodology can close all the gap between the estimates of Saez and Zucman (2020) and
those of SYZZ.


Accounting for large firms. First, we can come close to reconciling our findings with SYZZ
by noting that in large firms the capital share of profits is higher than in small firms. Because
SYZZ are primarily interested in the "typical" top earner, the main SYZZ estimates are person-
weighted (as opposed to dollar-weighted). A medical practice that has a low capital share of
profits enters with the same weight as a company with $50 million in assets that has a high
capital share of profits. For the computation of factor income shares, however, the relevant
statistics are dollar-weighted.
   In 2014, 0.2% of all S-corporations had more than $50 million in assets and these firms
accounted for 21% of total S-corporation profit. Because they are so few in number, and despite
being important in terms of profit, firms with more than $50 million in assets are in effect
disregarded in the equal-weighted analysis. As we have seen, the largest S-corporations are
likely to have high capital shares of profits (Figure 20). Classifying as capital income 80% of
the profits made by S-corporations with more than $50 million in assets (consistent with the


                                               38
results in Figure 20) increases the capital share estimated using the SYZZ owner death design
by 17 percentage points.
       In appendix results, SYZZ also present "dollar-weighted" results. However, capturing the
contribution of large firms with the owner death/retirement strategy is challenging. The sample
in the SYZZ owner death/retirement analysis includes about 19,000 firms (2,436 owner-deaths,
16,548 owner-retirement), and thus no more than a few dozens firms with more than $50 million
in assets. As SYZZ note (p. 1721), "the standard errors do increase with dollar-weighting."
Our view is that for large firms, more robust estimates of factor shares are obtained by looking
at the universe of listed firms and C-corporations of the same size in the same sector, as in Saez
and Zucman (2020).


Accounting for the capital of exiting firms. A significant fraction of the large decline in
business income observed by SYZZ is driven by business shutdown upon the death or retirement
of an owner. When a firm shuts down following the death or retirement of an owner (and is not
reorganized under a different employer identification number), SYZZ assign this firm 0 income
post-shutdown.57 The decline in income to zero is interpreted as labor income vanishing. This
raises an issue. When an owner dies and a firm shuts down as a result, this does not mean that
business income derived fully from labor. To see this, consider the two following examples.
       Example 1: consider a medical practice organized as an S-corporation, composed of a doctor
(the owner), two nurses, tangible capital (office space, medical equipment such as an X-ray
machine), and intangible capital (such as electronic medical records). The doctor dies; the
practice closes. The income of the practice goes to zero, but this does not mean that 100% of
its income used to derive from labor. The capital survives the doctor's death or retirement. This
capital will contribute to generating income elsewhere in the economy. For instance, the X-ray
machine may be sold to a hospital; the electronic medical records to a neighboring practice; the
office space to another business. In the estate of the wealthy owner who dies, there is positive
business wealth: office space, equipment, etc. Since there is business wealth with positive market
value in the estates of dead business owners, business income cannot entirely derive from labor.
       Example 2: consider a hotel organized as an LLC partnership, owned and run by a couple
who employs housekeeping staff. The couple retires and upon retirement sells the business to a
hotel chain. The chain replaces the housekeeping staff with contractors. In SYZZ, it is assumed
that 100% of the income of this partnership derived from labor. In reality, a potentially large
  57
     "If a firm exits (i.e., no longer files a Form 1120S or Form 1065 income tax return), it is coded as having 0
profits and 0 sales in exited years, except for the reorganization correction defined below." SYZZ (2020, p. 1711).



                                                        39
fraction of income derived from capital (in this example, real estate). The owners indeed sell
their business at a non-zero price.
   Some reconciliation between our findings and the SYZZ estimates can be obtained as follows.
In the SYZZ analysis sample, 41% of the treated firms (i.e., those for which an owner dies) exit
the sample in the four years following owner death. Some of these exits do not represent firm
shutdowns but firm reorganizations. In the doctor's practice example above, a new doctor
might take over the practice and reorganize it under a new name, keeping more than half
of the staff employed. 9% of the treated firms in the SYZZ sample are reorganized in this
way following an owner's death. SYZZ account for these reorganizations by assigning to the
reorganized firm the income of the old firm the year before owner death. This leaves 32% of
the firms in the SYZZ treated group that are liquidated upon the death/retirement of their
owners, or that keep operating but with a more than 50% change in staffing, such as in the
hotel example above.58 For these firms, income goes to zero and SYZZ consider that the labor
share was 100%, no matter what capital stock the firms owned. Classifying 25% of the profit of
these firms as capital increases the capital share of business income estimated using the owner
death/retirement design by 8 percentage points.
   Taken together, the two corrections we propose (assigning positive capital income to exiting
firms; accounting for large firms specifically) increase the capital share estimated by SYZZ from
25% to 25% + 17% + 8% = 50%, thus closing all the gap with our own estimates.

4.2     Revised Estimates of Factor Income Shares at the Top
4.2.1    Methodology

We revise our estimates of factor income shares at the top of the income distribution by incor-
porating the following research findings and improvements.
   First, the capital share of S-corporation income is less than 100%. As emphasized by SYZZ,
S-corporations profits in part reflect a labor component. This is linked to the fact that doc-
tors, dentists, and lawyers--who would typically operate as non-corporate businesses in other
countries--frequently operate as S-corporations in the US. Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2018),
following standard national accounts conventions, allocated 100% of S-corporation profit to
  58
     SYZZ infer reorganizations by looking at whether following the exit of a business, more than 50% of its
workers are subsequently employed by another firm. This excludes reorganizations in which a majority of
workers are displaced (e.g., employees retiring, switching job, or being replaced by contractors) after owner
death/retirement. In the SYZZ owner-death analysis, 41% of the treated firms exit, and 22% of the exiting
owner-death firms correspond to reorganizations with a majority of workers retained (SYZZ 2019, p. 1712).
Thus 41%× (100% - 22%) = 32% of the treated firms close or are heavily reorganized.



                                                     40
capital. In our revised series, we split S-corporation profit equally between labor and capital.
       Second, assigning to partnerships the return seen for listed corporations within industry,
excluding large firms, leads to a capital share of partnership income of 50% or more in the
2010s, with a rising trend since the 1980s (Saez and Zucman, 2020). In Piketty, Saez and
Zucman (2018), it was assumed that 30% of partnership income is capital, with no trend.
Therefore, in contrast to S-corporations, our new computations lead us to revise upwards the
capital share of partnership income.
       Third, there is a great deal of heterogeneity among pass-through firms. In small firms (e.g.,
medical practices), as shown by the SYZZ equal-weighted owner death/retirement estimates, a
large fraction of business profit derives from labor. In large firms, a larger fraction of profit derive
from capital (Saez and Zucman, 2020). This calls for applying heterogeneous capital shares to
pass-through business profit. Thus in our revised estimates, at the level of each tax unit, we
classify 25% of S-corporation profit below the 99.99th percentile of the wage distribution (around
$4 million in 2016) as capital income, and 75% of S-corporation profit in excess of the 99.99th
percentile of the wage distribution as capital.59 We also classify 75% of passive S-corporation
profit as deriving from capital.60 This averages to an overall capital share of S-corporation
income of about 50%. We proceed similarly for partnerships.
       Two examples illustrate this procedure. Consider first the case of a doctor operating as
an S-corporation, who receives $600,000 in wage and $400,000 in S-corporation profit. In our
revised series, as in SYZZ, this person earns $900,000 in labor income and $100,000 in capital
income, i.e., has a capital share of income of 10%. The capital share is not zero because the
practice owns marketable, non-human capital. Second, consider the case of the owner-manager
of a large business (such as a retail chain) with $800 million in assets earning $1 million in
wage and $80 million in S-corporation income. In our computation, that person is assigned $58
million in capital income (25% on the first $4 million of profits, 75% on the next $76 million
of profits) and $23 million in labor income ($1 million from wages and 80-58=$22 million from
profits), corresponding to a pre-tax return on assets of 7.2% and pay similar to that of the CEO
  59
      Conceptually, a more accurate classification can be obtained by splitting profits into labor vs. capital at the
business level (rather than at the tax unit level), based on business-level balance sheets and income statements.
In ongoing work, Saez and Zucman (2020) implement and contrast the two approaches. Improvements arising
from the business-level approach will be incorporated in future revisions of our Distributional National Accounts.
   60
      Passive business income is defined by the IRS as income derived from businesses in which the owner does not
"materially participate." We allocate less than 100% of passive income to capital to take into account the fact that
the frontier between passive and non-passive income is fuzzy: there can be incentives to classify income as passive
or non-passive for tax purposes. Note that income classified as "non-passive" for tax purposes does not necessarily
primarily derive from labor. For instance, a large real estate partnership may generate ordinary business income
that is mostly capital income and yet is classified as non-passive in the tax return of its general partner.



                                                         41
of the listed retailer Kroger in 2019.61 By contrast in SYZZ, this person has $20 million in
capital income­a return on assets of 1.8% only­and labor income of $61 million, larger than the
compensation earned by the CEOs of all Fortune 500 companies in 2019 save Google and Intel.
       Last, we did additional research to estimate the wealth and capital income of sole proprietor-
ships, using the Survey of Consumer Finances and the Survey of Small Business Finance. The
evidence suggests that sole proprietorships own relatively little capital and have a low capital
share of business income, around 20%.62 Accordingly, we split income 80/20 for sole proprietor-
ships, as opposed to 70/30 in Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2018). Since, unlike S-corporations
and partnerships, there are no sole proprietorships with very large asset stocks, we apply this
80/20 split uniformly across the income distribution.

4.2.2      Results and Discussion

Updated estimates of factor income shares. Figure 21 shows the capital share of income
as originally reported in Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2018, Figure VIII) and in our updated series.
In both cases the same pattern emerges: a high capital share in the 1960s, gradually falling until
the late 1990s, and then rebounding since 2000. In 2014, the capital share of income in the top
1% is 59% in the original Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2016) series and 56% in the revised series.
The lower capital income from S-corporations is largely offset by the higher capital income from
partnerships, whose ownership is highly concentrated. The trend break around 2000 originally
noted in Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2018) is confirmed. The capital share of top 1% income
has increased by 10 points from 2000 to 2018, although capital still plays a lower role at the top
than in the 1960s and 1970s.
       Overall, the available evidence thus suggests that a high (and since 2000, growing) fraction
of income derives from capital at the top of the income distribution. The increasing role played
by capital is driven by the growth of all forms of capital income at the top, except interest, since
the turn of the 21st century: housing rents, C-corporations dividends, C-corporation retained
earnings, S-corporation profit, and partnership capital income. This increase is consistent with
the rise in aggregate household wealth (from around 400% of national income in 2000 to around
  61
    https://aflcio.org/paywatch/highest-paid-ceos
  62
    In the Survey of Consumer Finances, sole proprietorship and farm wealth totals $1.9 trillion in 2016 (to
which should perhaps be added part of the wealth of LLCs, since single-owner LLCs file as sole proprietorships
by default). We obtain a similar estimate ($1.8 trillion) by using the BEA fixed asset statistics and Federal
Reserve Financial Accounts to estimate the wealth of sole proprietorships, see Section 5.1 below. Assuming a
pre-tax rate of return of 7%, this suggests that around $135 billion of sole proprietorship and farm income can
be considered capital income, consistent with a capital share of 15%­20% (total sole proprietorship income is
around $800 billion in 2016 in the national accounts, after factoring in a large amount of unreported income).



                                                      42
500% in 2018), the rise in wealth concentration since 2001 (e.g., Bricker and Volz, 2020), and
the rise in the capital share of national income.


Discussion. A number of remarks are in order. First, our updated estimates of capital income
shares are likely to be conservative. Our update, following SYZZ, takes into account one form
of tax-motivated shifting: In S-corporation with active owners, owners have an incentive to
pay themselves low wages so as to avoid Medicare and Affordable Care Act taxes of 3.8% in
total. Reported profits reflect a "disguised wage" component and hence attributing 100% of
S-corporation profits biases capital shares upwards. However, there are other forms of shifting
biasing the capital share in the opposite direction. In private C-corporations, owners had until
2018 an incentive to pay themselves high wages.63 Taking this tax-induced shifting into account
would increase the capital share, although more research is required on this issue.64
       Second, as shown by Figure 22, the effects from reclassifying some private business income
as labor (or capital) are quantitatively small. After classifying three-quarters of pass-through
income as labor, SYZZ find that the capital share of income for the top 1% is slightly below 50%,
vs. slightly above 50% in Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2018). After our revisions, we are back to
a capital share slightly above 50%. The changes are small because pass-through income, though
significant, is not a major fraction of pre-tax national income for the top 1%, where wages and
(non-pass-through) corporate profits are key. Since the turn of the century, S-corporation and
partnership income has accounted for 20%­25% of the pre-tax national income of the top 1%.
       Third, we warn against estimating factor income shares based only on fiscal income as
reported in individual income tax data.65 These data suffer from a massive selection bias. By
definition, owners of pass-through businesses tend to show up at the top of the fiscal income
distribution, since all of their business's income--before any tax deduction--passes through
to their individual income tax returns. This is in contrast to people who own investments
other than shares in pass-through businesses, for whom only a fraction of income--sometimes a
negligible fraction--passes through to their individual income tax return. A striking illustration
of this bias is given by Warren Buffett, the main shareholder of Berkshire Hathaway. Since
  63
     This is because the top marginal labor income tax rate (39.6% + 3.8% Medicare taxes in 2014) was (before
2018) below the top rate on distributed profits (tax rate over 50% when combining the 35% corporate income
tax, the 20% tax on dividends and realized capital gains and the 3.8% investment income tax in 2014).
  64
     As SYZZ show in their Appendix Figure I.10.B, their finding that a majority of income in the top 1%
derives from labor is over-turned when treating private C-corporation wages as disguised capital income. When
classifying 75% of pass-through business income as labor and accounting for disguised capital income in private
C-corporations, 53% of the income earned by the top 1% derives from capital, vs. 47% for labor.
  65
     In SYZZ, half of the results on income composition at the top are based on individual income tax data only;
the other half uses the Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2018) distributional national accounts microfiles.


                                                      43
Berkshire Hathaway is not a pass-through business and does not pay dividends, only a small
fraction of Buffett's income shows up on his tax return. In 2016 Warren Buffett disclosed he
had adjusted gross income of $11.5 million. In the tax data, the owner of a mid-market pass-
through business, such as an auto-dealer, has a higher income than Warren Buffet. In reality,
Buffett's true income (his share of Berkshire Hathaway's profit, i.e., what would show up on
his tax return if Berkshire Hatthaway was a pass-through business) is in the billions of dollars,
orders of magnitude larger than his taxable income and the income of successful auto-dealers.
Moreover, Buffett derives all of his income from capital: he could stop working and keep earning
the same income.
       This selection bias is exacerbated when (as done by SYZZ) one excludes capital gains from
fiscal income. Six of the ten wealthiest Americans in September 2020--Jeff Bezos, Mark Zucker-
berg, Warren Buffett, Larry Page, Sergei Brin, and Elon Musk--are major shareholders of
corporations that do not pay dividends (Amazon, Facebook, Berkshire Hathaway, Alphabet,
Tesla). If one excludes capital gains, their taxable capital income is negligible. A methodology
founded on taxable individual income excluding capital gains is not appropriate to study the
capitalists of the 21st century.
       The selection bias in the US individual income tax data is large because a large fraction
of capital income is missed by these data (Piketty, Saez and Zucman, 2018, Figure I). About
two-thirds of economic capital income does not show up on individual income tax returns: all
the profits of non-pass-through corporations that are not distributed as dividends; most housing
rents; investment income earned in pensions plans; dividends and interest retained in trusts,
estates, fiduciaries, etc. Since the majority of capital income does not show up on individual tax
returns (while most labor income and pass-through business income shows up), the capital/labor
split and the role of private business income cannot meaningfully be studied with individual
income tax data only.66 SYZZ's Figure I (left panel), Figure II, Figure VII (left panel), Figure
VIII (left panel, reproduced in Figure 22 below), and Figure IX (left panel), which report
statistics on the role of capital vs. labor in tax data, mostly reflect the selection bias inherent
in the tax data, not the reality of capital vs. labor in the United States.
       Fourth, the question of whether the rich derive most of their income from labor or capital is
in our view somewhat misplaced. As shown by Figure 23, the answer entirely depends on what
fractile of the distribution one looks at. For billionaires, virtually all income derives from capital:
  66
    Note that a growing fraction of pass-through capital income does not show up on individual income tax
returns due to the rise of bonus depreciation and the gradual move of the US tax system towards full expensing
of business investment; see Section 3.1.



                                                     44
Warren Buffet, Bill Gates, Sergey Brin, etc. could stop working and their economic income
would be unchanged.67 Moving down the distribution, a higher and higher fraction of income
derives from labor. As a result, one can always find a threshold, high in the income distribution
(perhaps slightly above or slightly below the 99th percentile), above which a majority of income
derives from capital. Relatedly, since the capital share rises with income, "person-level" statistics
(that weigh a billionaire and a doctor equally) always show a lower role for capital than "dollar-
level statistics" (in which billionaires weigh more). For classical economic questions, such as the
study of capital accumulation, income and wealth distribution, and factor shares, the relevant
statistics are the dollar-weighted ones.


5      Revised Estimates of Wealth and Income Inequality
This Section presents our updated estimates of income and wealth inequality. These estimates
incorporate the points raised in Smith et al. (2019), Smith, Zidar and Zwick (2020) and Auten
and Splinter (2019) that are well founded, as discussed in the previous sections. They also
include numerous other adjustments unrelated to these papers, in particular to improve the
international comparability of the series, following the publication of updated Distributional
National Accounts guidelines (Alvaredo et al., 2020). Our data jointly estimates wealth and
income in a single coherent framework. We discuss inn turn how our changes affect wealth and
income inequality.

5.1     Updated Wealth Inequality Estimates
We revise our wealth inequality estimates comprehensively, asset class by asset class. Two key
changes need to be highlighted. First, we now incorporate an interest rate premium in recent
years for the wealthy when estimating interest-bearing assets. Second, we revise the distribution
of business wealth by accounting separately for partnerships and sole proprietorships.


Interest bearing assets. Saez and Zucman (2016, p. 550) called for monitoring the evolution
of the interest rate differential they observed in matched estates-income tax data for the period
  67
     The question of whether income derives from capital vs. labor is different from the question of whether
wealth is inherited vs. self-made. Warren Buffet, Bill Gates, etc. derive 100% of their income from capital.
Their wealth, however, is also almost 100% self-made; they did not inherit much. Whether income derives from
capital is a very different question from whether wealth is inherited. Capital income is income earned, without
any current labor input, from the ownership of assets. That labor inputs may have been provided in the past is
irrelevant for the computation of labor vs. capital shares of income (but it does matter for the computation of
the share of wealth inherited vs. self-made).



                                                      45
2008­2012 and to adjust the capitalization method accordingly if need be.68 The evidence from
recent years, in particular the extension of the Saez and Zucman (2016) matched estates-income
data to the period 2012­2016 by Smith, Zidar and Zwick (2020), have generally confirmed the
presence of a small interest rate premium at the top. Over 2008­2016, the interest rate r of
estates above $20 million has been equal to around 1.3­1.4 times the macro interest rate rm on
average. These new data points call for a more moderate adjustment than the one proposed in
the Saez and Zucman (2016) appendix series (Table B41c) that used r/rm = 1.6.
       We revise our estimation of interest-bearing assets by factoring in the interest rate pre-
mium observed in matched estates-income tax data. Consistent with the theory developed in
Section 2.2.2, we capitalize interest at the top using the observed interest r of the wealthy.
Specifically, we capitalize the interest of the top 1% wealthiest tax units using an interest r
equal to 1.15 times the average interest rate between 2003 and 2007, and equal to 1.4 times the
average interest rate starting in 2008. We apply these heterogeneous interest rates to tax units
ranked by wealth, proceeding by iteration. That is, we first construct wealth using homogeneous
returns, and then reconstruct wealth using heterogeneous returns, ranking tax units by wealth
estimated in the first step.
       In addition, in our revised series fixed-income claims are now decomposed into assets that
generate interest for tax purposes (interest-bearing deposits and taxable bonds and loans held
outside of mutual funds) and assets that generate dividends for tax purposes (taxable bonds
and loans held through mutual funds, including money market funds). Both types of assets are
estimated separately. Dividend-generating fixed-income claims are allocated proportionally to
non-qualified dividends starting in 2003 and proportionally to all dividend income before 2003.
Interest-generating assets are allocated proportionally to interest income, with the interest rate
differential adjustment described above.
       The main effect of this revision is to reduce the importance of fixed-income claims at the top
of the wealth distribution, especially in the post-2008 period. Figure 24 shows the evolution of
the revised top 0.1% with details on asset composition. Interest-bearing assets now account for
27% of the wealth of the top 0.1% in 2016.
       This revision brings asset composition in line with the evidence from the Federal Reserve.
As shown by Figure 25, the share of fixed income claims in the net wealth of the top 1% is
  68
    See Saez and Zucman (2016, p. 550): "We retain our baseline top 0.1% wealth share estimate because only
a few hundred non-married individuals die with estates above $20 million each year. As a result, there is likely
significant noise in the annual series, making it difficult to make a precise and systematic inference of the true
interest premium at the top. Looking forward, should new evidence show that taxable returns rise or fall with
wealth, then it would become necessary to specifically account for this fact--and similarly when applying the
capitalization technique to other countries."


                                                       46
almost identical in our series and in the Distributional Financial Accounts since 1989. For
instance, in both datasets, the top 1% held 30% of its wealth in fixed-income claims in 1995
and 22%­23% in 2018. (The Distributional Financial Accounts start in 1989 and do not report
statistics for groups smaller than the top 1%). More broadly, our revised series are now fully
consistent with the Distributional Financial Accounts, the most comparable official statistics.
Figure 26 compares the top 1% wealth shares (among equal-split adults) in our revised series
and the top 1% wealth share (among households) in the August 2020 Distributional Financial
Accounts. In both level and trend, the series are very close; see Saez and Zucman (2020b) for
a detailed comparisons of our updated series and the Distributional Financial Accounts.


Business wealth. We revise our estimates of business wealth to treat sole proprietorships
separately from partnerships. Our original methodology assigned the same capitalization factor
to sole proprietorship income and partnership income, because the Financial Accounts do not
decompose equity in non-corporate businesses into a partnership component and a sole pro-
prietorship component. We now estimate this breakdown by using the raw sources that the
Financial Accounts use to estimate equity in non-corporate business assets.
       The Financial Accounts estimate the assets and liabilities of non-corporate businesses using
the balance sheets of partnerships reported to the IRS and the Survey of Business Finance for
sole proprietorships (as sole proprietorships do not reported balance sheets for tax purposes).
Sole proprietorship assets in the latest wave of the Survey of Small Business Finance are ex-
trapolated forward based on income reported by sole proprietorships (e.g., a constant ratio of
bank deposits to income is assumed).
       Closely following the Federal Reserve, we estimate household equity in partnerships (exclud-
ing residential real estate, which is part of housing wealth in our series even when held through
partnerships) in five steps (see Appendix Table I-S.B7). First, we start with the official estimate
of partnerships' non-residential fixed assets at current cost reported by the Bureau of Economic
Analysis. Second, we partially upgrade non-residential fixed assets to market values, following
the methodology used by the Federal Reserve to estimate the balance sheet of non-financial non-
corporate businesses in the Financial Accounts Table B.104.69 Third, we add land (not part of
fixed assets) as reported in partnership tax returns. Fourth, we estimate partnerships' financial
  69
    The upgrade factor is equal to the ratio of (i) non-corporate businesses' non-residential real estate at market
value, plus equipment at current cost, plus intellectual property product at current cost, plus inventories (all
taken from the Financial Accounts Table B.104) minus non-corporate farm land to (ii) non-corporate businesses
non-residential fixed assets at current cost (from the BEA fixed asset statistics). The ratio fluctuates around
150% over time with no trend. In practice, this correction essentially amounts to upgrading commercial real
estate to market values, while other assets (equipment, intellectual property) remain at current cost.


                                                        47
assets and liabilities as the total amount of financial assets and liabilities of non-financial non-
corporate businesses reported in the Financial Accounts Table B.104, minus the financial assets
and liabilities of non-farm sole proprietorships (from the Survey of Small Business Finance) and
farms (from the Financial Accounts).70 Last we add the small amount of household equity in
unincorported brokers & dealers estimated in the Financial accounts. We find that household
partnership equity wealth equaled $3.8 trillion in mid-2016.
       We compute sole proprietorship wealth using a similar procedure, isolating farm from non-
farm sole proprietorships; see Appendix Table I-S.B7 for complete details and formulas. We
find that from 2010 to 2019, partnership equity wealth averaged 21% of national income (with
a rising trend) and the wealth of sole proprietorships averaged 11% of national income (with no
trend), in both cases excluding residential real estate.71
       We cross-checked these results with the Survey of Consumer Finances (see Appendix Table
I-S.B8). First, sole proprietorship plus farm wealth totals $1.9 trillion in the 2016 SCF, i.e.,
12% of national income, very similar to our estimate. Some of the businesses that are recorded
as active LLCs in the Survey of Consumer Finances may also be sole proprietorships, since
single-owner LLCs file as sole proprietorships by default. However, IRS statistics show that,
in 2016, non-farm sole proprietorships registered as LLCs earned the equivalent of only 16%
of all non-farm sole proprietorship net income.72 Sole proprietorship LLCs are thus unlikely
to have significant assets. Second, the wealth of partnerships is higher in the SCF (45% of
national income in 2016) than in our estimate (24% in 2016). This is due to a number of reason.
Our estimate excludes residential real estate partnerships (whose assets are treated as housing
wealth in our series, to improve consistency with rental income in the national accounts and in
income tax returns). Moreover, following the Federal Reserve, our estimate is only partially at
market value: commercial real estate and other structures are at market value (based on real
estate market prices) but other assets are at current cost. Last, our estimate excludes hedge
funds and private equity funds, which are not part of the non-corporate business sector in the
Financial Accounts, but included in the household sector.
       Accounting separately for sole proprietorship and partnership wealth increase business wealth
  70
     Note that partnerships often own other partnerships. Such holdings are recorded as offsetting financial assets
and liabilities in the Financial Accounts Table B.104 and have no impact on households' equity in partnerships
(called "net worth" in Table B.104). Corporate holdings of partnerships are a liability which reduce households'
equity in partnerships.
  71
     By construction, our estimate of partnership equity wealth, plus sole proprietorship wealth, plus rental
residential real estate (net of mortgages) adds up to households' equity in non-corporate businesses as recorded
in the Financial Accounts Table B.101. See Appendix Table I-S.B6.
  72
     See "Sole Proprietorship Returns, Tax Year 2017," SOI Bulletin, available here, Figure K.



                                                        48
concentration, in line with what is seen in the Federal Reserve Distributional Financial Accounts.
This is because partnerships have more wealth underlying any dollar of income than sole pro-
prietorships in recent decades. Partnerships are more capital intensive: they are much larger
than sole proprietorships and operate in more capital intensive sectors. A sizable amount of
partnership wealth is in real estate (commercial real estate, land leasing, etc.) and oil-related
sectors (e.g., pipeline transportation), highly capital intensive sectors where sole proprietorships
are negligible. Our previous methodology which capitalized similarly a dollar of income earned
by a sole proprietorship and a partnership over-estimated sole proprietorship wealth and under-
estimated partnership wealth. Note that we keep matching the official Financial Accounts totals
for household equity in non-corporate businesses, totals which are on the low end since business
assets other than real estate is at current cost instead of market values.
   Last, as described in Section 4.2 above, we apply heterogenous capital and labor shares to
partnership income. In our revised series, and consistent with the available evidence (Figure 20
and Saez and Zucman, 2020), the capital share of business income rises with wealth: small
partnerships, like sole proprietorships, mostly earn labor income; while in large partnerships,
business income is closer to corporate profits, i.e., to capital income. Since labor income is
disregarded when estimating business wealth, this heterogeneity leads to more business wealth
concentration.


Corporate equity wealth. We improve the estimation of equity wealth. In our previous
series, we used a "mixed method" to capitalize dividends and capital gains: to rank tax units
only dividends were capitalized; to compute equity wealth, both dividends and capital gains
were capitalized. We implement three improvements.
   First, we now always put a weight of 50% on dividends and 50% on realized capital gains,
i.e., we distribute half of directly-held equity wealth proportionally to dividends and half pro-
portionally to realized capital gains (in our previous series, the weight put on capital gains was
de facto higher in years with large capital gains realizations). Second, for both rankings and
shares, we now capitalize dividends and a smoothed measure of capital gains. This smoothed
measure of capital gains is equal to the capital gains realized on average by the tax unit and its
closest 20 neighbors in terms of wealth (estimated by capitalizing equity solely with dividends).
This procedure allows us to have the same measure of equity wealth (and total wealth) when
ranking tax units and when computing their wealth. This greatly simplifies use while repro-
ducing almost exactly the results from our original "mixed method." This micro-level mixed
methodology is much superior to capitalizing equity using dividends and capital gains as capital

                                                49
gains are too lumpy at the individual level. Last, we use qualified dividends starting in 2003
instead of all dividend income. Qualified dividends exclude the dividends generated by money
market and bond funds (which we use to estimate wealth held in money markets and bond
funds, see above).
       These changes have relatively modest impacts, as (i) capital gains, qualified dividends, and
ordinary dividends are usually distributed similarly, (ii) the "micro mixed method" gives results
similar to the "macro mixed method" applied previously.73


Matching the Forbes 400. We now adjust equity wealth at the very top to match the
amount of billionaire wealth implied by Forbes each year. Between 1982 and 2005, we adjust
the equity wealth of the top 400 so that total top 400 wealth matches Forbes (reducing equity
wealth proportionally in the rest of the distribution). We make no correction before 1982 (in
1982 the share of wealth owned by the top 400 is small according to Forbes, less than 1% of
aggregate wealth vs. more than 3% in recent years). Starting in 2006 we implement the same
correction but for a group slightly larger than the top 400, namely billionaires (estimated using
the Forbes 400 and Pareto-interpolation techniques).
       This adjustment is motivated by the fact that the capitalization method, which infers equity
wealth based on dividends and realized capital gains, does not accurately capture the wealth
of billionaires who receive no dividend and barely realize any capital gains. This problem has
become more severe in recent years with the rise of giant tech companies that do not distribute
dividends yet. Six of the ten wealthiest Americans in July 2020--Jeff Bezos, Mark Zuckerberg,
Warren Buffett, Larry Page, Sergei Brin, and Elon Musk--collectively worth around $500 billion
in July 2020 (0.5% of total US wealth wealth), are major shareholders of corporations that do
not pay dividends.


S-corporations. As described in Section 4.2 above, and just like for partnerships, we apply
heterogeneous capital and labor shares to S-corporation profits. In our revised series, and
consistent with the available evidence (Figure 20 and Saez and Zucman, 2020), the capital
share of S-corporations profits rises with wealth: small S-corporations mostly earn labor income;
while in large S-corporations, S-corporation profit has a high capital component. Since labor
income is disregarded when estimating S-corporation wealth, this heterogeneity leads to more
concentration of S-corporation equity wealth.
  73
    The only notable exception is in 2009 and 2010, when the new methodology delivers lower equity wealth at
the top end. As a result the 2001­2010 and 2010­2016 dynamics of top wealth shares are now more consistent
with those seen in the SCF and Distributional Financial Accounts.


                                                    50
Housing wealth. We revise the distribution of owner-occupied housing to better match the
Federal Reserve SCF and Distributional Financial Accounts. Our original methodology aimed
at matching the share of housing wealth owned by the top 10% of the wealth distribution in
the SCF, but it did not attempt to match the share of housing wealth owned by the top 1%.
As noted in footnote 22 of Saez and Zucman (2016), according to the SCF, property taxes
are regressive at the top, with top 1% and top 0.1% households having substantially lower
property tax rates than average. As a result, assuming constant property tax rates as in our
benchmark methodology under-estimates housing wealth at the top relative to the SCF. We
now incorporate the observed property tax rate differential seen between the top 1% and the
rest of the population in the SCF.74 This translates into a small increase in housing wealth in
the top 1% and reconciles our estimate of owner-occupied housing wealth in the top 1% with
the Distributional Financial Accounts.
       We also fix a classification error in the estimation of aggregate mortgage debt. In our
previous series, mortgages on commercial real estates were included under tenant-occupied-
housing mortgage debt. In our revised series, commercial real estate mortgages are correctly
subtracted from business equity wealth (not housing wealth). This translates into an increase
in housing wealth net of mortgages.


Pension wealth. Last, we improve the treatment of pension wealth. Our previous method-
ology aimed at matching the amount of wealth found in the SCF for the top 10%, but did not
specifically target the top 1%. We now match the amount of pension wealth owned by the top
1%. To do so we reduced the weight put on non-taxable pension distributions (vs. taxable
pensions). Specifically, we now allocate 60% of pension wealth proportionally to taxable pen-
sion distributions, 30% proportionally to wages and 10% proportionally to non-taxable pension
distributions (e.g., Roth IRA distributions). This allows us to match the amount of pension
wealth seen in the SCF supplemented by the Sabelhaus and Henriques-Volz (2019) estimates
of defined benefit pensions. This revision reduces the top 1% wealth share by 1­1.5 points in
recent years. The share of pension wealth in the total wealth of the top 1% in now the same as
in the Distributional Financial Accounts.


  74
    SZZ develop a more sophisticated method to infer housing wealth with property taxes using state-level
information available solely in the internal tax data, paving the way to produce state-level wealth distribution
estimates. Our proposed change is a coarse way to achieve the same result for the US as a whole.




                                                      51
5.2       Updated Income Inequality Estimates
We revise our income inequality estimates comprehensively, income component by income com-
ponent. Two key changes need to be highlighted. First, we improve the estimation of pension
income going to the top 1% in recent decades. Second, we now deal with business income more
granularly.


Pension Income. Our revision of pension income parallels the changes to pension wealth
described just above. Just like 60% of pension wealth is now allocated proportionally to taxable
pension distributions, 30% proportionally to wages and 10% proportionally to non-taxable pen-
sion distributions (e.g., Roth IRA distributions), the same weights are used to allocate private
pension distributions. Our earlier treatment used a weight on non-taxable pension income that
varied over years and could be higher than 10%, especially in recent years. This revision reduces
the top 1% pre-tax income share by about 0.6 point in 2016 compared to the estimates reported
in Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2016).


Mixed business income. Paralleling our revision of business wealth, the estimation of busi-
ness income is improved by treating partnerships and sole proprietorships separately. We de-
compose mixed business income into a partnership and sole proprietorship component using the
same raw data sources as those used by BEA to estimate mixed income (i.e., tax returns, correc-
tions for depreciation based on the balance sheets of businesses reported to the IRS, corrections
for other differences between economic income and taxable income, correction for tax evasion
based on random audits, etc.). Consistent with our analysis of the wealth of sole proprietorships
vs. partnerships and the results in Saez and Zucman (2020), we allocate 50% of partnership
mixed income to capital (vs. 50% to labor) and 20% of sole proprietorship income to capital
(vs. 80%). This averages to an overall capital share of mixed income of close to 30%, which was
the assumption retained in our original series, but allows for a finer analysis of factor shares by
income group.
       In a similar vein, we now treat S-corporation equity as a separate asset class, distinct from
other corporations. Our earlier estimates treated S- and C-corporations together, as the NIPAs
do not decompose corporate profits into S-corporations vs. C-corporations profits. The NIPAs
only estimate S-corporation dividends separately. We now compute a specific equity income
  75
    In reality S-corporations may have slightly negative retained earnings, as corporations that make losses do
not distribute negative dividends. This will be taken into account once the BEA releases official decompositions
of corporate profits into S-corporation profits vs. other corporate profits.



                                                      52
flow for S-corporations vs. other corporations. The equity income of S-corporations is equal to
dividends paid by S-corporations (as estimated in the NIPAs) plus the share of business property
taxes paid by S-corporations; we assume that S-corporations have no retained earnings.75 We
allocate business property taxes to S-corporations proportionally to the share of S-corporation
equity in total corporate equity. We do no allocate any corporate tax to S-corporations. Treating
S-corporations as a separate asset class has small effects on the distribution of income, but it
allows for a more precise analysis of income sources.
    Figure 27 reports the composition of the top 1% income share. In 2018, the main income
sources for the top 1% (as a fraction of the total income earned by the top 1%) are compensa-
tion of employees (26%), equity income from non-pass-through corporations (19%), partnership
income (14%), pension income (10%), and S-corporation income (10%). All the rise of the top
1% income share since the late 1990s appears to be due to the rise of capital income, as found
in Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2018).


Tax rates. Taxes are allocated as in Saez and Zucman (2019b) and as in the international
guidelines of Alvaredo et al. (2020); see Saez and Zucman (2019c) for a conceptual discussion
of this allocation. There is no methodological change compared to Saez and Zucman (2019b).
Figure 28 reports the effective tax rate of the top 0.1% (including all taxes at all levels of
government, and expressed as a fraction of pre-tax income) in the original Piketty, Saez and
Zucman (2018) series, the Saez and Zucman (2019b) series, and the updated series presented
in this paper. As the graph shows, the revisions to wealth and income made in this paper have
only a trivial effect on the top tax rates reported in Saez and Zucman (2019b). The Saez and
Zucman (2019b) and current series differ somewhat from the original Piketty, Saez and Zucman
(2018) series for the reasons discussed in the online appendix of Saez and Zucman (2019b) and
in Saez and Zucman (2019c).


6     Conclusion
Scientific knowledge advances through debates (although not all debates necessarily advance
scientific knowledge). In the case of the measurement of US inequality, the recent debate, as
we have shown in this paper, has undoubtedly been useful. We are grateful to Auten and
Splinter (2019), Smith, Zidar and Zwick (2020), and Smith, Yagan, Zidar and Zwick (2019)
for encouraging us to reassess and improve some of our estimation procedures. Three issues
nonetheless deserve to be noted.


                                               53
       First, there is an incentive to contradict earlier work. This is partly a good thing: it is more
important to know that a received wisdom is false than confirming priors. But the incentive is
one sided: papers that "reverse" previous findings are more easily published (or attract more
attention) than research confirming these earlier findings.76 This imbalance risks distorting
research output. It could partly be addressed by changing publication and promotion norms,
to value more successful replications and rigorous extensions of existing work.
       Second, working on topics of policy relevance--such as inequality and what to do about it--
makes it difficult if not impossible to insulate the scientific debate from the political debate. The
two debates are necessary to a well functioning democracy but they obey different rules. The
scientific debate is about improving our understanding (e.g., our understanding of inequality and
of policy impacts) while the political debate is about advocacy and influencing outcomes. The
political process can fairly easily exploit discrepancies in scientific output for advocacy purposes
and claim that researchers hopelessly disagree. In areas ranging from the health effects of
tobacco to climate change, this process, facilitated by "merchants of doubt," has had dramatic
consequences in the past (Oreskes and Conway, 2011).
       Third, we stress the need for better and more comprehensive public statistics on inequality.
Our academic career has been about improving the measurement of inequality using existing
classical sources (e.g., Piketty and Saez, 2003), finding new data sources (e.g., Zucman 2013),
getting access to administrative data for research and helping setting it up for systematic re-
search (e.g., Chetty, Friedman, Saez, and Yagan, 2018), encouraging agencies to broaden data
access (Card et al. 2010), and creating systematic and regularly updated databases (World In-
equality Database, 2017). This work has made us well aware of the genuine difficulties involved
in measuring inequality--documented at length in our work. The solution to these difficulties
involves a more systematic collection of data for public statistical purposes; the creation of
improved conceptual frameworks to organize these data; the collaboration of researchers across
institutions and across countries to establish broadly-agreed, harmonized statistical standards.
Ultimately the best data about inequality would be published by government agencies, ac-
countable to elected representatives, discussed by the press and parties with a stake in their
improvement, and based on a regularly updated, internationally-agreed conceptual framework.
We have little patience for the view that "inequality is impossible to measure."




  76
    See for instance the cover story by The Economist titled "Inequality Illusions" (November 2019), based on
the three papers discussed in this article.


                                                     54
References

Alstadsæter, Annette, Niels Johannesen, and Gabriel Zucman. 2019. "Tax evasion
and inequality." American Economic Review 109, no. 6: 2073-2103.
Auten, Gerald and David Splinter. 2019. "Income Inequality in the United States: Using
Tax Data to Measure Long-term Trends." U.S. Department of the Treasury, Office of Tax
Analysis, unpublished mimeo, December 2019 version.
Auten, Gerald and David Splinter. 2019b. "Top 1% Income Shares: Comparing Estimates
Using Tax Data," AEA Papers & Proceedings, 109, 307-311.
Batty, Michael, Jesse Bricker, Joseph Briggs, Elizabeth Holmquist, Susan McIn-
tosh, Kevin Moore, Eric Nielsen, Sarah Reber, Molly Shatto, Kamila Sommer, Tom
Sweeney, and Alice Henriques Volz. 2019. "Introducing the Distributional Financial Ac-
counts of the United States," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-017. Washington:
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Bricker, Jesse, Alice Henriques, and Peter Hansen. 2018. "How Much has Wealth Con-
centration Grown in the United States? A Re-Examination of Data from 2001-2013." Finance
and Economics Discussion Series 2018-024. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Bricker, Jesse, and Alice Henriques Volz. 2020. "Wealth Concentration Levels and
Growth: 1989-2016." FEDS Notes 2020-02-20. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System (U.S.).
Bureau of Economic Analysis. 2020. "The 2020 Annual Update of the National Income
and Product Accounts," Survey of Current Business, vol. 100 (8).
Card, David, Raj Chetty, Martin Feldstein, and Emmanuel Saez. 2010 "Expanding
Access to Administrative Data for Research in the United States," White Paper for NSF 10-069
call for papers on "Future Research in the Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences".
Chetty, Raj, John Friedman, Emmanuel Saez, and Danny Yagan. 2018. "The SOI
Databank: A Case Study in Leveraging Administrative Data for Evidence-Based Policymaking."
Statistical Journal of the IAOS 2018, volume 34, 99-103.
Cooper, Michael, John McClelland, James Pearce, Richard Prisinzano, Joseph Sul-
livan, Danny Yagan, Owen Zidar, and Eric Zwick. 2016. "Business in the United States:
Who owns it, and how much tax do they pay?" Tax Policy and the Economy 30, no. 1: 91-128.
Gallin, Joshua H., Raven Molloy, Eric Nielsen, Paul Smith, and Kamila Sommer.
2019 "Measuring Aggregate Housing Wealth: New Insights from Machine Learning." Federal
Reserve Board working paper 2018-64, revised July 2019.
Guyton, John, Patrick Langetieg, Daniel Reck, Max Risch, and Gabriel Zucman.
2020. "Tax Evasion by the Wealthy: Measurement and Implications," working paper.
Johns, Andrew and Joel Slemrod. 2010. "The Distribution of Income Tax Noncompliance,"
National Tax Journal, 63(3), 397­418.
Piketty, Thomas, Emmanuel Saez, and Gabriel Zucman. 2018. "Distributional National
Accounts: Methods and Estimates for the United States." Quarterly Journal of Economics 133,
no. 1: 553­609.
Piketty, Thomas, Emmanuel Saez, and Gabriel Zucman. 2019. "Simplified Distribu-
tional National Accounts," AEA Papers and Proceedings, vol. 109, 289­295.
Sabelhaus, John, and Alice M. Henriques Volz. 2019. "Are Disappearing Employer
Pensions Contributing to Rising Wealth Inequality?" Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System.


                                             55
Saez, Emmanuel and Gabriel Zucman. 2016. "Wealth Inequality in the United States since
1913: Evidence from Capitalized Income Tax Data." Quarterly Journal of Economics 131, no.
2: 519-578. Updated series (post-2012) published at http://gabriel-zucman.eu/usdina/,
Appendix Table II, Table series E and on http://WID.world
Saez, Emmanuel and Gabriel Zucman. 2019. "Progressive Wealth Taxation." Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, forthcoming.
Saez, Emmanuel and Gabriel Zucman. 2019b.The Triumph of Injustice: How the Rich
Dodge Taxes and How to Make Them Pay., W.W. Norton.
Saez, Emmanuel and Gabriel Zucman. 2019c. "Clarifying Distributional Tax Incidence:
Who Pays Current Taxes vs. Tax Reform Analysis." UC Berkeley Working Paper 2019.
Saez, Emmanuel and Gabriel Zucman. 2020. "Labor and Capital in American Businesses,"
working paper.
Saez, Emmanuel and Gabriel Zucman. 2020b. "The Rise of Income and Wealth In-
equality in America: Evidence from Distributional Macroeconomic Accounts," September 2020,
forthcoming in Journal of Economic Perspectives.
Smith, Matthew, Danny Yagan, Owen Zidar, and Eric Zwick. 2019. "Capitalists in
the Twenty-first Century." Quarterly Journal of Economics 134, no. 4 (2019): 1675-1745.
Smith, Matthew, Owen Zidar, and Eric Zwick. 2019. "Top Wealth in America: New
Estimates and Implications for Taxing the Rich." Working Paper, April 24, 2020 revision.
Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration. 2020. "High-Income Nonfilers
Owing Billions of Dollars Are Not Being Worked by the Internal Revenue Service," May 29, 2020.
Available at https://www.treasury.gov/tigta/auditreports/2020reports/202030015fr.
pdf.
World Inequality Database. 2017. online at www.wid.world/.




                                             56
                                                Figure 1: Top 0.1% wealth share (tax units)




                       25%
                                                                    Saez and Zucman
                                                                     (2016, Figure I)
                       20%



                       15%




57
                       10%

                                                             Updated series

                        5%



                        0%




                               1910
                                         1920
                                                   1930
                                                             1940
                                                                        1950
                                                                                 1960
                                                                                           1970
                                                                                                     1980
                                                                                                               1990
                                                                                                                          2000
                                                                                                                                    2010
                                                                                                                                              2020




     Notes: This figure compares the share of wealth owned by the top 0.1% richest tax units, as estimated and printed in Saez and Zucman (2016, Figure I)
     and the share of wealth owned by the top 0.1% richest tax units in the updated estimates presented in this paper. The correction for the 1930s was already
     done in Piketty, Saez, and Zucman (2018) and due to an error in our initial estimation. Our updated estimates track our earlier estimates closely since the
     1960s, except for the Great Recession period of 2008-2012 where the updated series show less of a rise in inequality.
                               Figure 2: Top 1% Pre-Tax Income Share (Equal-Split Adults)


                      25%



                                                                                          Piketty, Saez and Zucman
                                                                                               (2018, Figure V)
                      20%




                      15%




58
                      10%
                                                                               Updated series




                        5%




                              1910
                                       1920
                                                 1930
                                                           1940
                                                                    1950
                                                                              1960
                                                                                       1970
                                                                                                 1980
                                                                                                           1990
                                                                                                                    2000
                                                                                                                              2010
                                                                                                                                        2020




     Notes: This figure compares the share of pre-tax national income earned by the top 1% adults (with income equally split among married spouses), as
     estimated and printed in Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2018, Figure V) and the share of pre-tax national income earned by the top 1% adults (with income
     equally split among married spouses) in the updated estimates presented in this paper.
           Figure 3: Wealth of Tax Units With Net Wealth Above $50 Million In 2016 ($ Trillion)


                        

                                                                                                "  "% #"! $"   "
                                                                                                

                                                                                                "  "% #"! $"   "
                                                                                                   !! "       




                        




59
                        


                        





                                       !                               & #                                   "  $


     Notes: This figure compares the amount of wealth owned by tax units with more than $50 million in net wealth in 2016 according to three sources: the
     Survey of Consumer Finances supplemented by the Forbes 400, the benchmark Saez and Zucman (2016) estimates, and SZZ. Saez and Zucman (2016)
     capture 90% of the wealth of tax units with net wealth between $50 million and $1 billion recorded in the SCF, and 105% of the SCF + Forbes billionaire
     wealth. SZZ (2016) capture 61% of the wealth of tax units with net wealth between $50 million and $1 billion recorded in the SCF, and 57% of the SCF +
     Forbes billionaire wealth. Therefore, the SZZ estimates of top wealth are substantially lower than the classical SCF and Forbes sources.
     Figure 4: Interest Rates Overall, for Top Estates, and Moody's Aaa and 10-Year Treasury Yields
                                                                         % " 
                                                                        
 %! !"$!%
                                                                        "##"  
                                                                        "##" 
   
                    
                                                                        &  $  
 !#

                    

                    

                    

                    




60
                    

                    




                                                                                                         
                   



     Source: Interest rates in matched estates-income tax returns taken from Saez and Zucman (2016, Appendix Table C6b) for 2000­2011 and from SZZ
     Appendix Figure A.15 Panel A for 2012­2016. The Saez and Zucman (2016) aggregate is revised to exclude bond mutual funds from the denominator (as
     such bonds pay dividends and not interest). The figure depicts Moody's Aaa (high quality corporate bonds with maturity over 20 years) and the 10-year
     Treasury rate. The interest rate of large estates is generally lower than the 10-year treasury rate and substantially lower than the Moody's Aaa rate.
                        Figure 5: Share of Taxable Interest Earned via Pass-Through Businesses


                          30%


                          25%


                          20%


                          15%                                                          Partnerships




61
                          10%


                           5%
                                                                               S-corporations

                           0%
                             1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017

     Notes: Partnerships. In 1993, 1994, 1995, partnership interest distributed to individuals is estimated by multiplying the amount of interest distributed by
     partnerships by the fraction of total partnership income distributed to individuals, within sector. This should should be seen as an upper bound for the
     amount of interest received by individuals in those years, as the ratio of interest to total distributed income may have been lower for individuals than for
     other types of partners (the pattern seen in 2011 in Cooper et al., 2016, Fig. 8B). In 2011, interest income distributed by partnerships to individuals is
     estimated using Cooper et al. (2016) and SOI data, as follows. Interest accounts for 6.8% of partnership income received by individuals (Cooper et al.,
     2016, Figure 8B), and individuals received $297b from partnerships (SOI tabulations of forms 1065), hence individuals received around 6.8% x $297 = $20.3
     billion in interest. Between 1995 and 2011, the share of interest received from partnerships in total 1040 taxable interest is interpolated linearly. After 2011,
     interest received by individuals from partnerships is estimated by assuming that the share of interest paid by partnerships that goes to individual partners
     is equal to its 2011 value, 11.9%. S-corporations. S-corporation taxable interest flowing to individuals is taken from SOI tabulations of 1120S forms. Note
     that we always exclude tax-exempt interest, which is reported separately by S-corporations and partnerships.
                           Figure 6: Overall and Top 1% Wealthiest Interest Rates in the SCF


                       
                                                                                             
    

                                                                                  
                                              
                       
                       
                       




62
                       
                       
                       
                                          

     Source: This figure depicts the interest rate among all households and among the top 1% wealthiest in the Survey of Consumer Finances. This is the
     interest rate on assets that generate taxable interest. Such assets include saving accounts ("saving"), money market accounts ("mmda"), call accounts at
     brokerage firms ("call"), certificate of deposits ("cds"), saving bonds ("savbnd"), all bond directly held ("bond") that are not tax exempt ("notxbnd"),
     and fixed claims held through trusts. It excludes all fixed claim assets held through mutual funds as such assets pay dividends and not interest for tax
     purposes. Interest income in the SCF includes interest income earned through passthroughs (partnerships and S-corporations) but the corresponding fixed
     claim assets cannot be identified separately from business wealth. Therefore, we uniformly reduce all three depicted interest rates using the fraction of
     interest income earned through passthroughs from Figure 5. Interest earned through passthroughs is very likely concentrated among the wealthy and taking
     this into account would further narrow the gap in the overall interest rate and the interest rate of the wealthy. In the series depicted, the interest rates of
     the rich follow the overall interest rate except for 2007-2016 when an interest premium on the rich arises In 2010-2019, the interest premium of the top 1%
     is stable around 40%.
                                        Figure 7: Interest Rate Earned by Listed Corporations

                         9%                                   Moody's Aaa
                                                              Interest rate of US non-financial coprorations (Compustat)
                         8%                                   Saez-Zucman aggregate

                         7%

                         6%

                         5%

                         4%




63
                         3%

                         2%

                         1%

                         0%
                                                                                                                                                 2011




                                 1995
                                        1996
                                               1997
                                                      1998
                                                             1999
                                                                    2000
                                                                           2001
                                                                                  2002
                                                                                         2003
                                                                                                2004
                                                                                                       2005
                                                                                                              2006
                                                                                                                     2007
                                                                                                                            2008
                                                                                                                                   2009
                                                                                                                                          2010
                                                                                                                                                        2012
                                                                                                                                                               2013
                                                                                                                                                                      2014
                                                                                                                                                                             2015
                                                                                                                                                                                    2016




     Notes: Interest rates are computed in Compustat as the ratio of interest and dividend income earned ("idit") to cash and short-term investments ("che")
     plus investments and other advances ("ivao"). According to 10-k reports, virtually all other investments are in fixed-income securities, and dividend income
     earned is negligible. The sample includes all listed US corporations (excluding financial corporations and real estate corporations) for which the variable
     "idit" is not missing or zero in Compustat.
                                  Figure 8: Interest Rate Earned by Large Listed Corporations

                                      
                    
                                                                    
 
              8%                                                                            8%
                                        Moody's Aaa                                                              Moody's Aaa
              7%                        Interest rate on Apple's fixed-income portfolio     7%                   Interest rate on Microsoft's fixed-income portfolio
                                        Saez-Zucman aggregate interest rate                                      Saez-Zucman aggregate interest rate
              6%                                                                            6%

              5%                                                                            5%

              4%                                                                            4%

              3%                                                                            3%

              2%                                                                            2%

              1%                                                                            1%

              0%                                                                            0%
                     00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16                            00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
                   20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20                            20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20




64
                                      
                                                                                           
 
              8%                                                                            8%
                                       Moody's Aaa                                                                Moody's Aaa
              7%                       Interest rate on Alphabet's fixed income portfolio   7%                    Interest rate on Pfizer's fixed income portfolio
                                       Saez-Zucman aggregate interest rate                                        Saez-Zucman aggregate interest rate
              6%                                                                            6%

              5%                                                                            5%

              4%                                                                            4%

              3%                                                                            3%

              2%                                                                            2%

              1%                                                                            1%

              0%                                                                            0%
                    2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016               00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
                                                                                                 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20

     Notes: Interest rates are computed using either 10-k reports or Compustat data. They are obtained by dividing total interest income earned by total
     fixed-income claims (cash, interest-bearing deposits, and portfolios of fixed-income securities).
                                   Figure 9: Interest Rate Earned by S-Corporations (2016)


                    4%




                    3%




                    2%




65
                    1%




                    0%
                               <$1 million          $1-$10 million        $10-$100 million         >$100 million          Moody's Aaa




     Notes: Interest rates are obtained by dividing taxable interest by the sum of cash, US government obligations, loans to shareholders, and mortgage & real
     estate loans. Source: SOI tabulations of 1120S tax returns.
                                        Figure 10: Yield on Interest-Bearing Assets in 2016


                    4%




                    3%




                    2%




66
                    1%




                    0%
                           Listed corp.       S-corp.>      SZ, top 1%        Estates >   Gates                 Apple          Moody's
                                               $100m        wealthiest         $20m     Foundation                              Aaa


     Source: Listed corporations: see Figure 7 above. S-corporations: see Figure 9 above. Bill and Melinda Gates foundation: publicly available tax return and
     Morningstar, see text. Estates above $20 million: SZZ Appendix Figure A.15 panel A, updating Saez and Zucman (2016, Figure V.B.).
   Figure 11: Interest Rate on Savings Accounts of US Foundations


      *
                                                                          
       '*                                                         * 
 
                 
                                                                  
    
 

       &*
                                                                  * 
 

  
  
       %*                                                          

       $*

       #*

       "*

       !*

        *

       *

       *
            '' ''         ''" ''$ ''&                         "      $      &                    "      $


Notes: this figure depicts the interest rate on savings accounts of US foundations from 1990 to
2016 using publicly available IRS micro-data on foundations at https://www.irs.gov/statistics/
soi-tax-stats-private-foundations-harmonized-microdata-files-ascii. The first series in dark blue
circles depicts the interest rate when using all foundations (total interest earned summed across all foundations
divided by total savings accounts, i.e. interest rate weighting by savings account size). The second series in
orange diamonds depicts the interest rate of the top 1% wealthiest foundations. These two series track each
other very closely implying that wealthy foundations do not earn a higher interest rate on savings accounts than
average. The third series in grey straight line depicts the revised Saez-Zucman interest rate used to capitalize
interest income on individual income tax returns. This series tracks fairly closely the interest rate earned by
foundations (overall and wealthy ones) on their savings accounts. The fourth series in yellow triangles depicts
the interest rate of the top 1% highest interest income earning foundations. This interest rate is much higher due
to selection (as high interest income selects both on savings accounts size and interest rate). It is comparable in
magnitude to the Moody AAA interest rate (depicted in dashed line as the fifth series).




                                                        67
Figure 12: Top 1% Foundations Wealth Shares with Various Capital-
ization Methods


      "

      "


      "

      "

      "                             

                       
 

 
               
      "
                       
 

 
    "                
          

      "
                      
 

 
    " 
                
  
                      

      "
                         


Notes: this figure depicts the share of total foundation wealth owned by the top 1% foundations (ranked by
size of net wealth). The first series in solid black line is the true wealth share using wealth reported on the
foundations' tax returns. The next three series estimate the top 1% wealth shares capitalizing saving accounts
wealth using interest income (for this specific asset class) and using various assumptions on the interest rate
from Figure 11. All other asset classes are estimated using the actual reported wealth for these asset classes.
The second series in dark blue circles uses as interest rate the average interest rate across all foundations as in
the basic SZ methodology. The third series in orange diamonds uses as interest rate for the top 1% wealthiest
foundations (ranking by wealth excluding savings accounts) the average interest rate of the top 1% wealthiest
foundations as in SZ revised methodology. The fourth series in yellow triangles uses as interest rate for the
top 1% highest interest earnings foundations the average interest rate of the top 1% highest interest earnings
foundations as in the SZZ methodology. In the last two series, the interest rate for other foundations is taken as
constant and set to match aggregates. The graph shows clearly that the SZ and the revised SZ method provide
accurate estimates while the SZZ method underestimates top wealth shares because it underestimates savings
accounts at the top, exactly as predicted by the theory. The bias is more severe in recent years when the interest
rate is lower. The asset class of savings accounts is about 5% of total wealth.




                                                        68
                  Figure 13: Fixed-Income Claims Owned by the Top 1% in 2016 (Trillions of $)

                         


                         


                         


                         





69
                                 % #                          # !"                       #!!                       "  $
                                #" # !"                                                                            # !"

     Note: fixed-income claims include checkable deposits and currency, time deposits and short-term investments, money market fund shares, debt securities,
     loans, and the fraction of mutual fund assets invested in bonds and loans; minus fixed-income claims held in IRAs. The aggregate for all households is
     $15.0 trillion in mid-2016 in all series (i.e., the Financial Accounts totals). Sources: Federal Reserve Distributional Financial Accounts (DFA): downloaded
     August 2020; 2016 Q3 estimate. Fixed-income claims held in IRAs by the top 1% are estimated as 10% of total fixed-income claims in IRAs; mutual fund
     assets invested in bonds and loans are estimated as 10.8% of the amount of "Corporate equities & mutual fund shares" assets owned by the top 1% (the
     aggregate ratio). The equal-split DFA estimate is obtained as 1.025 times the household DFA estimate (see SZZ Figure A16 Panel D). SZZ: Fig. 14 Panel
     C. Saez-Zucman updated: total fixed-income assets (variable hwfix, $7.44t for the top 1%) excluding miscellaneous assets (variable miscw, $0.37t).
                        Figure 14: Interest Rates at the Top in Smith, Zidar and Zwick (2020)


                                                  Moody's Aaa
                    8%
                                                  SZZ top 0.1% by interest income (including interest retained in trusts)

                    7%                            SZZ top 0.1% by wealth
                                                  Estates $20m+
                    6%

                    5%

                    4%




70
                    3%

                    2%

                    1%

                    0%
                      2000                  2003                 2006                 2009                 2012                2015


     Note: Moody's Aaa is the rate used by SZZ to capitalize interest income, ranking tax units by interest excluding interest retained in trusts (including
     retained in trusts) computes the average interest rate of the top 0.1% when ranking by total interest (including retained in trusts). Estates above $20m:
     see Figure 4. SZZ Top 0.1% by wealth: see text.
                           Figure 15: Wealth of American billionaires in 2016 (Trillions of $)

                        


                          


                        



                          



                          




71
                          



                              % # 
                          !                   % # 
                      "  $
                                                                                   
 
 #"

     Notes: Forbes + SCF is the estimate of billionaire wealth obtained by appending the Forbes 400 to the SCF, which by construction excludes the Forbes
     400. Saez-Zucman (2016), original is the estimate from the Distributional National Accounts microfiles of Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2018), which use
     the benchmark Saez and Zucman (2016) method to estimate wealth. Saez-Zucman (2016), 2020 update is from the updated series presented in this paper.
     Both the SZZ and the Saez and Zucman (2016) estimates reported here are at the tax unit level, conceptually comparable to the unit of observation for
     Forbes and SCF at the top.
     Figure 16: Profits Before Interest, Tax, and Depreciation of Real Estate S-Corporations ($
     Billion)

                         50

                         45

                         40            75% of ordinary business income
                                       Net rental income
                         35
                                       Depreciation

                         30            Interest
                                       25% of ordinary business income
                         25




72
                         20

                         15

                         10

                          5

                          0
                                          Smith-Zidar-Zwick (1120S)                             Actual (1120S + 8825)


     Notes: This figure compares earnings before interest, tax, and depreciation (EBITD) as used by SZZ to estimate the wealth of real estate S-corporations
     (using only form 1120S) vs. actual EBITD (using form 1120S and 8825) in 2016. Source: SOI tabulations of forms 1120S and 8825. Because SZZ do
     not include interest and depreciation expensed on rental income schedules (form 8825) they significantly under-estimate the true EBITD of real-estate
     S-corporations, and hence significantly under-estimate their wealth.
     Figure 17: Excess of Tax Depreciation Over Economic Depreciation for Non-Farm Non-Corporate
     Businesses (% of Non-Farm Proprietor's Income)


                     35%


                     30%


                     25%


                     20%


                     15%




73
                     10%


                       5%


                       0%


                      -5%




                              1960
                                       1965
                                                1970
                                                          1975
                                                                   1980
                                                                            1985
                                                                                     1990
                                                                                               1995
                                                                                                        2000
                                                                                                                 2005
                                                                                                                          2010
                                                                                                                                   2015
                                                                                                                                             2020




     Notes: This figure shows the ratio of the NIPA capital consumption adjustment (i.e., the excess of tax depreciation over economic depreciation) for non-farm
     sole proprietorships and partnerships (NIPA Table 7.13 line 14) to NIPA non-farm proprietor's income excluding capital consumption adjustment (NIPA
     Table 7.14, line 11). The figure shows that a high and growing fraction of the true economic income of non-corporate businesses (primarily partnerships) is
     exempt from taxation due to the rising generosity of tax depreciation rules. Auten and Splinter (2019) incorrectly classify the gap between tax and economic
     depreciation as tax evasion, which they then incorrectly allocate to the bottom 99% of the income distribution.
               Figure 18: The Allocation of Underreported Income in Auten and Splinter (2019)




74
     Notes: This Figure shows Table 2 from Johns and Slemrod (2010). The red column, showing the distribution of underreported income by reported pre-audit
     income, is the one used by Auten and Splinter (2019) to allocate underreported income. The blue column, showing the distribution of underreported income
     by corrected post-audit income, is the conceptually correct column to use. When ranking people by corrected post-audit income, 27% of underreported
     income comes from the top 1% (as opposed to 5% only when ranking by pre-audit income). The reason is that tax evaders are obviously richer once we
     account for their underreported income. Moreover, a number of individuals who report large business losses (and hence show up at the bottom of the
     pre-audit income distribution) are found in random audits to have in fact high incomes.
              Figure 19: Rate of Return on Assets for S-corporations vs. Listed Firms, By Sector


                              14%
                                                                                                            S-corporations (assuming 25% of
                              12%                                                                           business profit is capital income)
                                                                                                            Winsorized listed firms
                              10%

                                 8%

                                 6%

                                 4%




75
                                 2%

                                 0%
                                                 s              rs            rt            f.                le                 r               s           ds            es           e
                                             ice          ale            p po          a nu            l e sa          r a cto            ld ing          oo        u riti          stat
                                      s  erv         d  e              u                             o              n t               u i               g          c              e
                                                                    &s            tm            wh               co                                  le         Se             al
                               r i nk         h icle            v e           d uc            s                e               io  nb            r ab                        Re
                             /d            ve                 i            ro             o d             ra d             c t              -d u
                          od                              rat         a lp             go             yt             s tru             on
                        Fo            otor         in ist            t             l e             l t             n                N
                                    M            m                 Me          rab              ia              Co
                                            Ad                                               ec
                                                                           Du            Sp
                                                                                        3-digit NAICS sector

     Notes: This figure reports the return on assets in the 10 largest sector for S-corporations in terms of ordinary business income (excluding offices of health
     practitioners and legal services). For S-corporation, income is 25% of net income from a trade or business, plus interest paid, minus net gains on noncapital
     assets, plus tax depreciation, minus book depreciation (estimated by multiplying assets by the within-sector ratio of book depreciation to assets observed
     for listed firms). For the sector "Securities, commodity contracts, other financial investments, and related activities" (NAICS 523), we include 100% of
     portfolio income (net of investment interest expenses) in operating income. Similarly for real estate, we include 100% of rental income, as well as all interest
     and depreciation expensed on form 8825. For listed companies, income is operating income (variable OIBDP in Compustat) minus book depreciation, and
     a 95% winsorization is applied to income and assets. Source: SOI tabulations of forms 1120S, 8825, and Compustat.
                                    Figure 20: Capital Share of Value-Added, By Asset Size

                        


                                               

                            
                                                
                                                




                            




76
                            




                                                                                                                                  




     Notes: this figure shows the capital share of value-added at factor costs for C-corporations (excluding RICs and REITs) vs. S-corporations, by asset size.
     The capital share is computed as capital income divided by capital plus labor income, using SOI tabulations of forms 1120 and 1120S. For S-corporations,
     capital income is equal to 25% of ordinary business income, plus interest paid, minus net gains on noncapital assets. For C-corporations, capital income
     is equal to income subject to tax, minus portfolio income, plus charitable contributions and domestic production deduction, plus state income taxes paid,
     plus interest paid, minus net gains on noncapital assets. For both S- and C-corporations, labor income is the sum of wages and salaries, compensation of
     officers, employee benefit programs, and pension, profit sharing, etc., plans. C-corporations with more than $2.5 billion in assets are excluded from the
     >$100m bin.
                                     Figure 21: The Capital Share of Income in the Top 1%




                           

                                                                                               ""$ %  #
                                                                                                    #  
                           


                                                                                                                   " ! !




77
                                                                                                               

                                                                                                                                 





                                  
                                           

                                                   
                                                            

                                                                     
                                                                             

                                                                                      
                                                                                              





     Notes: this figure shows the capital share of income in the top 1%, i.e., the total amount of capital income earned by adults in the top 1% of the pre-tax
     income distribution (with income equally split among married spouses) divided by the total pre-tax income of this group. The pink line is the series as
     reported in Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2016, Table VIII) while the blue line shows our updated series. In the updated series, capital income includes 50%
     of S-corporation profits, about 50% of partnerships profits in recent years, 20% of sole proprietorship income, as well as non-S-corporation equity income,
     interest income, housing rents, and the capital component of pension income.
             Figure 22: The Capital Share of Income in the Top 1%: Comparing Estimates (2014)

                         


                         


                         





78
                                                               !                                                
                                                                                         

     Notes: this figure shows the capital share of income in the top 1% in 2014 according to different estimates. Series labeled "PSZ" and "PSZ udpated" are
     taken from Figure 21 above; see notes to this figure. Series labeled "SYZZ" are taken from Smith et al. (2019), Figure VIII, Panel B. Smith et al. (2019)
     exclude capital gains from capital income.
                                        Figure 23: The Capital Share of Income at the Top




                                                                         
                                                  


                           





79
                                                                                                                        




                                  

                                           

                                                   
                                                            
                                                                     
                                                                             
                                                                                      
                                                                                              




     Notes: This figure shows the capital share of income in the top 1%, the next 0.9%, and the top 0.1% in our updated series. Capital income includes 50%
     of S-corporation profits, about 50% of partnerships profits in recent years, 20% of sole proprietorship income, as well as non-S-corporation equity income,
     interest income, housing rents, and the capital component of pension income.
               Figure 24: The Top 0.1% Wealth Share (Among Equal-Split Adults): Composition



                                                                                                                             



                                                                                                                               

                                                                                                                               




80
                   
                                                           
                                  
                                  


                                                                                        





                            

                                    

                                            

                                                    

                                                            

                                                                    

                                                                            

                                                                                    


                                                                                            


                                                                                                    






     Notes: This figure shows the composition of wealth owned by the 0.1% wealthiest adults, with wealth equally-split among married spouses. Equities exclude
     S-corporation equity. Pass-throughs include partnerships, S-corporation equity, and sole proprietorships.
                        Figure 25: Share of Fixed-Income Claims in the Wealth of the Top 1%

                          40%


                                                          Saez and Zucman (2016),
                                                               updated series
                          30%




                          20%
                                                                                     Distributional Financial
                                                                                            Accounts




81
                          10%




                            0%




                                   1989
                                             1992
                                                       1995
                                                                1998
                                                                          2001
                                                                                    2004
                                                                                              2007
                                                                                                        2010
                                                                                                                  2013
                                                                                                                            2016
                                                                                                                                      2019




     Note: fixed-income claims include checkable deposits and currency, time deposits and short-term investments, money market fund shares, debt securities,
     loans, and the fraction of mutual fund assets invested in bonds and loans; minus fixed-income claims held in IRAs. The aggregate for all households is
     identical in both series (i.e., the Financial Accounts total). Sources: Federal Reserve Distributional Financial Accounts (DFA): downloaded August 2020.
     Fixed-income claims held in IRAs by the top 1% are estimated as 10% of total fixed-income claims in IRAs; mutual fund assets invested in bonds and loans
     are estimated as x% of the amount of "Corporate equities & mutual fund shares" assets owned by the top 1%, where x is the time-varying aggregate ratio
     of mutual fund assets invested in bonds and loans to total corporate equities & mutual fund shares owned by households. Saez-Zucman updated: total
     fixed-income assets (variable hwfix) excluding miscellaneous assets (variable miscw), equal-split adults.
     Figure 26: Top 1% Wealth Share: Updated Saez and Zucman (2016) vs. Distributional Financial
     Accounts


                           50%


                           45%


                           40%


                           35%                                                           Distributional Financial Accounts
                                         Saez-Zucman (2016)                                         (households)




82
                                             2020 update
                           30%            (equal-split adults)


                           25%


                           20%




                                  1910
                                            1920
                                                      1930
                                                               1940
                                                                         1950
                                                                                  1960
                                                                                              1970
                                                                                                      1980
                                                                                                               1990
                                                                                                                         2000
                                                                                                                                  2010
                                                                                                                                            2020




     Note: Both series series use the same definition of household wealth (the market value of all non-financial and financial assets net of all debts, excluding
     consumer durables and unfunded pensions), have the same total wealth (the official Financial Accounts total), and the same totals asset class by asset class.
     In the Saez and Zucman series, the unit of observation is the adult individual with wealth equally split between married spouses; in the Distributional
     Financial Accounts series, the unit of observation is the household. The top 1% households includes 1.26 million households in 2016; since about 90% of top
     1% households are married, this represents about 2.27 million adults. The top 1% adults includes 2.38 million adults in 2016, making the level of the two
     series broadly comparable. A fully accurate comparison would convert the Distributional Financial Accounts series to equal-split adults, and would show a
     slightly higher top 1% wealth share in the Distributional Financial Accounts compared to what is reported in the figure, with negligible impact on trends.
     Sources: Federal Reserve, and Saez and Zucman (2016), September 2020 update.
                Figure 27: The Top 1% Income Share (Among Equal-Split Adults): Composition




                                                                                                             




                                                                                                                      




83
                                                                                                                       




                   
                                      

                                                                                                     
 




                            

                                    

                                             

                                                     

                                                             

                                                                     

                                                                              

                                                                                      


                                                                                              


                                                                                                      






     Notes: this figure shows the composition of pre-tax income earned by the top 1% over time. Income is split equally among married spouses. Labor income
     includes compensation of employees, the labor component of sole proprietorship income (80%), and the labor component of pension income. Other capital
     income includes housing rents, interest, the capital component of sole proprietorship income, and the capital component of pension income. Partnerships &
     S-corporations splits 50/50 into a labor income and a capital income component (so that the line dividing labor and capital on the figure runs in the middle
     of the Partnerships & S-corporations component).
                          Figure 28: Top 0.1% Effective Tax Rate (Percent of Pre-Tax Income)



                   70%


                   60%


                   50%


                   40%




84
                   30%


                   20%                             Piketty, Saez and Zucman (2018)

                                                   Saez and Zucman (2019b)
                   10%
                                                   This update

                     0%




                            1950
                                    1955
                                            1960
                                                    1965
                                                            1970
                                                                     1975
                                                                             1980
                                                                                     1985
                                                                                             1990
                                                                                                     1995
                                                                                                              2000
                                                                                                                      2005
                                                                                                                              2010
                                                                                                                                      2015
                                                                                                                                              2020




     Notes: Taxes include all taxes at all levels of government. Tax rates are computed by dividing taxes paid by pre-tax income. Original Piketty, Saez and
     Zucman (2018) series do not include pure capital gains at the denominator. Saez and Zucman (2019b) series and this update include pure capital gains at
     the denominator (to smooth the effect of capital gains realizations). Saez and Zucman (2019b) series restrict the population to people earning more than
     1/2 the minimum wage in pre-tax income (which has negligible impact on top tax rates).
