                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           NEGLECTED NO MORE:
          HOUSING MARKETS, MORTGAGE LENDING, AND SEA LEVEL RISE

                                       Benjamin J. Keys
                                        Philip Mulder

                                      Working Paper 27930
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27930


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2020




We thank Lincoln Brown, Benjamin Collier, Geoffrey Heal, Sam Hughes, Rhiannon Jerch,
Carolyn Kousky, Howard Kunreuther, Yanjun Liao, Chris Mayer, Eric Zwick and participants at
the Kleinman Center's Energy Economics and Finance Seminar and the Wharton Urban Lunch
for helpful comments and suggestions. Erin St. Peter provided outstanding research assistance.
Keys thanks the Research Sponsors Program of the Zell/Lurie Real Estate Center for financial
support. Any remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Benjamin J. Keys and Philip Mulder. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Neglected No More: Housing Markets, Mortgage Lending, and Sea Level Rise
Benjamin J. Keys and Philip Mulder
NBER Working Paper No. 27930
October 2020
JEL No. G21,G22,G50,Q54,R21,R31

                                         ABSTRACT

In this paper, we explore dynamic changes in the capitalization of sea level rise (SLR) risk in
housing and mortgage markets. Our results suggest a disconnect in coastal Florida real estate:
From 2013-2018, home sales volumes in the most-SLR-exposed communities declined 16-20%
relative to less-SLR-exposed areas, even as their sale prices grew in lockstep. Between
2018-2020, however, relative prices in these at-risk markets finally declined by roughly 5% from
their peak. Lender behavior cannot reconcile these patterns, as we show that both all-cash and
mortgage-financed purchases have similarly contracted, with little evidence of increases in loan
denial or securitization. We propose a demand-side explanation for our findings where
prospective buyers have become more pessimistic about climate change risk than prospective
sellers. The lead-lag relationship between transaction volumes and prices in SLR-exposed
markets is consistent with dynamics at the peak of prior real estate bubbles.


Benjamin J. Keys
Department of Real Estate
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
432 Vance Hall
3733 Spruce Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
benkeys@wharton.upenn.edu

Philip Mulder
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3733 Spruce Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104
pmulder@wharton.upenn.edu
1        Introduction

Is a U.S. coastal housing bubble bursting? Under most climate forecasts, the question is not if but
when property values will reflect expected sea level rise (SLR). A sufficiently forward-looking house
price should account for both current heightened risk of extreme weather events, storm surges,
and nuisance flooding, as well as future anticipated inundation. On the other hand, if prices do
not fully reflect future risk, then unmitigated climate change could cause further large declines in
property value. As 42% of the U.S. population resides in a coastal shoreline county (Fleming et al.,
2018), whether property and mortgage markets are already responding to climate risk is of crucial
importance as homeowners, mortgage lenders, insurers, and policymakers try to predict how coastal
real estate markets will evolve in the coming decades.
        In this paper, we study the relationship between SLR exposure and changes in housing and
mortgage markets from 2001-2020. We focus on the coastal Florida market, where the Union of
Concerned Scientists projects that over one million properties are at risk of chronic inundation due
to SLR by 2100 (Dahl et al., 2018).1 Our analysis compares housing markets more exposed to SLR
with similar coastal markets with less SLR exposure.2 Using data on home transactions (both cash
and mortgaged), mortgage applications, and flood insurance all linked to sea level rise forecasts at
the census tract level, we examine the mechanisms through which the increasing salience of SLR
exposure over this period may have affected housing and mortgage markets.
        Figure 1 presents the raw trends in home sales volume (top panel) and prices (bottom panel)
between less-SLR-exposed and more-SLR-exposed tracts normalized by their 2001-2012 mean. Prior
to 2012, the two markets were on essentially identical volume paths. However, we document a sharp
decline in transaction volume since 2013 in housing markets most exposed to SLR. Sales in these
high-risk tracts have fallen in absolute terms since 2013, while sales in low-risk coastal tracts rose
between 2013-2018. In contrast, relative home prices follow volumes with a lag; From 2013-2016
they increase similarly in both groups, with a relative decline in the high-risk tracts only beginning
to emerge in 2018.
        This lead-lag relationship between real estate volumes and prices was last seen in these SLR-
exposed tracts at the start of the housing bust. While sales volumes began a precipitous decline in
2005, prices along the Florida coast remained relatively stable; It was only in 2008, after a decline
in annual sales volumes of over 60% from the market peak, that prices started a similarly steep
    1
     Dahl et al. (2018) note that Florida has the highest SLR exposure of any state in the U.S, motivating our decision
to make it the focus of analysis.
   2
     We define "more" and "less" exposed coastal tracts as those where more than 70% or less than 10% of developed
land would be inundated at 6 feet of sea level rise, respectively. Figure 2 shows maps of the coastal communities
included in the full sample, 771 tracts in all, that are within 1/2 mile of the coast.



                                                          2
decline (see Figure 1). The pattern of volume and prices during the housing market boom and
bust demonstrates that prices are not a sufficient statistic for market demand, and that declines in
volume may occur well before falling prices.3
       The staggered declines in sales volumes and prices in more-SLR-exposed markets relative to
their less-exposed coastal neighbors, echoing the last housing market cycle, raise our two primary
research questions. First, does the relative sales volume slowdown have a direct connection to
SLR exposure, or is it more plausibly explained by differences between the markets that are only
indirectly correlated with SLR? Second, what are the mechanisms for and implications of this
divergence between transaction volumes and home prices in SLR-exposed markets?
       To assess whether the housing market trends in Figure 1 reflect a direct relationship with climate
risk, we use matching estimators in a difference-in-difference framework to control for observable
differences between markets with different SLR exposure. Using 2001-2012 as a baseline period, we
examine whether the post-2013 volume and price trends in more-SLR-exposed markets diverged
from observationally similar areas less exposed to SLR. To test the robustness of our results, we
compare our findings across synthetic control, nearest neighbor, and generalized propensity score
matching estimators. Each approach provides intuitive counterfactuals and additional flexibility for
further hypothesis testing. Our empirical approach reflects the uncertainty and community-level
effects of SLR risk while allowing us to flexibly control for a large number of observable differences
and pre-trends across markets.
       All three methods produce similar results consistent with the raw trends shown above: After
2013, more-SLR-exposed markets declined in housing transaction volumes but saw comparatively
little change in prices relative to observationally similar less-SLR-exposed markets. By 2018, we
estimate that the most-SLR-exposed census tracts in Florida had 16-20% lower transaction volumes
from their 2001-2012 annual average relative to a counterfactual where these areas continued to
follow a matched sample of markets with low SLR exposure. Our estimates imply that approx-
imately 16,500 fewer home transactions took place from 2013-2018 among the 187 census tracts
most exposed to SLR relative to counterfactual trends. On the other hand, we find no evidence of
a strong relationship between changing home prices and SLR from 2013-2016. However, starting
in 2016, prices in more-SLR-exposed tracts began to relatively decline, reaching 5-10% below trend
by 2020.
       Next, we consider the potential mechanisms behind these changing market trends. First, we
   3
    See DeFusco et al. (2017), who describe and theoretically motivate the lead-lag relationship between volumes
and prices over the housing boom and bust. A related literature studies the co-movement between prices and volume
across housing market cycles (e.g. Stein (1995), Scheinkman and Xiong (2003), Burnside et al. (2016)). See also Case
and Shiller (2003) and Case (2008), who discuss inertia and downward rigidity in house prices.




                                                         3
rule out the hypothesis that lender behavior can explain these patterns: We estimate similarly large
relative declines in both cash home purchase and home purchase loan volumes. We also document
generally small changes in the rate of loan denial, securitization, or refinancing volume with respect
to SLR exposure. These findings suggest that it is homebuyers, not lenders, whose demand in
SLR-exposed areas began to wane in 2013.
       Given the importance of socioeconomic status and climate change beliefs in shaping how buyers
might be responding to growing risk, we explore how our results vary with poverty and climate
change perceptions.4 High-poverty, SLR-exposed communities have had larger relative declines in
home sale volumes and prices, suggesting a greater housing market decline than their wealthier
counterparts. We also find that the volume and price declines are concentrated in SLR-exposed
markets located in counties where Yale Climate Opinion Survey data show more residents are
worried about climate change.
       Notably, transaction volumes begin to diverge in 2013 as a confluence of events focused public
attention on climate risk. These events include Hurricane Sandy striking the East Coast in October
2012, the release of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) AR5 report which
increased worst-case SLR projections, and the release of the 2014 National Climate Assessment
which documented SLR exposure in the United States (Stocker et al., eds, 2013; Georgakakos et
al., 2014). These reports spurred local news coverage of climate risk, with headlines like "Florida
Communities Prepare for Rising Seas," and an apparent increase in public interest (Gibson, 2014).5
Google Trends search intensity for the topic "Sea Level Rise" in Florida shows a positive trend
break in search interest in 2013 (see Appendix Figure A-1). Pew Research polling data found that
the percentage of Americans worried about climate change, after flattening at 40% from 2010-
2013, began steadily increasing in 2013 to 60% by 2020 along with a growing partisan gap between
Democrats and Republicans on the topic (Kennedy, 2020). We interpret these indicators as evidence
that an upward trend in SLR risk salience began in 2013.
       Given these changing beliefs around sea level rise, we view our findings as most consistent with
a framework where the increased salience of climate change has led prospective buyers to become
more pessimistic about future home prices in SLR-exposed areas than current homeowners. As in
models of climate belief heterogeneity in Bakkensen and Barrage (2017) or Baldauf et al. (2020),
SLR risk may not be fully capitalized into home prices in areas where "climate optimists" are the
marginal home buyers.6 However, these models cannot match the pattern of declining volume but
   4
     For a few examples from a large literature exploring interactions between poverty and climate change, see
Bakkensen and Ma (2020), Keenan et al. (2018), and R¨   as¨
                                                          anen et al. (2016).
   5
     For examples of local media coverage, see Frago (2014), Reiser (2014), and Elevation zero: Rising seas in South
Florida (2013).
   6
     A related point is made by Bunten and Kahn (2017), who model how risk and amenity preference heterogeneity,


                                                         4
stable relative prices that we observe in the most-SLR-exposed areas until 2018.
    Instead, our empirical findings are best characterized by the housing market bubble dynamics
of DeFusco et al. (2017), where sellers remain optimistic about their home's value at the peak of
a housing boom because they overestimate demand by extrapolating from recent price increases.
Thus, sellers set prices higher than most prospective buyers are willing to pay, causing transaction
volumes to decline before prices. The divergence between volume and prices can be explained by
sellers in SLR-exposed areas systematically underestimating the SLR risk discount demanded by
increasingly anxious buyers.
    Under this framework, our results would suggest that declining volume (a `quiet' phase for
transactions) will precede falling prices in high SLR exposure markets. Both the less-SLR-exposed
and more-SLR-exposed tracts in our sample exhibit a lead-lag relationship between home sale
volumes and prices over the housing boom-and-bust. However, it was only the more-SLR-exposed
tracts that experienced a decline in sale volume from 2013-2018 even as home prices continued to
increase in both markets. After a significant lag, home prices have started to follow sale volumes
into a relative decline, matching the empirical predictions from DeFusco et al. (2017).
    If heightened SLR risk awareness has made prospective homebuyers more wary of at-risk coastal
markets, why have lenders been relatively unresponsive? Our interpretation, informed by conver-
sations with multiple lenders and industry participants, is that lenders are protected by federal
programs that actively mis-price climate risk. First, for mortgage loans held on balance sheets,
the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) offers generous coverage at subsidized prices be-
low actuarial fairness (Kousky et al., 2017). Second, for securitized loans, Fannie Mae, Freddie
Mac, and the FHA, which insure over half of the U.S. mortgage market, do not price predictable
regional variation in default risk, including climate risk (Hurst et al., 2016). Thus, while lenders
may have more sophisticated risk assessment capabilities relative to homebuyers, their incentives
are not aligned to internalize SLR risk, and if anything may exploit the mis-pricing of risk at the
federal level (Ouazad and Kahn, 2020).
    Our results, which are apparent in the raw time-series, are robust to a variety of sample restric-
tions and econometric assumptions regarding the construction of the counterfactual or choice of
matching variables. Between our methodologies, we are able to include extensive controls for cur-
rent flood risk, pre-2013 tract demographics, and county fixed-effects. By subsetting the estimation
sample to coastal markets, we compare the dynamic capitalization of SLR exposure across areas
with similar coastal amenities and trends over the housing market boom and bust. Our findings are
robust to excluding Miami-Dade county, suggesting that our estimates reflect a broader pattern in
independent of beliefs, can attenuate the relationship between climate risk and house prices in a residential sorting
model.


                                                         5
the coastal Florida real estate market. The estimated coefficients are also similar when we exclude
SLR-exposed tracts that were struck by a large hurricane over the 2013-2020 period, indicating
that future, rather than current, flood risk better explains our findings. Finally, changes in flood
insurance premiums over this time period cannot explain these divergent patterns in home sales.
    Our findings contribute to a rapidly growing literature on climate change, sea level rise, and
housing markets. First, our paper uniquely incorporates dynamic market activity alongside home
prices rather than examining prices independent of transaction volume.7 Several papers have
found evidence that SLR risk is at least partially capitalized into house prices, with an emphasis
on heterogeneity in capitalization between markets with different beliefs.8 Both Bernstein et al.
(2019) and Baldauf et al. (2020) estimate large SLR price discounts after 2013, and are significantly
higher in areas with high climate change "worry" as measured in the Yale Climate Opinion Survey.
Similarly, Giglio et al. (2015) construct a "Climate Attention Index" from mentions of flood zones
and hurricanes in property listings, and find that high Index values are related to greater SLR
discounts. Our results suggest that focusing on prices alone can miss important dimensions along
which housing markets respond to SLR. The initial divergence between home sale volumes and
prices that we document provides the first empirical evidence that increasing salience of SLR risk
can first result in a decline in market liquidity rather than being immediately capitalized into home
prices.
    A notable difference between our approach and the prior literature is that we measure SLR
exposure and outcomes at the census tract rather than property level. Thus, our identification
strategy compares differentially exposed coastal communities rather than differentially exposed
properties in the same community. We adopt this approach for two primary reasons. First, SLR
inundation projections are highly uncertain at the property level due to measurement error and
model uncertainty (Gesch, 2009). Second, property-level comparisons may be contaminated by
localized spillover effects from SLR impacting nearby roads or infrastructure and increasing flood
risk for even nominally non-inundated properties (McAlpine and Porter, 2018). Using a continuous
community level measure better reflects the uncertainty and spillover effects of SLR exposure.9
    A second central contribution is our analysis of lender behavior in response to increasing SLR
salience. Our results showing sharp declines in both mortgage volumes and cash purchases suggest
that buyers' changing risk perceptions are currently of primary importance for understanding hous-
    7
      A related literature studies the capitalization of current flood risk into housing markets. See, for instance, Bin
and Landry (2013), Bin and Polasky (2004), Eichholtz et al. (2019), Kousky (2010), and Muller and Hopkins (2019).
    8
      A notable exception is Murfin and Spiegel (2020), who compare elevation price premiums across areas with
different relative rates of SLR due to geological subsidence. They find that no difference in the elevation premium
between areas with higher versus lower expected relative SLR, indicating that SLR risk is not capitalized into prices.
    9
      See Section 2 for more details on the construction of our SLR exposure measure and Section D on the decision
to use tract-level measures.


                                                           6
ing market trends in SLR-exposed coastal Florida. Our results are potentially consistent with the
findings of Ouazad and Kahn (2020) that lenders increase mortgage securitization in areas struck
by large hurricanes that occurred between 2004 and 2012, insofar as they suggest that lenders may
have updated their beliefs about climate risk before 2013. However, the fact that lenders have
not meaningfully changed their rate of refinancing, loan denial, or securitization in the most-SLR-
exposed areas suggests that either their perception of SLR risk has either not changed since 2013,
or else they view their balance sheets as sufficiently insulated from climate risk.
         Finally, our empirical approach provides a uniquely broad analysis of housing markets' response
to SLR risk by incorporating many data sources and emphasizing tract-level variation. The primary
analysis covers 20 years of housing market activity with data from over 1,380,000 home sales and
2,650,000 loan applications in coastal Florida. We also collect extensive and novel data on changing
policy-level flood insurance premiums and take-up rates. Data on over 320,000 flood insurance
policies are used to calculate census tract-level measures of premium increases that followed the
2012 Biggert-Waters (B-W) legislation that reformed the NFIP.10 Merging these records at the
tract-level with rich controls and SLR projections, we are able to estimate the effects of SLR risk
salience on not just house prices, but also transaction volumes and lender behavior, as well as study
the effects of changing flood insurance premiums. Combining these sources, we are able to conclude
that SLR-exposed housing markets are experiencing demand-driven declines in transaction volume
and home prices over a period coinciding with increasing climate risk salience, and that cannot be
explained by lender behavior, insurance premiums, or other observable factors correlated with SLR
exposure. These steep transaction volume declines in at-risk tracts may serve as a leading indicator
of further impending price declines.


2         Data

2.1        Data Sources

Our analysis relies on five main data sources merged at the 2010 census tract level: Sea level rise
(SLR) projections from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), home sales
prices and characteristics from CoreLogic and Zillow, mortgage lending data from the Home Mort-
gage Disclosure Act (HMDA) database, and data on National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)
premiums, claims, and take-up rates from the OpenFEMA policy and claims database. In this
section, we describe how these data, along with several other complimentary sources, are used to
    10
    See also Gibson et al. (2019), who study the effect of the 2012 B-W reforms, flood map changes, and the impact
of Hurricane Sandy on property values in New York.




                                                        7
construct the sample and variables used to conduct our analysis.


2.2      Sample Selection

To compare SLR exposure within housing markets located near similar coastal amenities, we subset
to 2010 Florida census tracts where the 2000 census population centroid from National Historic
GIS database (Manson et al., 2019) is within 1/2 mile of the coast. There are 859 tracts that
meet this definition. We further exclude tracts with zero Census population or that we identify
as completely non-residential (14 tracts) and tracts with insufficient data in CoreLogic and Zillow
observations to reliably estimate home price indices (HPIs) (74 tracts).11 These restrictions lead
to a final estimation sample of 771 tracts. Our estimation period is 2001-2018 for our lending and
home sale volume data, and 2001-2020 for home prices.
       We collect a number of tract-level controls from the 2010 census and geographic data, including
population share foreign born residents, population share nonwhite, household poverty rate, age
demographics, and the share of tract area occupied by water.


2.3      Sea Level Rise Exposure (NOAA)

Our data on SLR projections come from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA) (Marcy et al., 2011).12 These NOAA projections use hydrological models and elevation
data to map how coastal land areas would be inundated under one foot to ten feet of SLR. We use
these projections to create our measures of SLR exposure across coastal housing markets at the
census tract level.
       We calculate a continuous measure of SLR exposure for each tract as the share of developed land
that would be inundated at six feet of SLR. Developed land is defined using the 2001 National Land
Cover Database and overlaid with the six-foot SLR layer from the NOAA in ArcGIS (Consortium,
2001). From this continuous measure, we construct a binary indicator of "more-SLR-exposed"
versus "less-SLR-exposed" tracts, defined as tracts with SLR exposure greater than 70% (187
tracts) or less than 10% (217 tracts) respectively.13
       Figure 2 maps the geography of SLR exposure across the estimation tract sample. The top
panel shows continuous exposure for all estimation tracts and the bottom panel shows the subset of
more-SLR-exposed (red) or less-SLR-exposed (green) tracts. Both maps show that SLR exposure
  11
      See Section 2.4 for the details of tract-level HPI construction.
  12
      See https://coast.noaa.gov/slrdata/ for NOAA SLR data. Our version was downloaded in August 2018.
   13
      Our rationale for choosing these specific thresholds comes from our Generalized Propensity Score (GPS) results
(see Section 3.3), which estimate effects as a function of the continuous SLR exposure measure. The GPS results
find small and insignificant effects among the less-SLR-exposed group, and that the largest treatment effects are
concentrated in the most-SLR-exposed tracts.


                                                         8
tends to be higher on the state's west coast and along the southern edge to Miami. However, the
inset maps focused on Tampa Bay and Miami show substantial SLR risk heterogeneity within small
geographic areas. Figure 3 plots the distribution of SLR exposure with cutoffs for the more-SLR-
exposed and less-SLR-exposed tracts. The density of SLR exposure is greatest at the upper and
lower ends of the exposure distribution.
       The NOAA's six-foot measure matches the benchmark for SLR exposure used in other research
on climate risk and housing markets (Bernstein et al., 2019; Goldsmith-Pinkham et al., 2019). A
recent meta-analysis of climate models suggests that six feet of SLR is towards the upper end of
likely SLR outcomes under a high emissions scenario (Garner et al., 2018). This measure captures
variation in SLR tail risk, an important consideration given that much of the expected costs of
climate change occur under such worst-case scenarios (Weitzman, 2011). By construction, the
continuous tract-level measure of SLR exposure at six feet will be correlated with relative exposure
at other SLR depths.
       As a measure of contemporaneous flood risk, we measure the share of each tract's developed
land designated by FEMA as inside a Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA), commonly referred to as
a floodplain. Data for the floodplain extent comes from the National Flood Hazard Layer provided
by FEMA.14


2.4      Home Price Index and Market Transaction Volume (Corelogic and Zillow)

We use home purchase records from CoreLogic to measure housing transaction volume from 2001-
2018 at the census tract level and by cash versus mortgage purchases. CoreLogic gathers publicly
available deeds and tax assessor records on the near-universe of Florida home sales. The deed
records include information on sale date, sale price, and whether the sale was a cash or mortgage
purchase. Sales records from deeds are consistently available across most geographic areas starting
in 2001 and are updated through the end of 2018.
       We measure residential property transaction volumes as the annual number of condo or single-
family home transactions at the tract level. We assign each transaction to a 2010 census tract using
parcel coordinates in CoreLogic. We use the CoreLogic cash purchase field to separately tally cash
purchases.
       To measure home prices from 2001-2020, we use the Zillow Zip Code level home price index
(HPI) crosswalked to 2010 census tracts and standardized to equal one for each tract in 2001
(Missouri Census Data Center, 2014; Zillow, 2020). We take the annual home price measure as
  14
   Current data from the National Flood Hazard Layer can be downloaded at https://www.fema.gov/flood-
maps/tools-resources/flood-map-products/national-flood-hazard-layer. Our version of the data were downloaded in
August 2018, with the shapefile available upon request.


                                                      9
the May 31 estimate of each year, with the exception of 2020 where we use the end-of-February
measurement to avoid contamination from the potential housing market effects of COVID-19.
       A key advantage of the Zillow HPI is that it provides the most up-to-date measurement of
home prices available, whereas the CoreLogic data are available through 2018.15 We note that our
2001-2018 home price results are extremely similar when we estimate our HPI in CoreLogic instead.
Details of this estimation are available upon request.16


2.5      Loan Volumes, Denial Rates, and Securitization Rates (HMDA)

Loan applications from the HMDA database allow us to measure credit volume and lender behavior
through rates of loan denials and securitization. Passed in 1975 to enforce fair lending laws, the
Home Mortgage Disclosure Act requires lenders to submit detailed characteristics of home mortgage
or refinance loan applications and subsequent denials or approvals, including data on applicant
income and demographics, property census tract, and loan amount if approved.
       We measure annual purchase loan volume as the number of approved home purchase loans in
HMDA. We crosswalk loans reported at the 2000 census geography in the earlier HMDA samples to
2010 census tracts using the Missouri Census Data Center Geocorr application weighting by housing
units (Missouri Census Data Center, 2014).17 We use reported loan amounts to analogously define
dollar-weighted purchase loan volume. In addition, we construct similar measures of refinancing
volume. To account for lender heterogeneity, we also separately measure lending volumes by "local"
and "non-local" lenders. Following a similar procedure used in Gallagher and Hartley (2017), if a
lender makes at least 10% of their total lending value (as measured in the full, national HMDA
data) within a given county, they are classified as "local" to that county.
       We estimate tract-level annual denial and securitization indices controlling for characteristics
in the loan-level HMDA data. The denial and securitization indices are estimated from linear
probability models where the outcome is whether a loan application was approved our denied or
whether an approved loan below the conforming loan limit (CLL) was marked in HMDA as sold for
  15
     With no similar publicly available data on transaction volumes available with the same recency, we study trans-
action volumes through 2018 with our CoreLogic data.
  16
     The Zillow HPI is missing from 2001-2014 in 16 out of the 771 coastal census tracts, whereas there are sufficient
observations in CoreLogic to estimate annual tract-level HPIs for the entire estimation sample over that period. We
use the relationship between the estimated CoreLogic HPI and the Zillow HPI from 2001-2014 in the non-missing
tracts, which have a correlation coefficient around 0.75, to predict and fill in the missing 2001-2014 Zillow HPI
values in the 16 tracts with partial data. Our results are almost identical excluding these tracts. We only estimate
a replacement HPI in CoreLogic if the tract has an average of twenty transactions per year over the replacement
period.
  17
     We obtain very similar results measuring purchase loan volume with CoreLogic instead of HMDA. Small dis-
crepancies in loan counts between the two datasets can be explained by measurement error in crosswalking the 2000
census tracts in HMDA and possible geocoding errors in CoreLogic. Reassuringly, the 2010 tract-level loan counts in
both datasets have a correlation coefficient greater than 0.9 from 2001-2018.



                                                         10
securitization, respectively. Both estimating equations include flexible controls for loan value, loan
type, distance from the CLL, and the borrower's reported loan-to-income ratio. Appendix Section
C describes the estimation of these indices in more detail.


2.6      Flood Insurance Premium Changes (NFIP)

The National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) is a government entity that provides over 95%
of flood insurance policies in the United States, with $1.3 trillion in value insured as of December
2019 (Kousky et al., 2018). To address the program's large debts after Hurricane Katrina, Congress
passed the Biggert-Waters (BW) Insurance Reform Act of 2012, which required the NFIP to increase
premiums on subsidized policies and other fees. As a result, average premiums increased in our
estimation sample from $833 in 2012 to $1,243 in 2018.
       To account for these changing premiums, we turn to the OpenFEMA policy and claims databases.
These data describe the universe of NFIP policies issued since 2009 and claims filed since 1978
(OpenFEMA, 2020a,b).18 The policy data include the insured home's geography at the 2010 cen-
sus tract level and detailed policy attributes. The claims data describe every claim submitted by
policyholders, including the exact date of loss and the total claim paid, also geocoded at the 2010
census tract. We manually code NFIP rating manuals to construct premiums and fees across 234
distinct policy categories from 2012 ­ 2018 to measure premium changes over time.19
       Simply averaging annual observed premiums may be a biased measure of true premium increases
if policyholders respond to higher rates by insuring less on the intensive or extensive margin. To
address this measurement issue, we instrument for the observed change in premiums with the
counterfactual change if the tract's composition of policies had remained fixed in 2012. To construct
the instrument, we measure the difference in premium for each 2012 policy under the 2018 versus
2012 rates as if it had maintained the same coverage decisions in both years. We take the inverse
hyperbolic sine (IHS) of the mean difference in each tract multiplied by the take-up rate as our
measure of premium changes.20 Appendix Section C.2 describes our construction of tract-level
premiums and IV estimation in more detail.
  18
     FEMA and the Federal Government cannot vouch for the data or analyses derived from these data after the data
have been retrieved from the Agency's website(s) and or Data.gov.
  19
     The NFIP historical rating manuals can be accessed via https://www.fema.gov/flood-insurance/
work-with-nfip/manuals/archive.
  20
     The IHS is defined as IHS (y ) = ln(y + (1 + y 2 )1/2 ). Like the standard log transformation, the IHS shares many
of the same properties that allow coefficients to be approximately interpreted as elasticities. The function has the
added benefit of being defined at y = 0 (Bellemare and Wichman, 2020).




                                                          11
3         Methodology

3.1        Estimating Changes in SLR Capitalization after 2013

A challenge of studying the effects of climate risk on housing markets is the lack of exogenous
variation in exposure. In particular, SLR exposure is correlated with current flood risk, coastal
amenities, income, and demographics. As shown in Table 1, more-SLR-exposed tracts are closer
to the coast, have higher flood risk, higher socioeconomic status, and more foreign-born residents
relative to less-SLR-exposed tracts.
         The purpose of our estimation strategy is to test whether the differential 2013-2020 market
trends in tracts with higher SLR exposure persist when we compare them to a group of less-SLR-
exposed tracts that are more observationally similar in pre-2013 characteristics. To achieve this,
our methodology builds on a difference-in-difference style estimator that controls for differences in
outcome levels and differential trends by a large number of observable characteristics. Motivated by
the apparent trend break in SLR risk awareness in 2013, which aligns with the break in home sales
volume among more-SLR-exposed tracts in the raw data, we estimate changes in housing market
outcomes from 2013-2020 relative to a 2001-2012 baseline period.21 In particular, our estimators
compare changes in outcome trends after 2013 in tracts with different SLR exposure by normalizing
each outcome variable by its tract-level 2001-2012 average. This transformation adjusts for pre-
existing differences in outcome levels across tracts. The units of our estimated coefficients are the
relative change between more-SLR-exposed and less-SLR-exposed tracts as a percentage of each
tract's 2001-2012 mean.22
         Under a parallel trends assumption, our estimates can be interpreted as relative changes in the
capitalization of SLR into more- versus less-exposed housing markets. In other words, our parallel
trends assumption is that in the absence of growing SLR salience in coastal Florida, housing markets
with different SLR exposure would have continued on similar paths. If any of the observable or
unobservable differences between more-SLR-exposed and less-SLR-exposed tracts is correlated with
some other housing market shock around 2013, then we would misattribute different trends to
increasing SLR risk salience.23
    21
     For other examples of research that shows 2013 as a turning point in SLR capitalization, see Baldauf et al.
(2020) and Bernstein et al. (2019), who find that the capitalization of SLR into home prices increases after 2013, and
Goldsmith-Pinkham et al. (2019), who identify an SLR premium in municipal bond yields that only starts to emerge
in 2013. See also the discussion of increasing SLR risk salience in Section 1.
  22
     This data transformation also facilitates matching in the synthetic control (SC) method (see Section 3.2 for
details on the SC method). We obtain similar results when we define the outcomes as log differences in the nearest
neighbor and generalized propensity score estimators.
  23
     Our decision to subset to coastal census tracts is motivated in part by the differential trends between coastal
and non-coastal housing markets from 2001-2013, as shown in Figure A-2. Florida as a whole had distinct home sale
volume and price dynamics, particularly over the housing boom and bust, relative to its coastal areas.



                                                         12
       To address this threat to the parallel trends assumption, we employ a series of matching estima-
tors to select a subset of less-SLR-exposed tracts that are observationally similar to the more-SLR-
exposed tracts on pre-2013 characteristics and outcome trends. We can be more confident that
different relative trends between more- and less-exposed tracts which persist in matched samples
are a result of increasing climate risk awareness rather than some unrelated shock. Combining our
difference-in-difference framework with matching estimators relaxes our parallel trends assumption;
tracts with higher SLR exposure would have continued on similar paths as the matched sample of
less-exposed tracts in the absence of growing SLR risk salience.24
       We apply three different estimators to establish the robustness of our results to alternative
matching techniques and sets of covariates: synthetic control (SC), generalized propensity score
(GPS), and nearest neighbor (NN) matching. Consistent results across these different methods
increases our confidence in the conditional parallel trends assumption. We describe each of the
three matching estimators in detail below.


3.2      Synthetic Control

For each more-SLR-exposed tract, the synthetic control (SC) estimator constructs a weighted av-
erage of less-SLR-exposed that match it as closely as possible on both covariates and pre-period
trends. Assuming that the procedure can achieve a close fit, SC results are robust to differences in
observable and unobservable characteristics with time-varying effects (Abadie, 2019).
       We apply the SC estimator as described in Abadie et al. (2010) and extended into settings
                                                               M denote the outcome for a tract
with multiple treated units as in Cavallo et al. (2013). Let Yit
i in year t that is in the more-SLR-exposed treatment group. The SC method aims to estimate
                     L , the value of Y if tract i were less-SLR-exposed. It accomplishes this by
the counterfactual Yit
constructing a "synthetic" tract i from the set of less-exposed tracts j = 1, . . . , J :

                                                           J
                                                    L =               L
                                                  Yit            wj Yjt                                             (1)
                                                          j =1

       where wj are a set of weights estimated over the less-SLR-exposed tracts and restricted to be
non-negative and sum to one. They are chosen to create a synthetic tract that will most closely
resemble the treated tract along a set of covariates which can include pre-period outcomes. The
                                     M - Y L.
estimated treatment effect is it = Yit    it
  24
    Spillover effects are another important threat to identification as there may be a reallocation of economic activity
from areas affected by SLR into nearby, less affected areas. This concern motivates our decision to refer to the
comparison group as "less-SLR-exposed" rather than "control" or "unexposed." Our estimated effects include the
net impact of any such reallocation.



                                                          13
   We construct our set of synthetic tracts by matching on the following set of non-outcome
covariates: 2010 population shares nonwhite, foreign born, under age 18, age 18-64, and in poverty,
inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS) of flood insurance claims per capita 1995-2005, share of tract area
made up of water, and distance-to-coast from tract population center. We also match on the
outcome variable as a set of consecutive two-year averages over the pre-period (i.e. the outcome
means in 2001-2002, 2003-2004,..., 2011-2012).
   Unlike the traditional SC setting in Abadie et al. (2010) with one treated group, we have
many treated units (187 more-SLR-exposed tracts). We adopt the implementation in Cavallo et
al. (2013) and run the SC procedure over each more-SLR-exposed tract to estimate an average
treatment effect in each year.
   We also follow Cavallo et al. (2013) to conduct inference by constructing placebo synthetic
controls for each of the less-SLR-exposed tracts from the other less-SLR-exposed tracts. For each
year, we construct 100,000 bootstrap samples from the set of placebo estimates equal to the number
of exposed tracts to construct a distribution of average placebo treatment effects. The two-sided
p-value of a treatment effect in year t is the probability that one of the average placebo effects has
a larger magnitude than the estimated average treatment effect.
   In sum, the SC estimator can flexibly control for a large number of observable covariates as
described above. As we show later in our results, with 12 years of pre-period data, the SC method
succeeds at constructing a set of synthetic tracts quite similar to the more-SLR-exposed tracts over
the pre-2013 period and across our set of outcomes.


3.3   Generalized Propensity Score

The generalized propensity score (GPS) approach is an extension of propensity score matching
that estimates the effects of continuous treatments. This feature means that, unlike with our other
two matching estimators, we do not need to classify tracts into binary more-versus-less exposure
groups while discarding any tract with intermediate exposure. Instead, we are able to estimate
dose-response functions and see the changing effects of SLR on housing markets across the full
distribution of exposure for all the tracts in our sample.
   We follow the GPS method as described in Hirano and Imbens (2004). Rather than estimate a
single propensity score, the GPS method models a generalized propensity scores at every point along
the distribution of SLR exposure conditional on actual exposure and covariates. The generalized
propensity scores are then used to estimate a "dose-response" function between SLR exposure and
outcomes. Appendix Section D describes GPS estimation in more detail.
   The generalized propensity scores are estimated conditional on deciles of distance-to-coast and


                                                 14
share of a tract's developed area in the floodplain (also referred to as "Special Flood Hazard
Areas," or SFHAs), county fixed-effects, inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS) of flood insurance claims
per-capita 1995-2005, 2010 population share under 18 and share 18 to 64, and quadratic terms of
2010 population shares nonwhite and foreign born, and tract area made up of water. We estimate
potential outcomes at 10% intervals of SLR exposure from 0% to 100%, and pool together our data
over 2010-2012, 2013-2015, and 2016-2018, and 2019-2020 to present our estimates compactly.25
      The ability to include county fixed-effects in propensity score estimation is another desirable
property of the GPS. These fixed-effects control for differential trends driven by county-level unob-
servable factors and show that our results can be robustly identified from within-county variation
in SLR exposure. This within-county analysis is most feasible with the GPS relative to our other
estimators because it draws on the full sample of coastal tracts and uses variation in continuous,
rather than binary, SLR exposure.


3.4      Nearest Neighbor Matching

Nearest neighbor (NN) matching pairs each more-SLR-exposed tract with a single less-SLR-exposed
tract that most closely resembles it over specified covariates. In addition to using this method to
assess the robustness of our results under alternative matching techniques, it is computationally
efficient and amenable to including additional regressors in post-matching estimation (Rubin and
Thomas, 2000), a feature we use to control for changing NFIP premiums (see Section C.2 for details
on this estimation).
      The NN procedure matches more-exposed tracts to less-exposed tracts by minimizing the fol-
lowing Mahalanobis distance metric over covariates X :


                                             (Xi - Xj ) (Xi - Xj )                                (2)

      Where  is the X covariance matrix. The estimated treatment effect is the mean difference in
outcomes between the more-SLR-exposed tracts and matched less-SLR-exposed tracts.
      The procedure works best when the number of covariates in X is relatively small. We choose
a set of six covariates based on reducing the largest differences in the full estimation sample and
prioritizing covariates correlated with primary outcomes. We implement nearest neighbor matching
with replacement over: 2010 population shares nonwhite, foreign born, and in poverty, inverse
hyperbolic sine (IHS) of flood insurance claims per capita 1995-2005, share of tract area made up
of water, and tract distance-to-coast from the population center.
 25
      We obtain similar GPS results from year-by-year estimates.




                                                         15
    As shown in Table A-1, matching significantly improves the covariate balance between more-
SLR-exposed and the matched sample of less-SLR-exposed tracts. The procedure reduces, but
does not eliminate, statistically significant differences in distance-to-coast, population share foreign
born, and flood insurance claims per-capita. Thus, the NN estimates rely on the parallel trends
assumption holding under these remaining observable differences.


4     Results

4.1       Descriptive Statistics

Figure 2 presents a map of Florida coastal census tracts used in our analysis. The top panel shows
the share of each tract's developed land that would be chronically inundated at six feet of sea
level rise (SLR). The figure includes insets for Tampa Bay and the Miami region, documenting
substantial variation in exposure within these coastal metro areas. The bottom panel highlights
the subsample of tracts that are categories as either "more-SLR-exposed" or "less-SLR-exposed."
We define "more-SLR-exposed" as at least 70% of the tract's developed land exposed to six feet
of sea level rise, and those with less than 10% of developed land exposed as "less-SLR-exposed"
tracts.
    Table 1 provides descriptive statistics of our sample of coastal Florida census tracts. Among
these tracts, we examine both continuous and discrete measures of exposure. Using all tracts, we
employ a continuous measure of the share of the parcels in the tract exposed to six feet of sea level
rise (SLR). The average tract in our sample has 40% of its parcels exposed to six feet of SLR, and,
as seen in Figure 3, the density of SLR exposure is greatest at the upper and lower ends of the
exposure distribution.
    In Columns 2 and 3 of Table 1, we present summary statistics for tracts assigned by our discrete
measure to "more-SLR-exposed" and "less-SLR-exposed" coastal tracts (as defined above). These
two groups of tracts are substantially different across a range of geographic and demographic
attributes. The high exposure tracts are much more likely to be located in a FEMA floodplain,
have a larger water area in the tract boundary, and have higher average house transaction prices.
These differences motivate our variety of approaches to account for observable differences between
the two areas while exploring the effect of sea level rise on the housing and mortgage markets of
these tracts.
    Figure 1 presents the time series of aggregate housing transactions and mean house price index
for our sample of less-SLR-exposed (top panel) and more-SLR-exposed (bottom panel) tracts. As
discussed in Section 1, there is a lead-lag relationship between transaction volumes and prices in


                                                  16
both the more- and less-exposed tracts over the housing boom and bust. However, while the less
exposed tracts see a steady increase in volumes and prices after the 2008 recession, the recovery in
more-exposed tracts is interrupted in 2013 with a sudden decline in transaction volumes. In these
at-risk tracts, the lead-lag relationship of the boom and bust repeats: While home prices continue
to rise until 2016, they begin to level off and see a large relative decline by 2020.26
       Figure 4 shows that these relationships between SLR, housing transactions, and house prices
hold across the continuous distribution of SLR exposure.27 Comparing changes in 2018 relative to
the pre-2013 mean, panel (a) shows a pronounced decline in relative home sales volume for tracts
with greater than 60% exposure to six feet of SLR. On the other hand, there is essentially no
relationship between SLR and relative changes in 2018 home sale prices as shown in panel (b).
However, by 2020, a significant negative relationship between SLR and relative prices emerges in
panel (c).


4.2      Synthetic Control Results

Can the lead-lag relationship between home sale volumes and prices across SLR-exposed areas be
explained by differences in observable (and potentially unobservable) characteristics or pre-trends?
We test whether the divergence between sales volumes and prices in markets with high SLR exposure
in the raw data is robust using the synthetic control (SC) estimator. Figure 5 shows the time series
of home sales and HPI for the more-SLR-exposed tracts (labeled with squares) and the synthetically
constructed control sample (labeled with circles). The home sales volume series (panel (a)) follow
each other closely prior to 2012, the period over which we balance pre-event covariates. After 2012,
however, the two series diverge sharply, with many fewer home sales in high exposure areas. By
2018, there are relatively 20% fewer home sales being made in more-SLR-exposed tracts than in
the synthetic control sample relative to the 2001-2012 mean.
       In contrast, the house price series (shown in panel (b)) follows a very different pattern, with
high exposure tracts' relative prices rising until 2016, peaking at roughly 2% higher prices, and
then falling to a level 5% below that of the synthetic control sample's prices by 2020. Note that
prices followed similar paths prior to 2012, highlighting the ability of the synthetic control method
to balance pre-trends for house prices despite the differences in many observable attributes of these
coastal tracts.
       Thus, even when the set of less-SLR-exposed tracts are chosen to match the more-SLR-exposed
  26
     Figure A-3 plots volumes and prices side-by-side in the more- and less-exposed samples to emphasize their lead-lag
dynamics.
  27
     Figure A-4 presents a map of the change in home sales volume (panel (a)) and HPI (panel (b)) between 2011-2012
and 2017-2018.



                                                          17
tracts on relevant covariates and outcomes prior to 2013, we see the same divergence between house
prices and sale volume emerge in high exposure tracts as shown in the raw data from Figure 1.
Cumulating the differences between the exposed and synthetic series and multiplying by the most-
SLR-exposed tracts' 2001-2012 mean home sale volume, we estimate that between 2013 and 2018,
there were approximately 16,500 fewer home transactions in more-SLR-exposed tracts relative to
pre-2013 predicted trends.
       Panels (c) and (d) of Figure 5 present the estimated treatment effects (the difference between
the two series in panels (a) and (b), respectively) along with the two-sided 95% interval of placebo
treatment effects indicated by the shaded gray region.28 Treatment effects falling outside of the
shaded gray region are statistically significant at  = 0.05.29
       The estimated coefficients for housing volume are negative and statistically significant in five out
of the six years between 2013-2018, and generally increasing in magnitude over time from a decline
of 4% in 2013 to 19% in 2018. The estimated coefficients for HPI are positive and significant from
2012-2016, but then fall into the range of the placebo results in 2017 before becoming a significantly
negative 5% relative decline from 2018-2020. Notably, relative to the volume declines which were
already significant in 2013, there was not a statistically significant relative decline in prices until
2018.


4.2.1      Sea Level Rise and Mortgage Lending

Does the decline in transaction volume reflect a change in credit supply on the part of lenders, who
may recognize the growing risk of a long-term 30-year obligation in SLR exposed markets? Or do
these patterns instead represent a negative shift in credit demand due to declining housing demand
in exposed areas? In Figure 6, we explore the dynamics of home purchase lending volumes alongside
cash purchase volumes. If the patterns we document were a consequence of lenders tightening their
credit standards, then we would expect a larger decline in home purchase lending volumes than
cash purchase volumes.
       Both panels (a) and (b) of Figure 6 show a sharp divergence between more-SLR-exposed tracts
and control tracts after 2012, with declines of roughly 20% by 2018 in both mortgage and cash trans-
  28
      The placebo treatment effects are calculated first by estimating a placebo synthetic control for each of the less-
SLR-exposed tract from the sample of other less-SLR-exposed tracts. Next, we draw 100,000 bootstrap samples of
size 187 (i.e. the number of more-SLR-exposed tracts) from the less-SLR-exposed tracts and calculate the placebo
treatment effect for each sample as the mean difference between the bootstrap sample and their placebo synthetic
controls. This procedure provides a distribution of placebo treatment effects from which we can calculate p-values as
the probability of observing a placebo effect greater in magnitude than the estimated treatment effect.
   29
      The first column of Table 2 presents the 2018 coefficients from the SC estimator across housing market outcomes
with p-values in parentheses.




                                                          18
actions that are consistent with the overall volume results presented above in Figure 5.30 Thus, the
explanation for the decline in transaction volume cannot be solely based on lender behavior. While
previous research has focused on lender decision-making, by examining cash purchase transactions
where lenders are not involved and nonetheless observing a pronounced contraction in home buying
activity, we are able to provide new evidence that the decline in sales volume reflects primarily a
housing demand rather than credit supply response.
       In Figure 7, we further examine additional indicators of lender behavior. If lenders are differ-
entially tightening their standards in these tracts, we would expect to see a decline in refinancing
volume and an increase in loan denials. In panel (a), we observe essentially no change in refi-
nancing activity. Panel (b) of Figure 7 shows that more loan applications are being denied in
more-SLR-exposed tracts, with coefficients consistently 4-7% more loan denials (off a base of 25%
in the pre-2013 period), but not statistically significant in all years. Thus, we conclude that while
lenders may be making small adjustments on the margin, changing loan denials cannot explain a
20% decline in purchase loan volume in more-SLR-exposed tracts.
       Although lenders have not meaningfully tightened credit in areas at risk of sea level rise, it
is possible they have increased securitization to transfer their climate risk to the housing GSEs.
However, Figure 8 shows little support for this hypothesis. The securitization rates of more-SLR-
exposed tracts mostly follow their synthetic counterparts (albeit noisily), with the 2018 coefficient
close to zero.
       While the above patterns suggest a muted lender reaction to SLR risk, it is possible that local
lenders with concentrated portfolios may be more exposed and thus more responsive. To test if
behavior differs across local and non-local lenders we define a lender within a county for a given
year as "local" if it originates at least 10% of its total annual lending in that county. We explore
purchase loan volumes across these two types of lenders in Figure 9.
       The local lender series (panel (a)) is quite noisy, but by 2018 shows a substantial decline in
lending volume. In panel (b), we document that non-local lenders have steadily been differentially
decreasing purchase loan volumes since 2012 in more-SLR-exposed markets, reaching roughly a 15%
decline by 2018. Both series appear to show a decline, but non-local lenders' decline was earlier and
more consistently statistically significant, whereas local lending patterns are considerably noisier.
Thus, these results do not support the view that local lenders have differentially responded to
climate risk due to superior local information or greater concentrated risk exposure.31
  30
    Our results also show consistent declines in the aggregate dollar value of purchase loans.
  31
    The number of loans originated and applied for with local lenders is too sparse at the tract level to reliably
estimate their securitization or denial indices. However, we obtain similar null results for securitization and denials
using only non-local lenders. We also find no evidence of changes in volume of refinance loans for local or non-local
lenders.


                                                          19
   In sum, our results suggest that changing SLR risk salience has not dramatically affected credit
supply in coastal Florida. One plausible mechanism behind these results is that lenders were
already incorporating climate risk into their practices prior to 2013, as suggested by Ouazad and
Kahn (2020) who find that lenders increased mortgage securitization in high-risk areas following
large hurricanes from 2004-2012.
   Furthermore, federal housing policies, by insulating mortgage balance sheets from disaster risk,
could also make lenders less responsive to climate risk. The National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP) offers flood insurance at premiums generally below actuarial rates for the highest risk
properties (Kousky et al., 2017). For instance, after Hurricane Katrina, the most flooded parts
of New Orleans saw no significant change in loan delinquency, consistent with flood insurance
payments protecting lenders from mortgage default (Gallagher and Hartley, 2017). Lenders can also
securitize loans with the housing GSEs, Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac, at prices that are completely
independent of current or future flood risk. Although the NFIP and mortgage securitization leave
taxpayers exposed to climate risk, these programs insulate lenders' balance sheets.


4.3   Examining the Distribution of SLR Exposure

While our synthetic control results highlight different housing market trends between more-SLR-
exposed and less-SLR-exposed tracts, they are limited to studying SLR exposure as a binary vari-
able. In reality, we observe a continuous distribution of SLR exposure across our sample in coastal
Florida. To study how intermediate levels of SLR risk affect housing markets, we turn to a gener-
alized propensity score (GPS) estimator.
   Figure 10 presents results for home sales and the home price index across the sea level rise
distribution, with the x-axis representing sea level rise exposure. "0" indicates no exposure, while
"1" means the entire tract (100% of developed area) would be inundated at six feet of sea level
rise. Panel (a) shows the differential change in home sales by 2013-2015 from the 2001-2012 period
relative to tracts with no SLR exposure. There is evidence of a modest and statistically insignificant
decline in transaction volume of 5% for tracts with at least 80% SLR exposure. Tracts at lower levels
of exposure show no relative difference in volume relative to tracts that are completely unexposed.
However, by the 2016-2018 period shown in panel (c), there is a clear downward trend in home
sales for tracts with greater than 50% exposure. For tracts that would be fully inundated at six
feet of sea level rise, we estimate a relative decline of roughly 20% of the pre-2013 mean in home
sales over the 2016-2018 period relative to tracts with no exposure, very similar to our estimated
effect for the more-SLR-exposed group using synthetic control methods.
   Panel (b) of the figure shows the relative change in home prices in 2013-2015 from the 2001-


                                                 20
2012 period. Similar to our results in Figure 5, we estimate a statistically significant relative
increase in prices of around 5-10% for tracts with high SLR exposure over this period. In panel
(d), we see that this relative increase has completely disappeared by the 2016-2018 period and that
relative price levels have returned to their 2001-2012 baseline or lower among SLR-exposed tracts.
Panel (e) shows that, by 2020, tracts with high SLR exposure saw relative home price declines of
approximately 10% of their pre-2013 mean prices.
   The main advantage of the GPS method is to show changing housing market dynamics across
the sea level rise distribution. We observe declining home sales only in tracts with at least 50%
sea level rise exposure, with the largest declines in the same tracts from the more-SLR-exposed
treatment group used in the synthetic control method. Tracts in the less-SLR-exposed group have
uniformly small estimated relative changes.
   Our GPS results across other outcomes are summarized in column 2 of Table 2, which shows the
point estimates for fully exposed tracts in 2016-2018 for volumes and prices as well as additional
outcomes with bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses, and the 2019-2020 price estimates.
These results show that the declining pattern in 2018 home sales volume is also present in home
purchase loans and cash sales, with relative declines in both around 20% of the pre-2013 mean.
We do estimate a statistically significant decline of 6% in refinancing volume and a 9% increase in
denials, but no significant change in securitization. In sum, our supplemental findings using the GPS
method estimate changing SLR capitalization across the entire distribution of SLR exposure and
are consistent with our synthetic control estimates. Seeing that the largest effects are concentrated
in the most-SLR-exposed areas, these results support the use of our "high vs. low" binary measure
for capturing the relevant treatment effect.


4.4   Nearest Neighbor Matching with Flood Insurance Premium Controls

We turn to a third and final estimator applying nearest neighbor matching to assess the robustness
of our results. For each of our more-SLR-exposed tracts, the estimator chooses a single less-SLR-
exposed tract that most closely resembles the exposed tract along 2010 population shares nonwhite,
foreign born, and in poverty, 1995-2005 flood insurance claims per capita, share of tract area made
up of water, and tract distance-to-coast from the population center, under a Mahalanobis distance
metric. This set of less-SLR-exposed tracts chosen with replacement forms the comparison group
for the more-SLR-exposed tracts.
   To first assess whether our synthetic control results are robust under this alternative matching
method, we re-examine the home sale volume and home price trends in Figure 11. The figure
plots annual treatment coefficients from 2010-2020 with 95% confidence intervals calculated from


                                                 21
bootstrapped standard errors indicated by the dashed red lines. Panel (a) shows the home sale
volume results, where we see flat trends prior to 2013 but a growing decline starting in 2013 that
culminates in a statistically significant relative decline of around 19% of the pre-2013 mean in 2018
for the most-SLR-exposed tracts.
       Panel (b) shows the results for relative home prices, which are increasing in the highly exposed
tracts through 2016. However, this increasing trend reverses, and by 2020 becomes a statistically
significant decline of around 5% of the pre-2013 mean. Together, the figure tells a similar story as
the synthetic control and GPS results: A sharp volume decline in tracts with high SLR exposure
starting in 2013, but a price decline that only emerges with a significant lag.
       The third column of Table 2 summarizes our nearest neighbor matching results over other
outcome variables, showing the estimated 2018 coefficients with bootstrapped standard errors in
parentheses as well as results for 2020 prices. Once again, we see declines around 20% in both
home purchase loans and cash purchases. There is no evidence of an increase in loan denials or
securitization, although there is a statistically significant decline of 6% in refinance volume.
       While it is reassuring that the nearest neighbor approach finds similar estimates as our synthetic
control and GPS methods, the main advantage of this methodology is that we can easily include
additional regressors in our estimates after matching. This is particularly useful to control for the
effects of flood insurance premium changes induced by 2012 Biggert-Waters (B-W) reforms. As
described in Table 1, more-SLR-exposed tracts have significantly more properties in the floodplain
than their less-SLR-exposed counterparts. Given that the B-W reforms primarily targeted increases
on subsidized properties in these high-risk areas, increasing premiums are a plausible alternative
explanation for the observed market trends.
       As described in Section 2, we measure premium changes as the inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS)
of the difference in per-capita premiums at the tract level for policies active in 2012 versus 2018.
A concern is that is that this measure may understate the true magnitude of premium increases if
changes in the rates induce a change in flood insurance take-up on the extensive margin or coverage
choices on the intensive margin. To address this concern, we construct an instrument for premium
changes by calculating the counterfactual change if each tract's policy cohort and take-up rate had
remain fixed from 2012 to 2018.32
       Table 3 shows the results from including the premium change variable in regressions over the
matched sample across our main outcomes in 2018 as well as home prices in 2020. Including the
controls do not significantly attenuate any of our estimates.33
  32
    See Section C.2 for more details on the premium change variable construction and estimation.
  33
    While useful as controls, we caution against any causal interpretation of the premium change coefficients them-
selves without a thorough examination of housing market pre-trends for areas differentially affected by the B-W



                                                        22
4.5    Heterogeneity of Capitalization by Climate Opinions

Our results point to a demand-side explanation for the drop in home sales volume in more-SLR-
exposed markets. In this section, we examine whether beliefs regarding climate change are asso-
ciated with the changes in sales volumes and prices documented above. Our beliefs data come
from the 2018 Yale Climate Opinions Survey. The Yale Climate Opinions Survey uses polling data
combined with statistical models to estimate climate change beliefs at the county level (Howe et
al., 2015).34
    Panel (a) of Figure 12 presents the relationship between the 2018 nearest neighbor matching
estimated treatment effect for changes in home purchase volume and the share of the more-SLR-
exposed tract's county that says they are worried about climate change in 2018.35 There is a
strong and statistically significant negative relationship: More-SLR-exposed tracts in counties with
a larger share of residents worried about climate change have experienced much weaker growth
in home sales through 2018. The differences are dramatic, with an additional ten percent of the
county worried about climate change associated with an approximately 11 percentage point greater
relative decrease in home sales volume.
    Panel (b) shows the relationship between the 2018 change in house prices and the share that are
worried about climate change. Here we observe only a small and statistically insignificant negative
relationship between the relative home price changes and worry about climate change. However,
panel (c) shows that by 2020, there is a strong and statistically significant relationship between
price declines and the climate worry measure. An additional ten percent of worried residents implies
a 7 percentage point greater relative home price decline. Indeed, in the counties with the lowest
share of worried residents, there is little evidence of relative price declines.
    In sum, the places with the largest transaction volume and price declines since 2013 are in
counties where residents are most worried about climate change. Together with the evidence on
changing SLR risk salience in Florida since 2013, this pattern suggests that the climate change
beliefs among prospective buyers may be affecting how and when SLR risk is capitalized into
housing markets. A consistent explanation for these findings is that counties with the most worried
potential buyers first saw a decline in transaction volume for SLR-exposed properties as optimistic
sellers held out for higher prices. Only more recently have prices finally started to decline with
falling demand. On the other hand, counties with fewer worried residents have seen neither volume
reforms and subsequent rate changes.
  34
     A partial list of recent studies using the Yale Climate Opinions Survey to estimate the heterogeneity of SLR
capitalization include Baldauf et al. (2020), Barrage and Furst (2019), Bernstein et al. (2019), and Goldsmith-
Pinkham et al. (2019).
  35
     In particular, the x-axis is defined as the estimated percent of adults in the county who would respond "somewhat
worried" or "very worried" to the question, "How worried are you about global warming?"


                                                         23
nor price declines in the most-SLR-exposed markets. Thus, our results point to an important role
for beliefs as driving market pessimism and housing market outcomes.


4.6      Heterogeneity of Capitalization by Poverty

Not all coastal communities in Florida are wealthy; in fact, poverty rates in our sample of census
tracts range from near zero to over 50%. We next explore whether there is any evidence of het-
erogeneous treatment effects by tract-level poverty. Given that lower-income households may find
it more difficult to adjust to climate risks, this is an especially important margin of heterogeneity
(Keenan et al., 2018).
       As a reduced form assessment of the evidence for such heterogeneity, we plot the difference for
2018 home sales volume and prices and 2020 prices between each more-SLR-exposed tract and its
matched less-SLR-exposed tract from the nearest neighbor matching against the more-SLR-exposed
tract's 2010 share of households in poverty. Figure A-5 shows these plots as binscatters, where each
point represents the mean treatment effect within one of twenty quantiles of population poverty
share.
       The figure shows that more-SLR-exposed tracts with higher poverty experienced greater home
sales volume and prices declines relative to matched less-SLR-exposed tracts. Although the linear
relationship between poverty and the relative 2018 sales volume decline is statistically insignificant,
both the 2018 and 2020 relative home price declines have a stronger and statistically significant
negative relationship with tract-level poverty. Panel (c) suggests that by 2020, more-SLR-exposed
tracts with a 10% high poverty rate experienced 7% greater relative price declines.
       Taken together, these results suggest that higher poverty communities have seen a faster and
larger change in the capitalization of SLR risk since 2013. While difficult to isolate specific mecha-
nisms behind this relationship in our context, one plausible explanation is that these communities
may have less resources for adaptation, or sellers may have less flexibility regarding marking their
assets to market.


4.7      Other Housing Market Outcomes and Additional Robustness

We use our nearest neighbor matching estimator to explore a wider range of housing market out-
comes in more-SLR-exposed tracts relative to the less-SLR-exposed matched sample.36 In each of
the results below, we summarize the 2018 coefficients, which give the relative change in more-SLR-
exposed tracts as a percentage of their pre-2013 mean.
  36
    The flexible matching and low computational burden of our nearest neighbor method made it the most feasible
for analyzing additional outcomes. As noted earlier, we see similar results in our main outcomes across all three
methods.


                                                       24
       We first examine subcategories of credit market responses to heightened SLR salience. In
Table A-2, we explore denials and securitization separately for purchase and refinance loans, where
we find no statistically significant changes. Table A-3 analyzes changes in loan volume separately
by local versus non-local lenders, purchase loans versus refinances, and loan volume versus value.
The results are, in total, similar to our previous findings that use more aggregate measures. There
is little evidence of consistent changes in refinancing volumes by local or non-local lenders, but
there are consistent declines in purchase loan volumes across local and non-local lenders.
       We next examine the sensitivity of our synthetic control results to match quality. The con-
sistency and robustness of the synthetic control estimator is conditional on match quality over
pre-period outcomes. In addition, if placebo tracts have poor match quality relative to the treated
unit, this can make inference too conservative (Abadie, 2019).
       To address these concerns, we re-estimate our transaction volume and home price outcomes,
removing any more-SLR-exposed with a 2001-2012 root mean square error (RMSE) above the
90th percentile for calculating treatment effects as well as any less-SLR-exposed tract with a
RMSE greater than twice the more-SLR-exposed trimmed mean when calculating the distribu-
tion of placebo effects.37 Figure A-6 shows synthetic control estimates for transaction volume and
home prices estimated with the trimmed samples described above. The robustness check shows
similar results as in the full sample, suggesting that match quality is not a large source of bias.38
       Other research has shown that large hurricanes can affect housing markets and lender behavior
in impacted areas (Zivin et al., 2020; Ouazad and Kahn, 2020). Over the 2013-2020 period, Florida
was struck by major hurricanes in 2017 and 2018. To assess whether our estimates are driven
by these storms, we recalculated our point estimates across our three estimators over our main
outcomes excluding the 54 more-SLR-exposed tracts that were flooded by at least one of these
storms, finding that the sample restriction made little difference to our point estimates.39
       Finally, given that the metropolitan area of Miami is a poster child for the growing threat
of climate change to cities, it is reasonable to wonder how much of these results are driven by
Miami-Dade county. To explore this question, we re-estimate the results for home sale volumes and
prices across the three methods excluding all census tracts in Miami-Dade county. This removes a
  37
     Note that the set of trimmed tracts is specific to each outcome. We remove 8 out of the 217 placebo estimates
for the volume estimates, and 4 from home prices. Appendix Table A-4 shows the RMSE between the set of more-
SLR-exposed and their synthetic counterparts from 2001-2012.
  38
     We obtain trimmed results consistent with the full sample estimates for our other main housing market outcomes.
  39
     These results are available upon request. We define a tract as "flooded" by a hurricane if its land extent is within
or intersected by the 64kt wind radii of the storm and there is at least one flood insurance claim in the tract with the
loss dated to the storm's period filed with the National Flood Insurance Program. The 2017 (Hurricane Irma) and
2018 (Hurricane Michael) impact date ranges and paths are pulled from the NOAA Final Best Tracks data (NOAA,
2017-2018).




                                                           25
total of 91 tracts from the estimation sample, 13 of which were less-SLR-exposed and 50 of which
are more-SLR-exposed. Appendix Figures A-7, A-8, and A-9 show these results for the synthetic
control, GPS, and nearest neighbor matching methods respectively. We find similar results as in
our estimation over the full sample.


5    Conclusion

In this paper, we provide new evidence that the "most liquid" parts of Florida (in that they are
most likely to be underwater by 2100) have increasingly illiquid housing markets. Since 2013, home
transaction volumes have fallen in relative terms by 16-20% in the most-SLR-exposed coastal census
tracts. This stark time-series pattern of divergence in sales volumes between more and less-exposed
areas is robust to a wide variety of controls, methods, and samples. Notably, this pattern holds
for both home mortgage volumes and cash purchases, suggesting that demand for at-risk coastal
properties has fallen sharply since 2013, above and beyond any adjustments currently being made
by lenders, insurers, or the GSEs.
    In contrast, home prices in both more and less-exposed markets rose from 2013-2015, and only
in recent years 2018-2020 have prices begun to (relatively) fall. This pattern of declining sales
volumes but relatively unresponsive prices points to a phenomenon most recently observed during
the housing boom and bust of the 2000s when a strong lead-lag pattern was observed in many
markets: Falling sales volumes preceded sharp declines in prices. The most natural explanation
for this pattern is the shrinking and eventual departure of "market optimists" from the market.
For supply to equal demand, "optimistic" sellers and "pessimistic" buyers would need to agree on
how the threat of sea level rise affects the present value of at-risk homes. Agreement might come
with continuing changes in beliefs, or else the realization of climate risk in the coming decades
(Bakkensen and Barrage, 2017).
    Why might some housing market actors have been slower than others to respond to increas-
ingly severe SLR projections? One possibility is that partisan division on climate change has led to
durable belief heterogeneity, a premise supported by polling data (Kennedy, 2020). Another expla-
nation is that the behavioral forces of myopia and optimism (among other potential biases) may be
causing homeowners in SLR-exposed areas to make irrational assessments of their risk (Meyer and
Kunreuther, 2017). In addition, nominal loss aversion relative to their purchase price could also
make homeowners slow to accept lower market prices (Genesove and Mayer, 2001). Finally, those
living in the places most exposed to SLR might already be the most optimistic about present (and
future) flood risk due to housing market sorting (Bakkensen and Barrage, 2017). Documenting



                                                26
the mechanisms and connections between SLR belief heterogeneity and housing market behavior
remains a promising direction for future research.
   While our empirical approach is not predictive of the future, sharp declines in transaction
volume could anticipate further declines in price. The ultimate consequences of perceptions of sea
level rise on coastal property values, and the associated mortgages attached to those properties,
depends crucially on whether there are buyers willing to hold these properties and at what price.
At some later date, in the absence of substantial mitigation and infrastructure efforts, many Florida
properties will be underwater. Until then, homeowners and lenders face greater risk of extreme
weather events, storm surges, and nuisance flooding. Our results suggest that fewer buyers are
willing to bear these risks at current market prices, leading to a sharp fall in transaction volumes.
   Finally, it is worth reiterating that these housing market responses to climate risk are not due to
the pricing of National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) premiums or federal mortgage programs;
Instead, these responses are in spite of federal policies that actively mis-price predictable climate
risk. This mis-pricing tends to subsidize coastal property markets at the expense of non-coastal
communities, distorting investment into more at-risk regions. Whether these programs will continue
to differentially support coastal housing investment in the face of rising costs, and how these markets
will respond to changes in these programs that may more accurately acknowledge the current and
future costs of climate change, remain crucial topics for future research.




                                                  27
References

Abadie, Alberto, "Using synthetic controls: Feasibility, data requirements, and methodological
  aspects," Journal of Economic Literature, 2019.

  , Alexis Diamond, and Jens Hainmueller, "Synthetic control methods for comparative case
  studies: Estimating the effect of California's tobacco control program," Journal of the American
  Statistical Association, 2010, 105 (490), 493­505.

Bakkensen, Laura A and Lala Ma, "Sorting over flood risk and implications for policy reform,"
  Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 2020, p. 102362.

   and Lint Barrage, "Flood risk belief heterogeneity and coastal home price dynamics: Going
  under water?," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2017.

Baldauf, Markus, Lorenzo Garlappi, and Constantine Yannelis, "Does climate change
  affect real estate prices? Only if you believe in it," The Review of Financial Studies, 2020, 33
  (3), 1256­1295.

Barrage, Lint and Jacob Furst, "Housing investment, sea level rise, and climate change beliefs,"
  Economics letters, 2019, 177, 105­108.

Bellemare, Marc F and Casey J Wichman, "Elasticities and the inverse hyperbolic sine
  transformation," Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 2020, 82 (1), 50­61.

Bernstein, Asaf, Matthew T Gustafson, and Ryan Lewis, "Disaster on the horizon: The
  price effect of sea level rise," Journal of financial economics, 2019, 134 (2), 253­272.

Bin, Okmyung and Craig E Landry, "Changes in implicit flood risk premiums: Empirical
  evidence from the housing market," Journal of Environmental Economics and Management,
  2013, 65 (3), 361­376.

   and Stephen Polasky, "Effects of Flood Hazards on Property Values: Evidence Before and
  After Hurricane Floyd," Land Economics, 2004, 80 (4), 490­500.

Bunten, Devin and Matthew E Kahn, "Optimal real estate capital durability and localized
  climate change disaster risk," Journal of Housing Economics, 2017, 36, 1­7.

Bunten, Devin Michelle and Matthew E Kahn, "The impact of emerging climate risks on
  urban real estate price dynamics," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research
  2014.

                                                 28
Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, "Understanding booms and busts
  in housing markets," Journal of Political Economy, 2016, 124 (4), 1088­1147.

Case, Karl E, "The central role of home prices in the current financial crisis: how will the market
  clear?," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2008, pp. 161­193.

   and Robert J Shiller, "Is there a bubble in the housing market?," Brookings papers on
  economic activity, 2003, 2003 (2), 299­362.

Cavallo, Eduardo, Sebastian Galiani, Ilan Noy, and Juan Pantano, "Catastrophic natural
  disasters and economic growth," Review of Economics and Statistics, 2013, 95 (5), 1549­1561.

Consortium, Multi-Resolution Land Characteristics, "NLCD 2001 Land Cover (CONUS),"
  https://www.mrlc.gov/data 2001.

Dahl, Kristina, Rachel Cleetus, Erika Spanger-Siegfried, Shana Udvardy, Astrid Cal-
  das, and Pamela Worth, "Underwater: Rising seas, chronic floods, and the implications for
  US coastal real estate," Cambridge, MA: Union of Concerned Scientists. Online at www. ucsusa.
  org/sites/default/files/attach/2018/06/underwater-analysis-full-report. pdf, 2018.

DeFusco, Anthony A, Charles G Nathanson, and Eric Zwick, "Speculative dynamics of
  prices and volume," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2017.

Eichholtz, Piet M A, Eva Steiner, and Erkan Yonder, "Where, When, and How Do Sophis-
  ticated Investors Respond to Flood Risk?," Available at SSRN, 2019.
  Elevation zero: Rising seas in South Florida

Elevation zero: Rising seas in South Florida, WLRN-Miami Herald News 2013. https:
  // www. wlrn. org/ elevation-zero .

FEMA, "NFIP Flood Insurance Manuals,"                 https: // www. fema. gov/ flood-insurance/
  work-with-nfip/ manuals/ archive 2005-2018.

Fleming, Elizabeth, Jeffrey Payne, William Sweet, Michael Craghan, John Haines,
  Juliette Finzi Hart, Heidi Stiller, and Ariana Sutton-Grier, "Impacts, Risks, and Adap-
  tation in the United States: Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume II," Technical Report,
  U.S. Global Change Research Program 2018.

Frago, Charlie, "St. Petersburg to look into expected sea level rise in waterfront mas-
  ter plan," Tampa Bay Times, 2014.          https: // www. tampabay. com/ news/ environment/


                                                 29
  st-petersburg-to-look-into-expected-sea-level-rise-in-waterfront-master/
  2201748/ .

Gallagher, Justin and Daniel Hartley, "Household finance after a natural disaster: The case
  of Hurricane Katrina," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2017, 9 (3), 199­228.

Garner, Andra J, Jeremy L Weiss, Adam Parris, Robert E Kopp, Radley M Horton,
  Jonathan T Overpeck, and Benjamin P Horton, "Evolution of 21st century sea level rise
  projections," Earth's Future, 2018, 6 (11), 1603­1615.

Genesove, David and Christopher Mayer, "Loss aversion and seller behavior: Evidence from
  the housing market," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116 (4), 1233­1260.

Georgakakos, Aris, Paul Fleming, Michael Dettinger, Christa Peters-Lidard, Terese C
  Richmond, Ken Reckhow, Kathleen White, and David Yates, "Ch. 3: Water Resources.
  Climate change impacts in the United States: The Third National Climate Assessment," Tech-
  nical Report, US Global Change Research Program Washington, DC 2014.

Gesch, Dean B, "Analysis of lidar elevation data for improved identification and delineation of
  lands vulnerable to sea-level rise," Journal of Coastal Research, 2009, (53), 49­58.

Gibson, Matthew, Jamie T Mullins, Alison Hill et al., "Climate risk and beliefs: Evidence
  from New York floodplains," Williams College, Feb, 2019.

Gibson,        William      E,       "Florida    communities   prepare   for   rising   seas,"   South
  Florida      Sun       Sentinel,       2014.             https: // www. sun-sentinel. com/ news/
  fl-xpm-2014-04-20-fl-preparing-for-rising-seas-20140418-story. html .

Giglio, Stefano, Matteo Maggiori, Johannes Stroebel, and Andreas Weber, "Climate
  change and long-run discount rates: Evidence from real estate," Technical Report, National Bu-
  reau of Economic Research 2015.

Goldsmith-Pinkham, Paul S, Matthew Gustafson, Ryan Lewis, and Michael Schwert,
  "Sea Level Rise and Municipal Bond Yields," Available at SSRN, 2019.

Gruber, Jon and Emmanuel Saez, "The elasticity of taxable income: evidence and implica-
  tions," Journal of Public Economics, 2002, 84 (1), 1­32.

Hirano, Keisuke and Guido W Imbens, "The propensity score with continuous treatments,"
  Applied Bayesian modeling and causal inference from incomplete-data perspectives, 2004, 226164,
  73­84.

                                                     30
Howe, Peter D, Matto Mildenberger, Jennifer R Marlon, and Anthony Leiserowitz,
  "Geographic variation in opinions on climate change at state and local scales in the USA," Nature
  Climate Change, 2015.

Hurst, Erik, Benjamin J Keys, Amit Seru, and Joseph Vavra, "Regional redistribution
  through the US mortgage market," American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (10), 2982­3028.

Indaco, Agustin, Francesc Ortega, and Suleyman Taspinar, "The Effects of Flood Insurance
  on Housing Markets," Cityscape, 2019, 21 (1), 129­156.

Ito, Koichiro, "Do consumers respond to marginal or average price? Evidence from nonlinear
  electricity pricing," American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (2), 537­63.

Keenan, Jesse M and Jacob T Bradt, "Underwaterwriting: from theory to empiricism in
  regional mortgage markets in the US.," Climatic Change, 2020, pp. 1­25.

  , Thomas Hill, and Anurag Gumber, "Climate gentrification: from theory to empiricism in
  Miami-Dade County, Florida," Environmental Research Letters, 2018, 13 (5), 054001.

Kennedy, Brian, "U.S. concern about climate change is rising, but mainly among Democrats,"
  https: // www. pewresearch. org/ ?p= 319435 2020. (accessed 2020-08-08).

Kousky, Carolyn, "Learning from Extreme Events: Risk Perceptions after the Flood," Land
  Economics, 2010, 86 (3), 395­422.

  , Brett Lingle, and Leonard Shabman, "The pricing of flood insurance," Journal of extreme
  events, 2017, 4 (02), 1750001.

  , Howard Kunreuther, Brett Lingle, and Leonard Shabman, "The emerging private
  residential flood insurance market in the United States," Wharton Risk Management and Decision
  Processes Center, 2018.

Manson, Steven, Jonathan Schroeder, David Van Riper, and Steven Ruggles, "IPUMS
  National Historical Geographic Information System: Version 14.0 [Database]," http: // doi.
  org/ 10. 18128/ D050. V14. 0 2019.

Marcy, Douglas, William Brooks, Kyle Draganov, Brian Hadley, Chris Haynes, Nate
  Herold, John McCombs, Matt Pendleton, Sean Ryan, Keil Schmid et al., "New map-
  ping tool and techniques for visualizing sea level rise and coastal flooding impacts," in "Solutions
  to Coastal Disasters 2011" 2011, pp. 474­490.


                                                 31
McAlpine, Steven A and Jeremy R Porter, "Estimating recent local impacts of sea-level rise
  on current real-estate losses: a housing market case study in Miami-Dade, Florida," Population
  Research and Policy Review, 2018, 37 (6), 871­895.

Meyer, Robert and Howard Kunreuther, The ostrich paradox: Why we underprepare for
  disasters, Wharton School Press, 2017.

Missouri Census Data Center, "MABLE geographic database," http: // mcdc. missouri.
  edu/ applications/ geocorr. html 2014.

Muller, Nicholas Z and Caroline A Hopkins, "Hurricane Katrina Floods New Jersey: The
  Role of Information in the Market Response to Flood Risk," Working Paper 25984, National
  Bureau of Economic Research June 2019. http: // www. nber. org/ papers/ w25984 .

Murfin, Justin and Matthew Spiegel, "Is the risk of sea level rise capitalized in residential
  real estate?," The Review of Financial Studies, 2020, 33 (3), 1217­1255.

NOAA, "National Hurricane Center Final Best Tracks," https: // www. nhc. noaa. gov/ data/
  tcr 2017-2018.

OpenFEMA,       "FIMA     NFIP    Redacted   Claims,"    2020.       https: // www. fema. gov/
  openfema-data-page/ fima-nfip-redacted-claims .

  , "FIMA NFIP Redacted Policies," 2020. https: // www. fema. gov/ openfema-data-page/
  fima-nfip-redacted-policies .

Ouazad, Amine and Matthew E Kahn, "Mortgage finance in the face of rising climate risk,"
  2020. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 26322.

R¨
 as¨
   anen, Aleksi, Sirkku Juhola, Anja Nygren, Mira K¨
                                                   ak¨
                                                     onen, Maarit Kallio,
  Adri´
      an Monge Monge, and Markku Kanninen, "Climate change, multiple stressors and
  human vulnerability: a systematic review," Regional Environmental Change, 2016, 16 (8), 2291­
  2302.

Reiser, Emon, "7 infrastructure ideas that could combat sea level rise in South Florida,"
  South Florida Business Journal, 2014.      https: // www. bizjournals. com/ southflorida/
  news/ 2014/ 10/ 01/ 7-infrastructure-ideas-that-could-combat-sea-level. html .

Rubin, Donald B and Neal Thomas, "Combining propensity score matching with additional
  adjustments for prognostic covariates," Journal of the American Statistical Association, 2000,
  95 (450), 573­585.

                                              32
Scheinkman, Jose A and Wei Xiong, "Overconfidence and speculative bubbles," Journal of
  political Economy, 2003, 111 (6), 1183­1220.

Stein, Jeremy C, "Prices and trading volume in the housing market: A model with down-payment
  effects," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1995, 110 (2), 379­406.

Stocker, T F, D Qin, G-K Plattner, M Tignor, S K Allen, J Boschung, A Nauels,
  Y Xia, V Bex, and P M Midgley, eds, Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis.
  Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel
  on Climate Change, Cambridge University Press, 2013. Chapter 13.

Weitzman, Martin L, "Fat-tailed uncertainty in the economics of catastrophic climate change,"
  Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 2011, 5 (2), 275­292.

Zillow, "Zillow Home Value Index (All Homes)," https: // www. zillow. com/ research/ data/
  2020.

Zivin, Joshua S Graff, Yanjun Liao, and Yann Panassie, "How Hurricanes Sweep Up Hous-
  ing Markets: Evidence from Florida," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research
  2020.




                                                 33
Tables

                                             All     More-SLR-Exposed      Less-SLR-Exposed
   Share SLR-Exposed                        .396            .884                  .033
                                           (.338)          (.091)                (.03)

   2001-2012 Mean Annual Sale Volume         122             136                  106
                                            (100)           (117)                 (85)

   2001-2012 Mean Sale Price               329000          422650                209046
                                          (289853)        (277285)              (134203)

   Population                               3461             2921                 3838
                                           (1463)           (1542)               (1270)

   Share Nonwhite                           .132             .076                 .191
                                           (.146)           (.065)               (.167)

   Share Poverty                            .129             .107                 .155
                                           (.087)           (.064)               (.098)

   Share Foreign Born                       .156             .226                 .139
                                           (.148)           (.193)               (.122)

   Distance-to-Coast (Meters)                664             427                  964
                                            (458)           (405)                (412)

   Share Area Water                         .333             .446                 .172
                                           (.259)           (.266)               (.204)

   Share in Floodplain                      .473             .913                 .111
                                           (.368)           (.192)               (.137)
   Observations                              771              187                  217

Table 1: Tract-level summary statistics of variable means with standard deviation in parentheses.
Sample divided into all coastal tracts, more-SLR-exposed tracts (share SLR-exposed > 0.7), and
less-SLR-exposed tracts (share SLR-exposed < 0.1).




                                               34
        Outcome                          Synthetic Control      GPS      Nearest Neighbor
                                             (P-value)          (SE)           (SE)

        Home Sale Volume                     -.191***         -.216**         -.187***
                                               (.000)          (.070)           (.048)
        Home Price Index (2018)              -.036***          -0.005           -0.020
                                               (.000)         (0.023)          (0.017)
        Home Price Index (2020)              -.066***        -0.138***        -.067***
                                               (.000)          (.033)           (.018)
        Home Purchase Loan Volume            -.147***         -.262**         -.215***
                                               (.000)          (.073)           (.055)
        Home Cash Sale Volume                -.246***           -.176          -.197**
                                               (.000)          (.115)           (.075)
        Refinance Volume                        -.004         -.060**          -.059**
                                               (.993)          (.023)           (.016)
        Denial Index                             .033          .091**            -.015
                                               (.649)          (.040)           (.034)
        Securitization Index                    -.012           -.035            .031
                                               (.478)          (.037)           (.022)

Table 2: Coefficients for the relative change by 2018 in SLR-exposed tracts over less-SLR-exposed
tracts across the primary outcomes, as well as the relative change for 2020 home prices, for each of
the three empirical methodologies. Bootstrap standard errors are in parentheses for the propensity
score matching and GPS columns, and p-values in parenthesis for the synthetic control column. The
GPS column estimates are from the pooled 2016-2018 period. Outcome variables are standardized
by their tract-level 2001-2012 mean.




                                                35
                   Sales     HPI (2020)   Purch Loans   Cash Sales    Refis    Denials   Securitization

 SLR-Exposed      -.287***    -.090***     -.382***      -.242**     -.066**    -.025        .091**
                    (.071)      (.022)       (.074)       (.093)      (.021)   (.045)        (.035)
 Premium Change    .049**        .011       .083***        .022        .003     .005        -.030**
                    (.020)      (.008)       (.020)       (.027)      (.007)   (.014)        (.013)

Table 3: Results from nearest neighbor matching showing the relative change in main outcomes
for 2018 in SLR-exposed markets relative to matched less-SLR-exposed markets. Includes control
for inverse hyperbolic sine of per capita increase in average NFIP premiums between 2013-2018.
Outcome variables are measured in 2018 relative to 2001-2012 tract-level mean, except for HPI
which is measured in 2020. Bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses.




                                                36
Figures




Figure 1: Housing transaction volume (top panel) and home price (bottom panel) trends in coastal
Florida census tracts with high versus low SLR exposure. Housing volume and home price index
are normalized by their 2001-2012 mean. Sources: Zillow Home Value Index, CoreLogic, Authors'
calculations




                                              37
Figure 2: Maps show SLR exposure for the sample of 771 coastal Florida census tracts. The top
panel shows the share of each tract's developed land in 2000 that would be chronically inundated
at six feet of SLR. The bottom panel shows the subsample of tracts categorized as either "more-
SLR-exposed" (> 70% exposure, 187 tracts) or "less-SLR-exposed" (< 10% exposure, 217 tracts).




                                              38
Figure 3: Histogram of tract SLR exposure. The first and second dashed lines indicate the cutoffs
for the less-SLR-exposed and more-SLR-exposed tracts, respectively.




                                               39
Figure 4: Relationship between tract-level SLR exposure and 2018 home sale volumes (top left),
2018 home prices (top right), and 2020 home prices (bottom right) relative to their 2001-2012 mean.
The plot divides tracts into twenty quantiles of SLR exposure and fits a quadratic curve to the
resulting scatterplot.




                                                40
Figure 5: Synthetic control results for housing transaction volume and home prices. Left col-
umn shows outcome for SLR-exposed tracts alongside synthetic counterparts, right column shows
treatment effects with two-sided 95% interval of placebo effect estimates in gray.




                                             41
Figure 6: Synthetic control results for housing transaction loan and cash purchase volumes. Left
column shows outcome for SLR-exposed tracts alongside synthetic counterparts, right column shows
treatment effects with two-sided 95% interval of placebo effect estimates in gray.




                                              42
Figure 7: Synthetic control results for refinancing volume and loan denial index. Left column shows
outcome for SLR-exposed tracts alongside synthetic counterparts, right column shows treatment
effects with two-sided 95% interval of placebo effect estimates in gray.




                                                43
Figure 8: Synthetic control results for securitization index. Top row shows outcome for SLR-
exposed tracts alongside synthetic counterparts, bottom shows treatment effects with two-sided
95% interval of placebo effect estimates in gray.




                                             44
Figure 9: Synthetic control results for local and non-local lender purchase loan volume. Left
column shows outcome for SLR-exposed tracts alongside synthetic counterparts, right column shows
treatment effects with two-sided 95% interval of placebo effect estimates in gray.




                                              45
Figure 10: Generalized propensity score results for housing transaction volume and home prices.
Results show the relative change in the outcome variable normalized by the tract-level 2001-2012
mean by 2013-2015 (top row) and 2016-2018 (bottom row).




                                              46
Figure 11: Annual coefficients from nearest neighbor matching for housing transaction volume (top
panel) and home prices (bottom panel). Units matched with replacement on the inverse hyperbolic
sine of flood insurance claims per capita 1995-2005, share of tract area made up of water, tract
distance-to-coast from the population center. Dashed lines indicate 95% confidence interval.




                                               47
Figure 12: Summarizes treatment effect heterogeneity from nearest neighbor matching estimator
for 2018 home sale volume (top left), 2018 home prices (top right), and 2020 home prices (bottom
right) by county-level concern about climate change. Each point is a county with the average
treatment effect of its more-SLR-exposed on the y-axis and the estimated share of adults in the
county worried about climate change from the 2018 Yale Climate Opinion Survey on the x-axis.
The dashed red line indicates the best-fit linear line through the points, with the coefficient and
standard error from the tract-level regression of the worry measure over the estimated treatment
effects indicated in the upper-right corner. Outcomes are normalized by the tract-level 2001-2012
mean. See Figure 11 for description of matching covariates.




                                                48
A    Appendix Tables

 Covariate                            Sample         More Exposed   Less Exposed    % Diff   t-stat
 Tract Distance-to-Coast (Meters)    Unmatched           427             964        -131.4   -13.16
                                      Matched            427             626         -48.7    -4.85
 Share Pop. Nonwhite                 Unmatched          0.076           0.191        -90.5    -8.83
                                      Matched           0.076           0.080         -3.0    -0.59
 Share Pop. Foreign                  Unmatched          0.226           0.139         53.9     5.49
                                      Matched           0.226           0.174        32.2      2.81
 Share Pop. Poverty                  Unmatched          0.108           0.155        -57.8    -5.71
                                      Matched           0.108           0.101         7.6      0.98
 Log Flood Claims Per-Capita         Unmatched           4.71            3.76         32.1     3.22
                                      Matched            4.71            4.59          4.3     0.41
 Tract Share Water                   Unmatched          0.446           0.172       115.5     11.69
                                      Matched           0.446           0.373        30.6      2.56

Table A-1: Covariate balance before (unmatched) and after (matched) nearest neighbor matching.
See text for specific covariate definitions. Flood claims per-capita are calculated by dividing the
total single-family flood insurance payments made in the designated Tract from 1995-2005 and
dividing by the 2000 Census count of single-family housing units.




                                                49
                                                  Relative Change from 2001-2012
                           Outcome                        2018 Coefficient

               Denials - Purchase Loans                         -.044
                                                               (.051)
               Denials - Refis                                   .033
                                                               (.047)
               Securitization - Purchase Loans                  .025
                                                               (.032)
               Securitization - Refis                            .059
                                                               (.038)

Table A-2: Results from nearest neighbor matching showing the relative change in denial and
securitization indices separated by purchase and refinance loans in SLR-exposed markets relative
to matched less SLR-exposed markets. Outcome variables are measured as changes relative to
2001-2012 tract-level mean with the second column showing the relative change coefficient in 2018.
Bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses.




                                                 50
                                                  Relative Change from 2001-2012
                           Outcome                        2018 Coefficient

               Purch Loan Volume - Local                       -.408**
                                                                (.159)
               Value Purch Loan - Local                        -.549**
                                                                (.201)
               Purch Loan Volume - Non-local                  -.183***
                                                                (.055)
               Value Purch Loan - Non-local                   -.288***
                                                                (.068)
               Refi Volume - Local                               .081
                                                                (.073)
               Value Refi - Local                              .322**
                                                                (.132)
               Refi Volume - Non-local                        -.062***
                                                                (.016)
               Value Refi - Non-local                            -.024
                                                                (.020)

Table A-3: Results from nearest neighbor matching showing the relative change in purchase and
refinance loan lending separated by local and non-local lenders in tracts exposed to sea level rise
relative to less-exposed tracts. See Figure 11 for description of matching covariates. Outcome
variables are measured as changes relative to 2001-2012 tract-level mean with the second column
showing the relative change coefficient in 2018. Bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses.




                                                51
                     Percentile   Transaction Volume   Home Price Index
                     10th               0.0875             0.0094
                     25th               0.1108             0.0139
                     50th               0.1466             0.0189
                     75th               0.2056             0.0257
                     90th               0.3578             0.0561

Table A-4: Distribution of root-mean-square error (RMSE) for transaction volume (second column)
and home price index (third column) outcome variables between more-SLR-exposed tracts and their
constructed synthetic counterparts from 2001-2012.




                                              52
B    Appendix Figures




Figure A-1: Quarterly Google Trends search intensity for topic "Sea Level Rise" in Florida from
2006 to 2020. Dashed line is at the first quarter of 2013.




                                              53
Figure A-2: Housing transaction volume (top panel) and home price (bottom panel) trends across
all of Florida (solid lines) and coastal Florida census tracts with high versus low SLR exposure
(dashed and dotted lines, respectively). Housing volume and home price index are normalized by
their 2001-2012 mean.




                                              54
Figure A-3: Annual aggregate housing transactions (left axis) and mean house price index (right
axis) for coastal Florida census tracts with either less-SLR-exposure (top panel) or more-SLR-
exposure (bottom panel). See Data and Methodology sections for data sources and definitions of
coastal and SLR exposure.




                                              55
Figure A-4: Maps show change in log home transactions (top panel) and home price index (bottom
panel) by coastal tract between 2011-2012 and 2017-2018. Tracts are colored by relative change,
with red indicating larger relative to declines and green larger relative increases.



                                              56
Figure A-5: Summarizes treatment effect heterogeneity from nearest neighbor matching by tract-
level poverty for 2018 home sale volume (top left), 2018 home prices (top right), and 2020 home
prices (bottom right). Points indicate the average treatment effect (y-axis) within twenty quantiles
of more-SLR-exposed tracts grouped by 2010 census estimate of the share of residents in poverty
(x-axis). The dashed red line indicates the best-fit linear line through the points, with the coefficient
and standard error from the tract-level regression of poverty over the estimated treatment effects
indicated in the upper-right corner. Outcomes are normalized by the tract-level 2001-2012 mean.
See Figure 11 for description of matching covariates.




                                                   57
Figure A-6: Synthetic control results for housing transaction volume and home prices, excluding
more-SLR-exposed tracts with root mean square error (RMSE) above the 90th percentile by out-
come. Placebo tracts with RMSE greater than double the more-SLR-exposed trimmed RMSE are
also removed for inference.




                                              58
Figure A-7: Synthetic control results for housing transaction volume and home prices, excluding all
tracts in Miami-Dade County. Top row shows outcome for SLR-exposed tracts alongside synthetic
counterparts, bottom shows treatment effects with two-sided 95% interval of placebo effect estimates
in gray.




                                                59
Figure A-8: Annual coefficients from nearest neighbor matching for housing transaction volume
(top panel) and home prices (bottom panel) excluding observations in Miami-Dade county. See
Figure 11 for description of matching covariates. Dashed lines indicate 95% confidence interval.




                                              60
Figure A-9: Generalized propensity score results for housing transaction volume and home prices
excluding all observations in Miami-Dade county. Results show the relative change in the out-
come variable normalized by the tract-level 2001-2012 mean by 2013-2015 (top row) and 2016-2018
(bottom row).




                                              61
C     Data Appendix

C.1    Denials and Securitization Index Estimation

This section describes the estimation of our tract-by-year indices for loan denial and securitization
using loan-level data in HMDA. To define the securitization index, we subset to approved purchase
or refinance loans below the conforming loan limit (CLL) in the estimation sample of tracts. To
construct a tract-level securitization index, using all approved loans i of type l  {Ref i, P urchase}
for a property in tract j in year t, we estimate a linear probability model:


                                2                              3
             j
 siljt = l + t          l
               Y eart + 0                   n
                                     V ALU Ei + LT Iin + 1
                                                         l                                l
                                                                   (CLLjt - V ALU Ei )m + 2 Xij +   iljt   (3)
                               n=1                           m=1


    where siljt is an indicator variable for whether loan application j was marked in HMDA data
as sold to one of the housing GSEs (Fannie/Ginnie Mae or Freddie/Farmer Mac) or to a private
securitization entity. V aluei is defined as the inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS) of loan value and LT Ii
is the loan-to-income ratio derived from reported borrower income and loan value. Both of these
variables enter as second-order polynomials in the estimating equation. (CLLjt - V ALU Ei ) is
the IHS of the difference between the CLL and loan value and enters as a third-order polynomial.
Finally, Xij contains binary indicators for whether the borrower is reported as nonwhite, whether
the property is owner-occupied, and whether the lender is local. The constant term , as well
as each of the  slope coefficients, vary by whether the loan is a refinance or purchase loan, as
indicated by the l superscripts.
    Equation (3) is estimated from 1,575,345 observations. The tract-by-year securitization index is
                                  j
constructed by adding each of the t terms to the overall mean securitization rate in the estimation
data such that the index values fall between zero and one. The final index values are winsorized
by year at the 99th and 1st percentiles.
    The denials index is estimated similarly over the sample of applications for purchase or refi-
nance loans. Because the denials index includes both conforming and non-conforming loans, l now
indexes four categories of loans by whether they are purchase or refinance and conforming or non-
conforming. In addition, the term |CLLjt - V aluei | is the IHS of the absolute difference between
the loan value and conforming loan limit. The estimating equation is written:


                                     2
            l
    diljt =  +   j
                 tY   eart +   l
                               0
                                                 n
                                          V ALU Ei + LT Iin + (|CLLjt - V ALU Ei |)n + l
                                                                                       1 Xij +   iljt      (4)
                                    n=1



                                                        62
       where diljt is an indicator for whether loan application i was denied. Equation (4) is estimated
from 2,650,018 observations.


C.2       Calculation of Flood Insurance Premium Controls

This section describes how we construct tract-level controls for changes in National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP) premiums from 2013-2018. To movtivate our approach, consider the tract-level
regression described below:


                               Yj,2018 - Yj,2012 =  +  (Pj,2018 - Pj,2012 ) +         j                             (5)

where Yj,t is some tract-level outcome (say Home Price Index) in tract j in year t, and Pj,t is some
measure of the cost of flood insurance.
       One way to define P is by taking a simple mean of the premiums we observe for the policies
in each tract in the corresponding years. The problem with this approach is that the observed
premiums are a function of the rates and fees that households face. When premiums increase
between 2012 and 2018, some households may choose to insure less or not buy flood insurance
altogether, attenuating our measure of premium changes. Thus, estimation of  in Equation 5
would be biased. This is a similar source of endogeneity as in other literatures where prices are a
function of consumption (see e.g. Gruber and Saez (2002) or Ito (2014)).
       To address this issue, we adopt a standard approach by instrumenting for the observed premium
change from 2012 to 2018 with the counterfactual change in premiums if insurance uptake were
exactly the same in 2018 as it was in 2012. To define these measures precisely, define pijr,2012 as the
premium paid by policy i in tract j that is part of rate class r in 2012, and let pnjr,2018 index the
corresponding set of policies in 2018.40 Let Njt be the number of homes eligible for flood insurance
in tract j in year t, and Ijt the number of flood insurance policies.41 We calculate the observed
change in flood insurance premiums as:42

                                              Ij,2018                     Ij,2012
                        Pj,2018 - Pj,2012 =                 pnjr,2018 -                pijr,2012
                                              Nj,2018                     Nj,2012
       As described above, this measure may be biased because the composition of observed policies
        Ijt
and     Njt ,   the take-up rate, may change in response to the premium changes. We construct our
instrument by measuring 2018 premiums under the 2012 policy cohort. This means using the 2012
  40
     Rate class refers to the set of attributes (e.g. property elevation relative to the floodplain, number of floors in
the home) that determines a policy's flood insurance rates and fees.
  41
     We subset to 1-4 family homes and NFIP policies, excluding mobile homes and condos. This sample forms the
large majority of policies and price variation over the period.
  42
     We scale premiums by the take-up rate to match the tract-level definition of our outcome variables.


                                                          63
instead of 2018 take-up rate, and calculating the 2018 premiums as if the same exact policies written
in 2012 formed the set of insured in 2018. This measure is defined:

                                 Ij,2012
                                         (      pijr,2018 - pijr,2012 )
                                 Nj,2012
   Using this instrument, we can estimate Equation (5) via two-stage least squares.




                                                 64
D       Methodology Appendix

D.1       Census Tract Versus Property Level Estimation

A notable difference between our approach and the papers described above is that we measure SLR
exposure and outcomes at the census tract rather than property level. In this section, we describe
in further detail our rationale for this decision. As described in Section 2, our SLR measure is
constructed from the share of a tract's developed land43 that would be inundated under six feet of
SLR whereas other studies relate property level exposure to property level sales prices.
      We opt for the tract-level approach for several reasons. First, the NOAA SLR model's inunda-
tion projections are highly uncertain on a property-by-property basis (Gesch, 2009). In addition
to fundamental uncertain from climate models, there is extra uncertainty from measurement error
in local geography, changes from construction or erosion over time, and the climate itself. We
view our continuous and community-level measure as better reflecting this uncertainty. Second,
there will likely be many local spillover effects from SLR that negatively impact even nominally
non-inundated properties, such as roadway flooding, which has been shown to erode property value
(McAlpine and Porter, 2018), or flooding of other critical infrastructure. Properties at a lower
elevation due to rising seas will also be exposed to increased flood risk due to their lower elevation.
Estimating SLR capitalization by comparing neighborhoods with different exposure, rather than
properties with nominally different exposure in the same neighborhood, avoids contamination from
these localized spillovers.


D.2       Generalized Propensity Score Estimation

This section describes the technical details behind the estimation of our generalized propensity
score (GPS) model. Let tract j have continuous SLR exposure Rj between 0 and 1. The first stage
of the GPS models Rj as a function of tract covariates. We use a tobit model censored at 0 and 1
with the following underlying linear model:



                     Rj = + 0 Distj + 1 SF HAj + 2 Claimsj + 3 P op18 + 4 P op64
                                                                              18
                                   2                                                                (6)
                           + 5         N onwhiten           n         n
                                                j + F oreignj + W aterj +          j
                                 n=1


      Where the covariates are, in order, deciles of distance-to-coast and share of a tract's developed
area in a FEMA Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA), IHS of flood insurance claims per-capita 1995-
 43
      In particular, developed land includes roads and non-residential buildings


                                                          65
2005, 2010 population share under 18 and share 18 to 64, and quadratic terms of 2010 population
shares nonwhite and foreign born, and tract area made up of water.
   In the second stage, we estimate each tract's generalized propensity score, pj , as the probability
density of observing the tract's actual SLR exposure from a normal distribution with mean Rj and
variance from Equation (6). Next, we fit the outcomes Yj as a flexible model of the generalized
propensity score and actual SLR exposure using a quadratic model:


                                                      2
                   E [Yj |Rj , pR j ] = 0 + 1 Rj + 2 Rj + 3 pj + 4 p2
                                                                    j + 5 Tj  pj                   (7)

   Finally, we estimate the average potential outcome at any level of SLR exposure, r. Let p(r, Xj )
be the generalized propensity score for tract j at counterfactual exposure r. p() is the same function
used to calculate the generalized propensity score pj from the results of equation (6), but calculated
from the counterfactual exposure r rather than the tract's actual exposure Rj . Then, the average
potential outcome at exposure r is:

                             J
                        1                        2
                                                                             2
          E [Y (r)] =              0 + 1 rj + 2 rj + 3 p(r, Xj ) + 4 p(r, Xj ) + 5 Tj  p(r, Xj )   (8)
                        J
                            j =1

   By calculating Equation (8) across the full distribution of SLR exposure, we can estimate the
effects of SLR risk over time as a series of dose-response functions relative to tracts with no SLR
exposure. We estimate potential outcomes at 10% intervals of SLR exposure from 0% to 100%,
and calculate standard errors from 2,000 panel bootstrap samples.




                                                       66
