                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    A Q THEORY OF INTERNAL CAPITAL MARKETS

                                         Min Dai
                                       Xavier Giroud
                                         Wei Jiang
                                        Neng Wang

                                     Working Paper 27931
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27931


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2020




We thank Gregor Matvos and Raghu Rajan for helpful comments. Min Dai acknowledges the
support of Singapore AcRF grants (No. R-703-000-032-112, R-146-000-306-114, and
146-000-311-114) and NSFC (No. 11671292). The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Min Dai, Xavier Giroud, Wei Jiang, and Neng Wang. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A q Theory of Internal Capital Markets
Min Dai, Xavier Giroud, Wei Jiang, and Neng Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 27931
October 2020
JEL No. D92,G3,L25

                                            ABSTRACT

We propose a tractable model of dynamic investment, division sales (spinoffs), financing, and
risk management for a multi-division firm that faces costly external finance. The model
highlights the importance of considering the intertwined nature of the different policies. Our main
results are as follows: (1) risk management considerations prescribe the allocation of resources
based not only on the divisions' productivity -- as in standard models of ''winner picking'' -- but
also their risk; (2) firms may choose to voluntarily spin off productive divisions to increase
liquidity; (3) diversification can reduce firm value especially in low liquidity states, as it increases
the cost of a spinoff and hampers liquidity management;(4) with corporate socialism, liquidity is
less valuable since it is less costly to replenish the firm's liquidity through a spinoff; and (5)
division-level investment is set such that the ratio between marginal q and the marginal cost of
investing in each division equals the marginal value of cash.

Min Dai                                            Wei Jiang
National University of Singapore                   Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
10, Lower Kent Ridge Road                          Clear Water Bay
Singapore 119076                                   Kowloon, Hong Kong
Singapore                                          weijiang@ust.hk
matdm@nus.edu.sg
                                                   Neng Wang
Xavier Giroud                                      Columbia Business School
Columbia Business School                           3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 812
Finance Division                                   New York, NY 10027
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 806                       and NBER
New York, NY 10027                                 nw2128@columbia.edu
and NBER
xavier.giroud@gsb.columbia.edu
1     Introduction
Multi-division firms--i.e., firms that operate two or more divisions and allocate resources to
their divisions through an internal capital market--play an important role in the economy.
For example, Maksimovic and Phillips (2002) estimate that multi-division firms account
for about three-fourths of total output in the U.S. manufacturing sector.
    The empirical literature shows that multi-division firms behave very differently com-
pared to stand-alone firms. These differences are found across firm policies, including the
"holy grail" of corporate finance--that is, cash management, financing, and investment
decisions. For example, multi-division firms tend to hold less cash (Duchin, 2010), are
more resilient when external capital markets are disrupted (Matvos and Seru, 2014), and
actively reallocate resources across divisions (Giroud and Mueller, 2015). The objective of
this paper is to propose a tractable dynamic framework that sheds light on the mechanics
of multi-division firms, taking into account the complex and intertwined nature of their
risk management, financing, and investment decisions.
    Broadly speaking, the theory literature on multi-division firms can be classified into two
camps: the "bright side" and "dark side" theories of internal capital markets. The bright
side theories highlight the winner picking role of headquarters (Alchian, 1969; Williamson,
1975; Stein, 1997). In these models, headquarters can create value by reallocating resources
from the less productive divisions toward the more productive ones (the "winners"). In
contrast, dark side theories argue that internal capital markets are plagued with agency
conflicts, as they give rise to internal politics in the allocation of resources. This notion was
first proposed by Coase (1937), who argued that power within a hierarchy impacts internal
policies, and later formalized in the models of influence activities (Milgrom, 1988; Milgrom
and Roberts, 1988; Meyer, Milgrom, and Roberts, 1992). In these models, managers of
weaker divisions have an incentive to lobby headquarters for more resources, in an attempt
to distort the resource allocation in their favor. To mitigate such inefficient lobbying, head-
quarters may find it optimal to tilt the resource allocation towards "corporate socialism"
such that stronger divisions end up cross-subsidizing the weaker ones (Rajan, Servaes, and
Zingales, 2000; Scharfstein and Stein, 2000).
    While these models have been influential, they are subject to two main limitations.


                                                1
First, they typically take other policies (e.g., cash management) as given, and hence do
not account for the interdependence across these policies. As we show, allowing for a joint
determination of these policies often reverses the predictions from simpler models featuring
fewer policies. Second, these models are static, and hence do not account for the changing
conditions companies face in a dynamic environment. These limitations are non-trivial. In
a dynamic world, firms can run low on cash, which generates a need for state-contingent
and time-varying risk management policy. In turn, this can affect the way internal capi-
tal markets operate. For example, the notion of winner picking mentioned above--albeit
well-established in the literature--may need to be qualified. When companies run low on
cash, the shareholder-value maximizing policy may no longer be to allocate resources to
high-productivity divisions, but instead to low-risk divisions. Or companies may decide
to spin off entire divisions, preferring higher corporate cash holdings over diversification
benefits (by retaining more divisions). More broadly, as these examples illustrate, it is
important to consider the dynamic and intertwined nature of multi-division firms' policies
when formulating a theory of internal capital markets.
   This paper aims to fill this gap, by providing a tractable dynamic framework in which
cash management, external financing, dividend payout, division sale (spinoff), and invest-
ment (including cross-divisional transfers) are characterized simultaneously for a multi-
division firm that faces costly external finance. Our framework builds on the model of
Bolton, Chen, and Wang (2011), henceforth BCW (2011), for stand-alone firms. Com-
pared to BCW (2011), our framework has two main innovations. First, we consider a firm
with two divisions. Second, we allow for lobbying frictions at the division level, in the
spirit of the dark side models of internal capital markets. As we will show, our parsimo-
nious framework captures many situations that multi-division firms face in practice, and
yields a rich set of prescriptions. For expositional simplicity, we focus on two-division firms.
Our model has two key state variables: (1) the ratio between the liquid asset (cash) and
the illiquid productive capital stock (the sum of capital stock in the two divisions), denoted
by w; and (2) the ratio of capital stock between the two divisions, denoted by z .
   Our main results are as follow. First, starting with the case without corporate socialism,
we find that multi-division firms hold less cash, require lower amounts of external financing,
and can more easily pay dividends compared to stand-alone firms. These prediction are

                                               2
intuitive--diversification decreases the volatility of the firm's cash flows, and hence reduces
the need for liquidity. This lower need for liquidity is consistent with Duchin's (2010)
finding that multi-division firms tend to hold less cash than stand-alone firms.
    Second, when firms run out of cash, they may optimally choose to spin off one of their
divisions. Given the lumpy nature of division sales, the spinoff can generate more cash
than what the firm needs to efficiently operate the remaining division, in which case the
excess amount is paid out to shareholders as a special dividend. This is consistent with
Dittmar's (2004) finding that firms often pay a special dividend subsequent to a spinoff.1
Another implication of the model is that diversification can make future division sales
(when the firm runs low on cash and has to increase cash holdings via division sale) more
costly. Taking both dimensions into account, our model implies a dark and bright side of
diversification from the perspective of liquidity management, even for a shareholder-value
maximizing conglomerate. In good times, diversification reduces the need for liquidity. In
bad times, diversification can hamper the firm's liquidity management by making division
sales more costly.
    Third, we find that, when companies are flush with cash, they allocate more of their
resources to the high-productivity division, as predicted by static models of winner pick-
ing. However, when cash is scarce, the risk management motive dominates and companies
allocate more of their resources to the low-risk division. Taking both aspects into account
motivates a broader formulation of the "winner picking" role of internal capital markets:
when headquarters allocates resources to divisions, it does so not only based on produc-
tivity, but also based on risk. In this regard, the within-firm allocation of resources is
analogous to a dynamic portfolio choice problem, in which funding is allocated based on
the risk-return profile of the individual securities. Unlike the standard portfolio choice prob-
lem (e.g., Merton, 1971), the risk-neutral firm in our setting is endogenously risk averse. As
we will show, this risk aversion depends on the firm's cash balance (in a highly nonlinear
fashion), the cost of external financing, and the cost of liquidating a division.
    This insight has important implications for capital budgeting. Indeed, contrary to
   1
     This result also speaks to the literature on leveraged buyouts (LBOs) that finds that, following LBO
deals, LBO investors often sell entire divisions and subsequently pay out large dividends (Eckbo and
Thorburn, 2008). While this is often seen as a form of asset stripping in the interest of the LBO investors,
our framework offers a potential shareholder-value maximizing interpretation.


                                                     3
the textbook view, ignoring idiosyncratic risk and the balance sheet of the conglomerate
when doing capital budgeting is incorrect; depending on the firm's liquidity, it may be
optimal to invest in a lower-NPV project if the project's idiosyncratic risk is sufficiently
low. Introducing a project (division) changes the firm's entire balance sheet composition
and risk profile. As such, the firm should value the new project by computing the net value
difference caused by introducing the new project into the firm, as opposed to evaluating
the project as if it were a stand-alone project.
       Fourth, we find that corporate socialism reduces the value of the firm, exacerbates
underinvestment, and hampers the winner picking. While these results are intuitive, one
subtle implication of socialism is that division sales become less costly with socialism than
without, as spinning off a division (and becoming a stand-alone firm) eliminates socialism
frictions and hence is more valuable for a conglomerate with socialism. This has implica-
tions for liquidity management. Indeed, with socialism, liquidity is less valuable since it is
less costly to replenish the firm's liquidity through a spinoff.
       Finally, our model offers insights on the q theory of investment for a conglomerate.
In neoclassical settings where the Modigliani-Miller (MM) theorem holds, the value of
a conglomerate is simply the sum of its divisions' values. In contrast, in our model, the
conglomerate's division-level investment decisions depend on not only liquidity (as in BCW,
2011), but also the relative (capital stock) size of the two divisions. With convex adjustment
costs, a financially constrained conglomerate equates the ratio between the marginal q and
the marginal cost of investing in each division to the marginal value of cash.2 This is a
generalized version of the q theory of investment for a financially constrained single-division
firm analyzed in BCW (2011).
       Our paper is related to several strands of the literature. First, it is related to the few but
notable studies that use dynamic modeling to study the behavior of multi-division firms.
In particular, Gomes and Livdan (2004) use a dynamic model to examine the valuation
implications of diversification.3 Matvos and Seru (2014) estimate a structural dynamic
   2
     The assumption of convex adjustment costs allows us to simplify the analysis by leaving out the
possibility that inaction is optimal.
   3
     In their model, stand-alone firms diversify only when they become relatively unproductive in their
current activities. This relates to the earlier models by Matsusaka (2001) and Maksimovic and Phillips
(2002), who predict that firms diversify into industries that match their organizational capabilities and
managerial resources, respectively.


                                                   4
model that quantifies the extent to which internal capital markets helped offset the fi-
nancial market disruptions that occurred during the financial crisis of 2007-2010. Bakke
and Gu (2015) examine the rationales as to why multi-division firms hold less cash than
stand-alone firms, estimating a structural dynamic model that quantifies the respective im-
portance of selection (when a stand-alone firm endogenously becomes a multi-division firm)
and diversification. Compared to these articles, our paper focuses on the interconnections
between the various policies of multi-division firms. This allows us to provide a rich set of
prescriptions that speak to various aspects of internal capital markets, ranging from the
validity of winner picking predictions to the economics of spinoffs.
   Second, our paper is related to the large literature that uses dynamic models of finan-
cially constrained firms to characterize their investment, financing, and risk management
decisions (e.g., Cooley and Quadrini, 2001; Gomes, 2001; Hennessy and Whited, 2007;
Riddick and Whited, 2009; Bolton, Chen, and Wang, 2011; D´
                                                         ecamps, Mariotti, Rochet,
and Villeneuve, 2011; Hugonnier, Malamud and Morellec, 2015; Bolton, Wang, and Yang,
2019; Nikolov, Schmid, and Steri, 2019; Abel and Panageas, 2020). Also related is the
work of Malenko (2019), who uses a dynamic model to study the optimal capital budgeting
mechanism in a single-division firm.
   While our framework shares various features with the models proposed in this literature,
the key difference is our focus on a two-division firm as opposed to a representative single-
division firm modeled in these papers. As a result, our model, while parsimonious, is
inevitably a two-dimensional problem involving partial differential equations (PDEs). This
is a key difference from almost all existing models in the literature, whose formulations can
be simplified to one-dimensional problems whose solutions are characterized by ordinary
differential equations (ODEs). Despite the richness of our model, we offer a theoretical
framework that remains analytically tractable and economically intuitive, provide proofs
of the key results, and numerically solve the model with high accuracy.
   Third, our paper is related to the large empirical literature that studies the mechanics
of internal capital markets. This literature finds support for both the bright and dark side
views. In particular, the findings of Maksimovic and Phillips (2002), Guedj and Scharfstein
(2004), and Giroud and Mueller (2015) indicate that companies allocate resources in a value-
enhancing manner. Naturally, this need not imply that internal capital markets achieve the

                                             5
first-best allocations. Indeed, the shareholder-value maximizing formulation of our model
does not deliver first-best allocations. In this regard, Shin and Stulz (1998), Rajan, Servaes,
and Zingales (2000), and Ozbas and Scharfstein (2010) find evidence for distortions that are
consistent with the models of corporate socialism.4 Overall, the empirical evidence suggests
that our model, which combines both the bright and dark sides--i.e., firms striving to
allocate resources in a value-maximizing fashion, while facing rent-seeking behavior of their
division managers--might provide a realistic characterization of internal capital markets.5
        Lastly, our paper is related to the literature on corporate spinoffs (e.g., Maksimovic and
Phillips, 2001; Dittmar, 2004; Eckbo and Thorburn, 2008). In particular, and as mentioned
above, our predictions that firms tend to pay out a special dividend following a spinoff is
consistent with the empirical findings of Dittmar (2004).


2         Model
In the following, we introduce the diversified firm's production and investment technology,
describe the firm's financing opportunities, and state the firm's optimization problem.


2.1        Firm and Division Technologies
A diversified firm has two divisions, a and b. Each division employs capital as its factor of
production. The price of capital is normalized to unity. We denote by Kts and Its the level
of capital stock and gross investment in division s at time t, respectively, where s " a, b.
The capital stock Kts of division s evolves according to

                                        dKts " pIts ´ s Kts qdt ,                                          (1)

where s is the constant depreciation rate of the capital stock of division s.
        The operating revenue generated by division s is proportional to its capital stock Kts and
is given by Kts dAs           s
                  t , where dAt is the productivity shock for division s over time interval
    4
     Direct evidence of influence activities at the division level is provided by Duchin and Sosyura (2013)
and Glaser, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Sautner (2013).
   5
     For a detailed review of the empirical literature on internal capital markets, see Maksimovic and Phillips
(2013).



                                                      6
pt, t ` dtq. We assume that, under the risk-neutral measure Q (i.e., on a risk-adjusted
basis), the cumulative (undiscounted) productivity of division s, As
                                                                   t , follows an arithmetic

Brownian motion process:

                                  dAs               s
                                    t " µs dt ` s dZt ,       s " a, b,                               (2)

where Zts is a standard Brownian motion under Q, and µs and s denote the mean and
volatility of the division's productivity for a unit of time under the risk-adjusted measure.6
We denote by  the constant correlation coefficient between the productivity shocks of the
two divisions. That is, the quadratic co-variation between Zta and Ztb , drZ a , Z b st , is equal to
dt. Note that the firm's productivity process in our model is a two-division generalization
of the one used in BCW (2011).7
       Let dYts denote the operating profit generated by division s " a, b over increment dt:

                                   dYts " Kts dAs    s       s
                                                t ´ It dt ´ Gt dt .                                   (3)

There are three terms contributing to the change in the division's operating profit dYts .
The first term in (3) is the division's operating revenue, the second term is the investment
(capital acquisition) cost, and the last term describes the capital adjustment cost.
       As in the q theory of investment (Lucas and Prescott, 1971; Hayashi, 1982; Abel and
Eberly, 1994), we assume that the capital adjustment cost depends on investment and
capital stock. That is, the capital adjustment cost in division s takes the form Gs
                                                                                  t "

Gs pIts , Kts q.
       For analytical tractability, we assume that the adjustment costs for both divisions are
homogeneous of degree one in their divisional I and K , so that

                                  Gs    s  s    s          s      s
                                   t " G pIt , Kt q " gs pit q ¨ Kt ,                                 (4)

where is    s   s
       t " It {Kt denotes the investment-capital ratio of division s at time t. We apply
   6
     By directly specifying the joint productivity process for the firm's divisions under the risk-neutral
measure, we incorporate the effect of the risk premium on the firm's decisions and valuation.
   7
     The same i.i.d. productivity assumption is also made in dynamic contracting models, e.g., DeMarzo
and Sannikov (2006), Biais, Mariotti, Plantin, and Rochet (2007), DeMarzo and Fishman (2007), and
DeMarzo, Fishman, He, and Wang (2012).


                                                    7
this homogeneity property, which was first proposed by Lucas and Prescott (1971) and
Hayashi (1982) for corporate investment, to investment at the division level.8 We make the
standard intuitive assumptions that gs piq is increasing, smooth, and convex in i, as in the
literature on the q theory of investment. Additionally, gs p0q " 0.
       The firm may choose to liquidate one or more divisions over time. As we will show, it
is suboptimal to liquidate both divisions at the same time. After liquidating division s,
the firm receives liquidation value Ls
                                     t and continues to operate as a going concern with the

remaining division. Note that which division to liquidate at what time is endogenous. To
preserve our model's homogeneity property, we assume that

                                             Ls
                                              t "
                                                            s
                                                         s Kt   ,                                  (5)

where      s    0. The lower the value of   s,   the more inefficient the liquidation technology for
division s. Of course, the firm may eventually die as it may be optimal to also liquidate
the remaining division in the future.
       To focus on the economically interesting case, we impose the following conditions:

                             µa    a   ¨ pr ` a q and µb            b   ¨ pr ` b q .               (6)

Otherwise, the firm prefers immediate liquidation without using its production technology.
       The firm's operating cash flow, dYt , over time increment dt is given by

                                     `                    ` a                 
                  dYt " dYta ` dYtb " Kta dAa
                                            t ` K b
                                                  t dA b
                                                       t ´ It ` It
                                                                  b
                                                                    ` Ga
                                                                       t ` Gb
                                                                            t dt .                 (7)

       Let  L denote the firm's (stochastic) liquidation/death time. If  L " 8, the firm never
dies but may operate with only one division. For a single-division firm,  L "  s , as there
is only one division s. However, for a two-division firm, division sale and firm liquidation
are very different events. We thus need to differentiate between three stopping times:  a ,
 b , and  L .
   8
    Eberly, Rebelo, and Vincent (2009) provide empirical evidence in support of the Hayashi homogeneity
assumption for the upper-size quartile of Compustat firms.




                                                     8
2.2       External Financing Costs and Cash Management
Neoclassical investment models (Hayashi, 1982) assume that the firm faces frictionless cap-
ital markets and that the Modigliani and Miller (1958) theorem holds. In reality, however,
firms often face external financing costs due to various financial frictions, e.g., transaction
costs, asymmetric information, and managerial incentive problems.9


External financing costs. We do not explicitly model the micro foundations of financing
costs. Instead, we directly specify equity issuance costs as in the literature. Specifically,
as in BCW (2011), we assume that a firm incurs both a fixed cost  and a proportional
(marginal) cost  whenever it chooses to issue external equity. Together, these costs imply
that the firm will optimally tap equity markets only intermittently, and when doing so it
raises funds in lumps, consistent with observed firm behavior.
       To preserve our model's homogeneity property, we assume that the firm's fixed cost of
issuing equity at t is proportional to its total capital stock Kt . That is, the fixed cost of
equity issuance, t , is given by

                                    t " Kt "  ¨ pKta ` Ktb q ,                                      (8)

where   0 is a constant measuring the fixed equity issuance cost.
       In practice, external costs of financing scaled by firm size may decrease with firm size.
With this caveat in mind, we point out that there are conceptual, mathematical, and
economic reasons for modeling these costs as proportional to firm size. First, by modeling
the fixed financing costs proportional to firm size, we ensure that the firm does not grow out
of the fixed costs.10 Second, the information and incentive costs of external financing may
to some extent be proportional to firm size. Indeed, the negative announcement effect of
a new equity issue affects the firm's entire capitalization. Similarly, the negative incentive
effect of a more diluted ownership may have costs that are proportional to firm size. Finally,
   9
     The classic writings include Jensen and Meckling (1976), Leland and Pyle (1977), and Myers and
Majluf (1984).
  10
     Indeed, this is a common assumption in the investment literature. See Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006)
and Riddick and Whited (2009), among others. If the fixed cost is independent of firm size, it will not
matter when firms become sufficiently large in the long run.



                                                   9
this assumption keeps the model tractable and generates stationary dynamics for the firm's
cash-capital ratio.11
       We denote by Ht the firm's cumulative external financing up to time t with H0 " 0 and
by dHt the firm's incremental external financing over time interval pt, t ` dtq. Similarly, let
Xt denote the cumulative costs of external financing up to time t with X0 " 0, and dXt
the incremental costs of raising incremental external funds dHt . The cumulative external
equity issuance H and the associated cumulative costs X are stochastic controls chosen by
the firm.
       Technically, due to the fixed equity issuance costs, the firm's external financing policy
can be described as a tuple  " t p1q ,  p2q , ¨ ¨ ¨ ; M p1q , M p2q , ¨ ¨ ¨ u, where  piq represents the
i-th external financing (stopping) time, and M piq  0 represents the corresponding net
financing amount at the i-th financing time. When the firm issues no equity, i.e., t   piq ,
we have dHt " dXt " 0. When the firm issues equity, i.e., t "  piq , we have

                                   H piq " H piq ´ ` M piq ,                                                (9)
                                   X piq " X piq ´ `  piq ` M piq .                                       (10)

Equations (9)-(10) imply that the net equity raised is dHt " M piq and the associated cost
of financing is dXt "  piq ` M piq at t "  piq . Here,  piq ´ refers to the time immediately
before  piq .


Cash carry costs and cash management. Let Wt denote the firm's cash balance at t.
If the firm's cash is positive, it survives with probability one. However, if the firm runs out
of cash (Wt " 0), it has to either raise external funds to continue operating, or liquidate
one of its divisions to replenish cash.
       If the firm chooses to raise external funds, it incurs both the fixed and marginal financing
costs specified above. In some situations the firm may prefer selling one of its divisions even
before exhausting its cash balance. As we discuss in detail later, this result is a novel insight
  11
     A potential limitation of our model is that it will be misspecified as a structural model of firms' outside
equity issue decisions. As such, the model is likely to work best when applied to mature firms as opposed
to start-ups and small entrepreneurial firms. Nevertheless, this limitation is mitigated in our setting, since
conglomerates (or, more generally, multi-division firms) tend to fit the former category.



                                                      10
from our multi-division firm model. In contrast, it is not optimal for a single-division firm
to liquidate itself as long as it still has a positive cash balance (BCW, 2011).
      As in most cash management models, the rate of return that the firm earns on its cash
balance is the risk-free rate r minus a carry cost   0 that captures in a simple way the
agency costs that may be associated with free cash inside the firm.12 However, paying out
cash also reduces the firm's cash balance, which potentially exposes the firm to current and
future underinvestment, and future external financing costs. This tradeoff, which has been
widely analyzed in the literature, determines the optimal payout policy. We denote by Ut
the firm's cumulative (nondecreasing) payout to shareholders up to time t, and by dUt the
incremental payout over time interval dt. Distributing cash to shareholders may take the
form of a special dividend or a share repurchase.
      Combining cash flows from operations dYt given in (7) with the firm's financing policy
given by the cumulative payout process U and the cumulative external financing process
H , in the region where the firm neither sells a division nor liquidates, its cash balance W
evolves as follows:
                               dWt " dYt ` pr ´ q Wt dt ` dHt ´ dUt ,                                 (11)

where the second term is the interest income (net of the carry cost ), the third term dHt
is the cash inflow from external financing, and the last term dUt is the cash outflow to
investors, so that (dHt ´ dUt ) is the net cash flow from financing. As equity issuance is
costly, it is not optimal to simultaneously issue equity and pay out a dividend. That is, at
all t, either dHt " 0 or dUt " 0. As raising external financing is costly, the firm is often
financially constrained; it neither issues equity nor pays out a dividend (dHt " dUt " 0),
even though saving inside the firm is also costly (  0).


2.3       Firm Optimization
2.3.1      Single-Division Firm Optimization

Next, we state the optimization problem for a single-division firm, proposed by BCW
(2011), which serves as an important benchmark for at least two reasons. First, it allows us
to characterize how having more than one division changes a firm's decisions and valuation.
 12
      Alternatively, the cost of carrying cash may arise from tax distortions (e.g., Graham, 2000).


                                                     11
Second, as a multi-division firm may sell one or more of its divisions, the solution for a
single-division firm naturally enters into our analysis of the optimization problem for a
multi-division firm.
   Let P s pK s , W q denote the value of a single-division firm with division s, and let tKts ; t 
0u be the firm's capital stock process and tWt ; t  0u its cash balance process. The firm
chooses its investment I s , payout policy U s , external financing policy H s , and liquidation
time L " s to maximize shareholder value by solving
                           ,, s                                      
         s  s                    ´rt    s      s    s   ´rs
                                                            ` s     
       P pK , W q " max E       e pdUt ´ dHt ´ dXt q ` e     Ls ` Ws .                        (12)
                                   0


The expectation takes risk into account (i.e., under the risk-neutral measure Q). The first
term is the discounted value of the net payouts to shareholders, and the second term is the
discounted value from liquidation. The firm may never liquidate (i.e., s " 8).

2.3.2   Multi-Division Firm Optimization

Unlike a single-division firm, which ceases to exist upon liquidating its only division, a
multi-division firm can sell one or more divisions to replenish its cash balance, and continue
operating as a going concern with the remaining divisions.
   When selling division s at time s , the conglomerate's cash balance increases from Ws ´
by a discrete amount Ls
                      s ´ to


                            Ws " Ws ´ ` Ls
                                         s ´ " Ws ´ `
                                                                  s
                                                              s K s ´   .                     (13)

For a two-division firm, after the division sale, the conglomerate becomes a single-division
firm that behaves as in BCW (2011).
   Let F pK a , K b , W q denote the conglomerate's shareholder value. In Section 5.3 we show
that it is never optimal for the firm to simultaneously sell both divisions (see Proposition
5.1). This is because the option value of keeping at least one division alive is strictly positive.
We can therefore divide the conglomerate's optimization problem into two subproblems:
one after it sells one of its divisions at stochastic time s , and the other before the sale of
the division. We solve the problem via backward induction.



                                                12
       Shareholders choose investment levels (I a , I b ), division sale timing pa , b q, payout policy
U , and external financing H to maximize the conglomerate's value by solving
                                                   «
                                                       
       F pK a , K b , W q "      max           E          e´rt pdUt ´ dHt ´ dXt q
                              I a ,I b ,U,H,         0
                                                                                                          ff
                                                                                                      (
                                                   `e´r P a pKa
                                                                , W q1t "b u ` P b pKb
                                                                                       , W q1t "a u            ,(14)


where 1A is the indicator function13 and P s pKs
                                                 , Ws q is the value of the single-division firm
defined in equation (12). The conglomerate spins off a division at stopping time  given by
 " minta , b u and liquidates itself at L " maxta , b u. In sum, the firm's optimization
problem is a combined convex control (investment), singular control (payout), impulse
control (equity issuance), and optimal stopping (division sale) problem (see Appendix A).
       Finally, we define the average q for a conglomerate as follows:

                                                    F pKta , Ktb , Wt q ´ Wt
                                           qt "                              .                                 (15)
                                                          Kta ` Ktb


3        Corporate Socialism
While putting two divisions together as a firm provides diversification benefits, doing so may
also give rise to agency costs. In particular, in the spirit of the models of influence activities
(e.g., Milgrom, 1988; Milgrom and Roberts, 1988; Meyer, Milgrom, and Roberts, 1992),
division managers may lobby headquarters to channel more of the firm's resources toward
their division. In these models, division managers prefer larger resource allocations due
to rent-seeking motives (e.g., if financial compensation, perquisite consumption, or outside
job opportunities are linked to the size of the division they manage) or "empire building"
preferences (e.g., if managers enjoy the power and status of managing a larger division),
and lobby headquarters accordingly. This lobbying incentive is especially pronounced for
managers of weak divisions that face a higher risk of being downsized; their managers
have incentives to overstate the division's true prospects in an attempt to gain access to
corporate resources that can be used to prevent or delay the downsizing.
  13
       The indicator function 1A is equal to one if and only if the event A occurs and zero otherwise.


                                                              13
       Such lobbying activities are costly to the firm, as division managers devote time and
effort lobbying headquarters at the expense of more productive activities. In the models of
corporate socialism (e.g., Rajan, Servaes, and Zingales, 2000; Scharfstein and Stein, 2000;
Matvos and Seru, 2014), headquarters can mitigate this lobbying behavior by tilting the
resource allocation toward weaker divisions at the expense of the stronger ones--analogous
to a "socialist" outcome in which stronger divisions cross-subsidize the weaker ones.14
       We model inefficient resource allocation within a firm by assuming that there is an
additional cost that the firm pays by having two divisions inside the firm. Let Gc
                                                                                 t denote

this cost, where c refers to the conglomerate. This cost can be interpreted as influence cost,
which lowers divisions' productivity and causes output losses.
       To be precise, the firm's operating profit, dYt , over time increment dt is then given by

       dYt " dYta ` dYtb ´ Gc        a   a    b   b       a    b    a    b        c
                            t dt " pKt dAt ` Kt dAt q ´ pIt ` It ` Gt ` Gt qdt ´ Gt dt .                (16)

       We focus on socialism for the case where the productivities of the two divisions are dif-
ferent. Without loss of generality, we refer to division a as the stronger division throughout
the paper (i.e., µa  µb ), whenever we study corporate socialism. Rather than using the
(risk-adjusted) true expected productivity µa for the stronger division a, headquarters uses
the (risk-adjusted) compromised productivity µ
                                             pa  µa .
       For division b, we set µ
                              pb " µb . This setup is in the spirit of the models of influence
activities, in which internal politics is more costly to the high-productivity division. Impor-
tantly, due to internal politics, the compromised productivities are closer to one another
compared to the uncompromised productivities.
       As in Matvos and Seru (2014), we assume that the (flow) cost of being a conglomerate
takes the form of:
                                           Gc    a
                                            t " Kt pµa ´ µ
                                                         pa q                                           (17)

where µ
      pa satisfies
                                         µ
                                         pa " µa ` c pµ ´ µa q                                          (18)
  14
    Several empirical studies find that multi-division firms tend to overinvest in divisions with low invest-
ment opportunities and underinvest in those with high investment opportunities (e.g., Shin and Stulz, 1998;
Rajan, Servaes, and Zingales, 2000; Ozbas and Scharfstein, 2010), consistent with the models of corporate
socialism.


                                                     14
with c P r0, 1s measuring the degree of corporate socialism and

                                                           µa ` µb
                                                      µ"           .                                            (19)
                                                              2

   The case with c " 0 corresponds to our baseline model of Section 2 with no corporate
socialism. The higher the value of c , the stronger corporate socialism. The case with
c " 1 corresponds to the one with perfect socialism, in that headquarters allocates capital
as if the two divisions were equally productive.
   In summary, when optimizing, headquarters uses the following "compromised" risk-
                              ps for division s " a, b:
adjusted productivity process A         t


                                             ps " µ
                                            dA    ps dt ` s dZts .                                              (20)
                                               t


Substituting equation (17) into equation (16), we obtain the following dynamics for dYt :

       dYt " dYta ` dYtb ´ Gc        a pa     b   b       a    b    a    b
                            t dt " pKt dAt ` Kt dAt q ´ pIt ` It ` Gt ` Gt qdt .


Importantly, corporate socialism disappears if headquarters sells one of the divisions, as
doing so avoids the Gc
                     t dt costs. As such, division sale is an important way for the firm to

mitigate corporate socialism.
                                           pa , I
   Headquarters chooses investment levels (I    pb ), division sale timing ppa , pb q, payout U
                                                                                              p,
and external financing H
                       p to solve
                                                   «
                                                       p
    ppK a , K b , W q "
    F                           max               E        e´rt pdU
                                                                  pt ´ dH
                                                                        p t ´ dX
                                                                               pt q
                          pa ,I
                          I   pb ,pa ,pb ,U
                                          p ,H
                                             p         0
                                                                                                           ff
                                                                                                       (
                                                 `e´rp
                                                       P a pKa
                                                             p , Wp q1tp"
                                                                                 b
                                                                         pb u ` P pK
                                                                                    b
                                                                                    p , Wp q1tp"pa u            ,(21)


where P s pKs
            p , Wp q is the value of a single-division firm defined in equation (12). As there

is no corporate socialism for a single-division firm, the parameters for the value functions
P a pKa
      p , W
                    b
           p q and P pK
                       b
                       p , Wp q are the original (true) parameter values µa and µb , rather

than µ
     pa and µ
            pb . The conglomerate spins off a division at time p given by p " mintpa , pb u.
The firm's liquidation time pL is then given by pL " maxtpa , pb u.


                                                            15
    Naturally, firm value is lower with socialism than without:

                            ppK a , K b , W q  F pK a , K b , W ; µa , µb q .
                            F                                                                 (22)

                                                                       ppK a , K b , W q, as
Additionally, we can bound from below the firm's value with socialism, F
follows:
                            ppK a , K b , W q  F pK a , K b , W ; µ
                            F                                     pa , µ
                                                                       pb q ,                 (23)

where F pK a , K b , W ; µ
                         pa , µ
                              pb q is the value of a hypothetical conglomerate with (risk-adjusted)
productivities µ
               pa and µ
                      pb for the two divisions under no socialism. While socialism lowers
the conglomerate's productivity for the more productive division from µa to µ
                                                                            pa , it has a
valuable division spinoff option, which allows the firm to eliminate socialism and increase
productivity after becoming a single-division firm.


4     An MM First-Best Benchmark
Before solving our model for a financially constrained conglomerate, it is helpful to consider
the special case where equity issuance is costless and there is no corporate socialism. In
this case, both the Modigliani-Miller (MM) and Coase Theorems hold. Whether the two
divisions are organized as units within a conglomerate or as two separate firms makes no
economic difference. In either organizational structure, the first-best outcome is achievable
as it is optimal for each division to choose its own first-best investment policy and financing
is irrelevant.
    Each division operates the same technology as in Hayashi (1982). Therefore, the average
q for division s is equal to its marginal q and satisfies the following present-value relation:

                                   FB             µs ´ is ´ gs pis q
                                  qs  " max                          .                        (24)
                                         s   i      r `  s ´ is

The first-order condition (FOC) for investment also implies that iF
                                                                  s
                                                                    B
                                                                      satisfies:

                                             1 FB       FB
                                        1 ` gs pis q " qs  ,                                  (25)

which states that the division's marginal cost of investing is equal to the marginal benefit


                                                   16
               FB
of investing, qs  . Since adjustment costs are convex, (25) implies that the first-best in-
                                         FB
vestment is increasing in q . Note that qs  is greater than unity, as the adjustment costs
create a wedge between the value of installed capital and newly purchased capital.
    The value of a conglomerate with cash Wt and divisional capital stocks Kta and Ktb is
given by:
                         F F B pKta , Ktb , Wt q " qa
                                                    FB a     FB b
                                                      K t ` qb Kt ` Wt .                 (26)

The enterprise value of the conglomerate is equal to the value of the conglomerate minus
cash, F F B pKta , Ktb , Wt q ´ Wt , which is independent of Wt since MM holds.
    Let zt denote the capital stock of division a divided by the firm's total capital stock:

                                                  Kta
                                        zt "             .                               (27)
                                               Kta ` Ktb

               FB
Moreover, let qt  denote the conglomerate's average q in our first-best setting. Using the
definition of average q given in equation (15), we obtain:

                                  FB       FB             FB
                                 qt  " zt qa  ` p1 ´ zt qqb  .                           (28)

That is, the average q of the conglomerate is simply a weighted average of the average q of
its divisions, where the weights are the divisions' relative sizes, zt and p1 ´ zt q.


5     Solution: Bright Side of Internal Capital Markets
In this section, we solve the model proposed in Section 2. Firm value is a function of three
state variables: the capital stock of each division (K a and K b ) and the firm's cash balance
(W ). We solve the model by dividing the problem into three steps. First, we characterize
the firm's decisions in the region where the marginal source of financing is its internal
financing; second, we characterize the firm's optimal payout policies; finally, we analyze
how a financially constrained conglomerate dynamically replenishes its cash by choosing
between external financing, division sale, and firm liquidation.




                                                17
5.1       Interior Region
In this region, firm value F pK a , K b , W q satisfies the following Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman
(HJB) equation:

       rF pK a , K b , W q " max pI a ´ a K a qFK a ` pI b ´ b K b qFK b
                             I a ,I b
                                       "                                                  
                                      ` pr ´ qW ` µa K a ` µb K b ´ pI a ` I b ` Ga ` Gb q FW
                                       1` 2 a 2     2
                                                                              
                                      ` a   pK q ` b  pK b q2 ` 2a b K a K b FW W .           (29)
                                       2

The first two terms (FK a and FK b ) on the right-hand side of (29) capture the direct effects
of investment on firm value; the third term (FW ) represents the effect of the firm's expected
savings; and the last term (FW W ) captures the effect of the volatility of cash holdings W .
       The firm finances its investment in both divisions out of the cash balance in this region.
The divisional investment levels I a and I b satisfy the following interconnected FOCs:15

                                              FK a pK a , K b , W q
                             1 ` Ga     a   a
                                  I a pI , K q "                    ,                                (30)
                                              FW pK a , K b , W q
                                  b
                                     ` b b    FK b pK a , K b , W q
                             1 ` GI b I , K "                       .                                (31)
                                              FW pK a , K b , W q

       First, consider the special case with frictionless external and internal capital markets
considered in Section 4 (i.e., the MM world). In this case, the marginal value of cash is
FW " 1, and the FOCs simplify to the neoclassical investment formula in (25)--that is,
the firm's marginal q with respect to capital stock K s in division s, FK s pK s , K s , W q, is
equal to the firm's marginal cost of investing in division s, 1 ` Gs
                                                                   I s , and the two FOCs

are independent of each other. In other words, one division's policy is independent of the
other's (MM and Coase Theorems).
       These properties no longer hold in our setup with financing frictions. The left-hand
side of (30) is the firm's marginal cost of increasing a unit of capital in division a, 1 ` Ga
                                                                                             Ia .

The right-hand side is the marginal benefit, which is equal to the marginal q for division a,
FK a pK a , K b , W q, divided by the marginal cost of financing (or equivalently, the marginal
  15
    The convexity of the physical adjustment cost implies that the second-order condition is satisfied and
the divisional investment decisions in our model admit interior solutions.



                                                   18
value of cash), FW pK a , K b , W q. Optimality requires that the two sides of (30) be equal.
The same reasoning applies to equation (31) with respect to division b. With costly external
financing, the firm deploys cash optimally to both divisions so that the FOCs (30) and (31)
for the two divisions hold and become interconnected.
   Re-writing (30) and (31), we have the following FOCs:

                 FK a pK a , K b , W q   FK b pK a , K b , W q
                        a     a     a
                                       "        b     b     b
                                                               " FW pK a , K b , W q .                 (32)
                 1 ` GI a pI , K q       1 ` GI b pI , K q

The first equality states that the ratio between marginal q and the marginal cost of investing
is equal for the two divisions--the implication of the intratemporal optimal allocation. The
second equality describes the intertemporal optimal savings: the ratio between marginal q
and the marginal cost of investing in all divisions is equal to the marginal value of savings
(cash), FW pK a , K b , W q. Note that, while marginal q is well defined for each division, it is
unclear how to define a meaningful marginal q at the conglomerate level, as K a ` K b is not
a state variable; instead, both K a and K b are state variables.
   By using the homogeneity property of our model and applying Euler's theorem, we
obtain the following expression:

   F pK a , K b , W q " FK a pK a , K b , W qK a ` FK b pK a , K b , W qK b ` FW pK a , K b , W qW ,   (33)

which links the book values of key balance sheet items (W , K a , and K b ) to the firm's
market value. Multiplying cash (W ) and divisional capital stocks (K a and K b ) by their
respective marginal (shadow) values (i.e., the marginal value of cash FW , the marginal q of
division a's capital stock FK a , and the marginal q of division b's capital stock FK b ) and then
summing up the three terms, we obtain the conglomerate's market value F pK a , K b , W q.
   The homogeneity property also allows us to equivalently express the firm's three-state-
variable value function as a two-state-variable value function:

                              F pKta , Ktb , Wt q " pKta ` Ktb q ¨ f pzt , wt q ,                      (34)




                                                      19
where zt is given in (27) and wt is the firm's cash-capital ratio defined as

                                                  Wt
                                         wt "           .                                      (35)
                                                Kta
                                                  ` Ktb

   The ratio w between cash balance Wt and the firm's total physical capital stock pKta `
Ktb q is the key state variable measuring the firm's degree of financing constraints. Using
Ito's Lemma, we obtain the following dynamics for wt :

                                    "                                 `          
             dwt " pr ´ qwt dt ` zt pµa dt ` a dZta q ` p1 ´ zt q µb dt ` b dZtb
                     "                    `b                      
                   ´ pia         a                    b
                        t ` ga pit qq zt ` it ` gb pit q p1 ´ zt q dt
                        "                                  
                   ´ wt zt pia                      b
                             t ´ a q ` p1 ´ zt qpit ´ b q dt .                                 (36)

The first term reflects the firm's net interest income; the second term captures the operating
revenues from the two divisions; the third term captures the total (flow) costs of investing;
and the last term captures the impact of changes in the divisions' capital stock.
   In addition to wt , the capital stock of division a as a fraction of the firm's total capital
stock, zt " Kta {pKta ` Ktb q, measures the distribution of illiquid productive capital stocks
between the two divisions, which is the other key state variable. Using the dynamics of K a
and K b , we obtain the following process for zt P r0, 1s:

                                             "                     
                           dzt " zt p1 ´ zt q pia           b
                                                t ´ a q ´ pit ´ b q dt .                       (37)

If and only if the growth rate of division a exceeds that of division b, i.e., pia          b
                                                                                 t ´ a q  pit ´ b q,

the relative size of division a grows, that is, zt increases.
   By using our model's homogeneity property--e.g., equation (34)--we can simplify the
HJB equation (29) and obtain the following partial differential equation (PDE) for f pz, wq:

                                          Lf pz, wq " 0 ,                                      (38)

where

 Lf pz, wq " max pia ´ a qz rf pz, wq ` p1 ´ z qfz pz, wq ´ wfw pz, wqs
               ia ,ib




                                                 20
                      ` pib ´ b qp1 ´ z q rf pz, wq ´ zfz pz, wq ´ wfw pz, wqs
                        "                                                             
                      ` pr ´ qw ` pµa ´ ia ´ ga pia qqz ` pµb ´ ib ´ gb pib qqp1 ´ z q fw pz, wq
                        1" 2 2      2
                                                                   
                      ` a    z ` b    p1 ´ z q2 ` 2z p1 ´ z qa b fww pz, wq ´ rf pz, wq .     (39)
                        2

The first and second terms on the right-hand side of equation (38) capture the effects of
investment in divisions a and b on firm value; the third term captures the effect of cash
management; and the fourth term captures the volatility effects (from both divisions and
their correlation). The sum of these four terms represents the expected change in firm value.
Subtracting rf pz, wq, the annuity value of f pz, wq, provides the net change in f pz, wq.
   Note that the active policies here are divisional investments only, as it is optimal for the
firm to solely rely on internal funds to finance investment in this region. The conglomerate
optimally chooses its divisional investments ia and ib so that the net change in its (scaled)
value f pz, wq, Lf pz, wq, is zero.
   The FOCs for divisional investment decisions can be simplified as follows:

                             1 a      f pz, wq ` p1 ´ z qfz pz, wq
                        1 ` ga pi q "                              ´w,                       (40)
                                                fw pz, wq
                             1 b      f pz, wq ´ zfz pz, wq
                        1 ` gb pi q "                        ´w.                             (41)
                                             fw pz, wq

The left-hand side of equation (40) is the marginal cost of investing in division a. The
right-hand side is the marginal q of K a divided by the marginal value of cash fw pz, wq. The
firm optimally chooses ia by equating the two sides of (40). The same applies to division b
in equation (41). As discussed above, the divisional investment decisions are interconnected
because of financial constraints.
   In order to fully characterize the value function f pz, wq, we must also analyze the firm's
payout, external financing, and division sale decisions. We show that there are two other
regions in the state space of pz, wq: (1) a payout region where the firm also actively pays
out a dividend to shareholders; and (2) an external financing/division sale region in which
the firm replenishes its cash by choosing external financing, division sale, or liquidation of
the whole firm.




                                               21
5.2    Payout Region
To determine the firm's payout region, we first consider the case in which the firm's cash
holdings are very large relative to its size. In this case, the firm is better off paying out its
excess cash to shareholders to avoid the cash-carrying costs. Let wt denote the (stochastic)
level of the cash-capital ratio wt above which the firm pays out cash. As cum-dividend firm
value f pzt , wt q must be continuous at all t, the following value-matching condition holds:

                      f pzt , wt q " f pzt , wt q ` pwt ´ wt q ,   for wt  wt .             (42)

By taking the limit wt Ñ wt and calculating the derivative with respect to wt , we obtain
the following equation in the region where wt  wt :

                                           fw pzt , wt q " 1 .                              (43)

That is, at the time of payout, the marginal value of cash is one. As the payout is optimally
chosen, the following "super contact" condition must also hold (Dumas, 1991):

                                          fww pzt , wt q " 0 .                              (44)


5.3    Division Sale, External Financing, and Liquidation Regions
When the firm is short on cash, it may raise costly external equity or liquidate a division to
replenish its cash stock. An important difference from BCW (2011) is that a conglomerate
may issue equity or liquidate a productive division to replenish its cash holdings before
exhausting its cash. That is, the firm may move preemptively, as doing so alleviates
even larger distortions in the future. Another key difference from BCW (2011) is that a
conglomerate may choose equity issuance and division sale under different circumstances,
while in BCW (2011) the firm either issues equity or liquidates itself when running out of
cash. We show that the liquidation of the whole firm is the firm's last resort, as doing so
wipes out its going-concern value (see Appendix B).

Proposition 5.1. Under the conditions given in equation (6), a.) in the first-best world,
it is never optimal to liquidate either division; b.) in a world with costly external financing,

                                                   22
it is optimal for the firm to sequentially sell its divisions rather than liquidate the firm in
its entirety.

     When the firm replenishes its cash via either equity issuance or division sale, it chooses
the less costly option that yields a higher firm value. The choice depends not only on the
liquidity ratio wt , but also the relative size of the two divisions, captured by zt , in addition
to the structural parameters of the model.


Costly external equity issuance. First, we calculate firm value conditional on issuing
external equity at t. Let J pKta , Ktb , Wt q denote this conditional firm value, which is given
by

                                                            "                           
      J pKta , Ktb , Wt q " max   F pKta , Ktb , Wt ` Mt q ´  ¨ pKta ` Ktb q ` p1 `  qMt .         (45)
                          Mt 0


The first term on the right-hand side of equation (45) is the post-equity-issuance firm
value, and the second term is the sum of net equity issuance Mt and the total cost of equity
issuance, which includes the fixed equity issuance cost,  ¨ pKta ` Ktb q, and the proportional
issuance cost Mt . Again, note that the value J pKta , Ktb , Wt q is conditional on equity
issuance, but equity issuance may not be optimal.
        rpK a , K b , Wt q denote firm value conditional on external financing or division sale
    Let F   t    t

being optimal. That is, we have the following condition:

                                                                                              (
      rpK a , K b , Wt q " max P a pK a , Lb ` Wt q, P b pK b , La ` Wt q, J pK a , K b , Wt q .
      F                                                                                            (46)
         t     t                     t     t               t     t             t     t


Equation (46) states that the firm selects one of the three mutually exclusive discrete
choices to maximize its value. If sale of division a or b is optimal, firm value is given by the
first and second term, respectively, on the right side of equation (46). If equity issuance is
optimal, firm value is equal to J pKta , Ktb , Wt q given in equation (45). The value function
for the single-division firm is the same as in BCW (2011) and reported in Section 2.
          a
     Let wt denote the cash-capital ratio immediately after the conglomerate sells division b
                                                      a
and becomes a stand-alone firm with only division a: wt " Wta {Kta , where Wta " Lb
                                                                                  t ` Wt .




                                                   23
           b
We define wt analogously. Using the homogeneity property, we obtain:

                        a      b p1   ´ zt q ` wt          b             a zt
                                                                            ` wt
                       wt "                           and wt "                   .              (47)
                                       zt                                1 ´ zt

   Let mt denote the scaled net equity issuance, mt " Mt {pKta ` Ktb q, and j pzt , wt q denote
firm value scaled by pKta ` Ktb q, that is, j pzt , wt q " J pKta , Ktb , Wt q{pKta ` Ktb q. Equation
(45) can be simplified as:

                       j pzt , wt q " max f pzt , wt ` mt q ´  ´ p1 `  q mt .                   (48)
                                       mt 0


Let f             rpK a , K b , Wt q{pK a ` K b q. Using the homogeneity property to simplify
    rpzt , wt q " F
                     t     t           t     t

equation (46), we obtain
                                    !                                             )
                                         a  a                b  b
                  f pzt , wt q " max zt p pwt q , p1 ´ zt q p pwt q , j pzt , wt q ,
                  r                                                                             (49)

       a      b
where wt and wt are given in equation (47).
   The equation that defines the external financing/division sale regions is then given by

                                          f pzt , wt q " f
                                                         rpzt , wt q .                          (50)


5.4     Summary
In Appendix A, we prove that the firm's (scaled) value f pz, wq associated with the firm's
optimal policies satisfies the following variational inequality:
                       !                                             )
                    max Lf pz, wq, 1 ´ fw pz, wq, f pz, wq ´ f pz, wq " 0
                                                  r                                             (51)

in the two-dimensional region defined by z P p0, 1q and w  0.
   Intuitively, the firm finds itself in one of the three regions. When the first term in
equation (51) is equal to zero (and the other two terms are strictly negative), the firm is in
the interior region and optimally chooses its investment-capital ratios for divisions a and b
as prescribed by (40) and (41). When the second term is equal to zero, the conglomerate
optimally makes a payout to shareholders as described by (42), (43), and (44). Finally,



                                                      24
when the last term is equal to zero, the firm optimally chooses either division sale or costly
external financing, as captured by (48) and (49).


6     Solution with Corporate Socialism
In this section, we analyze our generalized model with corporate socialism introduced in
Section 3.
    The key change from our baseline model is that corporate socialism effectively lowers
the productivity of the productive division a from µa to µ
                                                         pa . Once one of the divisions is
sold, the conglomerate becomes a single-division firm and no longer incurs the cost of being
a socialistic conglomerate. Therefore, eliminating the dark side of internal capital markets
provides an incentive for the conglomerate to engage in division sale.
    Specifically, the cash-capital ratio under socialism, wt " Wt {pK a ` Ktb q, is given by

                       "                                 `              
dwt " pr ´ qwt dt ` zt pµ   pa dt ` a dZta q ` p1 ´ zt q µb dt ` b dZtb                         (52)
        "                    `b                               " a                              
      ´ pia         a                   b                                               b
           t ` ga pit qq zt ` it ` gb pit q p1 ´ zt q dt ´ wt zt pit ´ a q ` p1 ´ zt qpit ´ b q dt .


As corporate socialism lowers µa to µ
                                    pa , the conglomerate's cash balance wt has a lower drift
than without socialism.
    The solution of the headquarters' problem satisfies the following variational inequalities:
             !                                                          )
     max         L
                 pfppz, wq, 1 ´ f
                                p w , p z, w q , f
                                                 r p z, w q ´ f
                                                              p p z, w q  " 0,   z P p0, 1q,   w  0,   (53)

where
                                "                                                 i
                       a
 Lf pz, wq " max pi ´ a qz f pz, wq ` p1 ´ z qfz pz, wq ´ wfw pz, wq
 p p                              p                   p               p
             ia ,ib
                                      "                                           i
                    `pib ´ b qp1 ´ z q fppz, wq ´ z fpz p z, w q ´ w f
                                                                     p w p z, w q
                     "                                                                    
                    ` pr ´ qw ` pµ  pa ´ ia ´ ga pia qqz ` pµb ´ ib ´ gb pib qqp1 ´ z q f   p w pz, w q
                     1 2 2
                       "         2
                                                                   
                    ` a   z ` b    p1 ´ z q2 ` 2z p1 ´ z qa b f     pww pz, w q ´ r f pz, w q
                                                                                    p               (54)
                     2

and f
    rpz, wq is the scaled value when the conglomerate chooses to either sell a division or



                                                         25
issue equity:
                                    !                                         )
                       rpz, wq " max z pa pwa q , p1 ´ z q pb pwb q , p
                       f                                              j pz, wq .                             (55)

As in our baseline model without socialism, pa pwa q and pb pwb q are the value of the firm with
a single division, a and b, respectively. Note that, as division sale eliminates socialism, the
productivity parameter for pa p ¨ q is µa rather than µ
                                                      pa . That is, to analyze the headquar-
ters' problem, the firm needs to use both the true risk-adjusted productivity µa and the
compromised productivity µ pa .16 In equation (55), p
                                                    j pz, wq denotes the conglomerate value
conditional on external financing, which is given by

                        j pz, wq " max
                        p                    f
                                             ppz, w ` m
                                                      p q ´ r ` p1 `  qm
                                                                       ps .                                  (56)
                                     m
                                     p 0


   As we show later, the solution features three regions: (1) the interior region where
L
pfp " 0, f
         p w  1, f  f u; (2) the payout region: tfw " 1u; and (3) the external financ-
                 p   r                            p
ing/liquidation region: tf
                         p" f
                            ru.



7        Quantitative Analysis: Without Socialism
We now turn to the quantitative analysis of the model. In this section, we consider the case
without socialism (c " 0) for a firm with two symmetric divisions, that is, two divisions
whose productivity shocks have the same mean and volatility (µa " µb and a " b ), but
are not perfectly correlated ( " 10%).17
       The parameters used in the benchmark case are provided in Table 1. We set the annual
mean and volatility of the productivity shocks to µa " µb " 20% and a " b " 9%,
respectively, which are in line with the estimates of Eberly, Rebelo, and Vincent (2009) for
large U.S. firms.
       While our analyses do not depend on the specific functional form of gs pis q for division
  16
      While in Matvos and Seru (2014), it is sufficient for the conglomerate to use compromised productivi-
ties, as their model features no division sale, this is no longer the case here since selling a division eliminates
socialism in our model.
   17
      In Section 8, we consider the case with socialism (c  0) for a firm with asymmetric divisions.




                                                        26
Table 1: Summary of Parameters. This table summarizes the symbols for the key
parameters and the values used in our quantitative analysis. The values in the "symmetric"
column are for the case where the two divisions have the same parameter values. The
values in the "asymmetric" column are for the case where the two divisions have different
parameter values. Whenever applicable, parameter values are annualized.
 Parameters                                                      Symbol       Symmetric   Asymmetric
 Risk-free rate                                                    r             6%          6%
 Proportional cash-carrying cost                                                 1%          1%
 Proportional financing cost                                                     6%          6%
 Fixed financing cost                                                            1%          1%
 Correlation of two divisions                                                   10%          10%

 Risk-neutral mean productivity shock for division a                  µa        20%          24%
 Risk-neutral mean productivity shock for division b                  µb        20%          16%
 Volatility of productivity shock for division a                      a          9%          9%
 Volatility of productivity shock for division b                      b          9%          9%

 Rate of depreciation for division a                                    a        9%          9%
 Rate of depreciation for division b                                    b        9%          9%
 Adjustment cost parameter for division a                              a          8           8
 Adjustment cost parameter for division b                               b         8           8
 Socialism parameter                                                    c         0         0.686
                                                                         FB
 Capital liquidation value for division a                            a {qa       0.6         0.6
                                                                         FB
 Capital liquidation value for division b                            b {qb       0.6         0.6


s " a, b, for simplicity, we adopt the following widely used quadratic form:

                                                        s pis q2
                                           gs pis q "            ,                                  (57)
                                                           2

where the parameter s measures the degree of the adjustment cost for division s. For
our baseline calculations, we assume that both divisions have the same adjustment cost
parameter, which we set to a " b " 8 as in Shapiro (1986) and Hall (2001). We further
assume that both divisions have the same annual depreciation rate, which we set a "
b " 9%. Moreover, we assume that the liquidation value for a division is proportional to
the market value (on a first-best basis) of the division's capital stock. This assumption
captures the idea that, when acquiring a division, the buyer uses as benchmark the value
that the division can potentially create.18 As the two divisions have the same production
 18
      In this regard, we differ from BCW (2011) who assume that the liquidation value is proportional to


                                                   27
                            FB           FB
parameters, we set      a {qa    "   b {qb    " 0.6.19
    As in BCW (2011), we set the annual risk-free rate to r " 6%, the proportional cash-
carrying cost to  " 1%, the proportional financing cost to  " 6%, and the fixed financing
cost to  " 1% of the firm's total capital stock. With these parameter values, the first-
best average q in the neoclassical model is q F B " 1.4 and the corresponding first-best
investment-capital ratio is iF B " 0.05 in both divisions.20


7.1     Diversified vs. Stand-Alone Firm
In Figure 1, we compare the diversified firm (that is, the firm with the two symmetric
divisions described above) with a stand-alone firm. Both firms have the same total capital
stock and the same parameter values. The only difference is that the diversified firm has
an internal capital market (allowing headquarters to reallocate resources across the two
symmetric divisions with imperfectly correlated productivity shocks) and the option to
spin off a division at any time it chooses. For now, we assume that the diversified firm has
two divisions of equal size (z " 0.5).
    In the figure, the left-hand panels (A1-A3) pertain to the liquidation case, where we
assume that, if the firm runs out of cash, the only option is to liquidate a division or the
entire firm (that is, the firm cannot issue external financing). Alternatively, this can be
seen as an extreme case of costly external financing--the cost is so high that firms do not
resort to it. We relax this assumption in the right-hand panels (B1-B3), pertaining to the
refinancing case, where firms have the option to issue equity to replenish their liquidity. In
what follows, we discuss both cases, starting with the liquidation case.

Liquidation case.

In panel A1, we plot the average q for the diversified firm (solid line) and stand-alone
firm (dashed line), along with the first-best benchmark implied by the neoclassical model,
which is q F B " 1.4 for our parameter values (dotted line). The horizontal axis plots the
the book value of the division's capital stock.
  19
     In Sections 7.3 and 7.4, we consider alternative values of the liquidation
                                                                       a        parameters.
  20
     The first-best investment-capital ratio is given by iF B " r ` s ´ pr ` s q2 ´ 2pµs ´ pr ` s qq{s , and
the first-best q by q F B " 1 ` s iF B . See Appendix B for details.



                                                     28
                                                                1.45
    1.6
                                  Two-division
    1.5                           Single-division
                                  First-best
    1.4                                                          1.4


    1.3


    1.2                                                         1.35


    1.1


     1                                                           1.3


    0.9


    0.8                                                         1.25
          0   0.05   0.1   0.15       0.2           0.25                0   0.02   0.04   0.06   0.08   0.1   0.12   0.14   0.16



    35                                                           1.2


    30
                                                                   1


    25
                                                                 0.8

    20
                                                                 0.6
    15

                                                                 0.4
    10


                                                                 0.2
     5


     0                                                             0
          0   0.05   0.1   0.15       0.2           0.25                0   0.02   0.04   0.06   0.08   0.1   0.12   0.14   0.16



    0.1                                                         0.08


                                                                0.06
   0.05

                                                                0.04

     0
                                                                0.02


                                                                   0
  -0.05

                                                                -0.02

   -0.1
                                                                -0.04


  -0.15                                                         -0.06
          0   0.05   0.1   0.15       0.2           0.25                0   0.02   0.04   0.06   0.08   0.1   0.12   0.14   0.16




Figure 1: Comparison of a diversified firm (with z " 0.5) and a single-division firm. The
left-hand panels (A1-A3) pertain to the liquidation case, the right-hand panels (B1-B3)
to the refinancing case. In panel A1, the vertical lines mark the payout boundary w. In
panel B1, the vertical lines mark the payout boundary w and the equity issuance amount
m, respectively.


                                                           29
cash-to-capital ratio w. The vertical lines mark the endogenous payout boundary at which
the firm pays out cash to shareholders (w " 0.13 for the diversified firm, and w " 0.21 for
the stand-alone firm, respectively).
       When the firm runs out of cash (reaching w " 0), the diversified firm spins off one
of the divisions.21 Since the divisions are symmetric and the firm starts with z0 " 0.5,
the investment levels of both divisions are identical at all times, and hence zt " 0.5 for
all t before the firm liquidates a division. (For this reason, the choice of which division
to liquidate is immaterial.) Assuming that division a is spun off, the firm receives the
                              a
liquidation value        aK       and becomes a single-division firm with a cash-to-capital ratio of
      a
 aK
 Kb
          "   b   " 0.84. Since this ratio exceeds the dividend payout boundary of the single-
division firm (w " 0.21), it will optimally pay out the difference of 0.63 to shareholders,
and then operate as a stand-alone firm with the remaining liquidity.
       Note that this sequence is consistent with Dittmar's (2004) finding that firms often pay
a special dividend subsequent to a spinoff. Given this optimal response, the diversified
firm's value at w " 0 is 1.11.22 In contrast, when w " 0, the stand-alone firm has no
choice but to liquidate the entire firm. Given our assumption that the liquidation value
is 0.6 times the (first-best) market value, this implies that the stand-alone firm's value at
w " 0 is 0.6 ^ q F B " 0.84. As these calculations illustrate, liquidation is more costly for
the stand-alone firm (as it permanently forgoes all future growth opportunities) compared
to the diversified firm (as it liquidates a division in lieu of the entire firm).
       As can be seen, we find that the diversified firm achieves a higher valuation compared to
the stand-alone firm, especially in bad times when the firm is low on cash.23 The rationale
is twofold. First, the diversified firm has the option to spin off a division to replenish
its liquidity. This option is more valuable for lower values of w.24 Second, diversification
  21
      For our parameter values, it is never optimal to liquidate a division when w  0. In Section 7.4, we
consider alternative parameterizations, under which early liquidation can be optimal. Note that, as shown
in Section 5.3, it is never optimal for the diversified firm to liquidate both divisions at once.
   22
      Formally, the diversified firm's value at w " 0 satisfies F pK a , K b , W q " P b pK b , a K a q, and hence
f pz, wq " p1 ´ z qpb p a q. For z " 0.5 and our parameter values, f p0.5, 0q " 1.1.
   23
      This pattern is consistent with the empirical evidence of Matvos and Seru (2014) and Kuppuswamy
and Villalonga (2016), who find that the value of diversification was higher during the recent financial
crisis. It also echoes Matvos, Seru, and Silva's (2018) finding that firms aim to diversify their operations
in times of capital market disruptions.
   24
      Indeed, this spinoff option makes q pz, wq at w " 0 exceed the liquidation value for the stand-alone
firm, " 0.6 ^ 1.4 " 0.84.


                                                       30
reduces the volatility of the firm's productivity shocks and hence the likelihood of costly
liquidation. This benefit from diversification is especially valuable in bad times when w
is low.25 We further observe that the payout boundary w is lower for the diversified firm.
The same two rationales explain this finding. That is, the conglomerate's option to spin off
a division, and the lower volatility of the productivity shocks reduce the value of holding
cash. As such, the diversified firm can more easily afford to pay a dividend. This finding
is consistent with the evidence of Duchin (2010) who documents that diversified firms hold
less cash compared to stand-alone firms.
       Panel A2 plots the (net) marginal value of cash qw . As is shown, the marginal value
of cash increases as the firm becomes more constrained and liquidation more likely. Since
liquidation is more costly for the stand-alone firm, the marginal value of cash is higher for
the stand-alone firm compared to the diversified firm. Note that costly liquidation induces
both firms to be de facto "risk averse," as the average q of both firms is concave in w. Thus,
holding cash today (below the payout boundary w) maximizes firm value and reduces the
likelihood of liquidation in the future. Intuitively, cash is valuable as it helps keep the firm
away from costly liquidation.
       Panel A3 plots the investment-capital ratio for both firms, along with the first-best
level (iF B " 0.05 for our parameter values). Due to financing constraints, investment is
below the first-best for both firms. Importantly, underinvestment is more severe for the
stand-alone firm. This mirrors the pattern in panel A2. As liquidity is more valuable for
the stand-alone firm (compared to the diversified firm), it has a greater demand for cash,
and hence reduces investment more aggressively.26

Refinancing case.

In the right-hand panels of Figure 1, we consider the refinancing case. Specifically, when
the firms run out of cash (w " 0), they now replenish their liquidity by raising external
equity. Doing so is costly, as the firms incur fixed ( " 1%) and variable ( " 6%)
  25
      Note that our setup is conservative in that it likely underestimates the value gains from diversification.
This is because of our assumption of i.i.d. productivity shocks. In reality, shocks are likely to exhibit some
degree of persistence, which increases the benefits from diversification.
   26
      Note that, close to w " 0, investment is negative for both firms (and even more so for the stand-alone
firm). Intuitively, the firms disinvest in order to raise cash and stay away from the liquidation boundary.


                                                      31
financing costs. In panel B1, we plot the average q for both the diversified and single-
division firms. Because the firms can now issue equity (at a cost), they avoid inefficient
liquidation even under financial distress. As a result, for both firms, the average q is
higher in the refinancing case compared to the liquidation case in panel A1. Moreover, the
respective payout boundaries (w) are lower than in the liquidation case. This is because
firms are more willing to pay out cash when they can raise new funds in the future.
   We continue to find that the diversified firm is more valuable than the stand-alone firm.
As diversification reduces the volatility of the firm's cash flows, it reduces the likelihood of
running out of cash and resorting to (costly) equity issuance. As a result, the diversified firm
has higher value, can more easily afford to pay out cash (w " 0.15 for the diversified firm,
and w " 0.10 for the stand-alone firm), and issues less equity in the event of refinancing
(m " 0.04 for the diversified firm, and m " 0.05 for the stand-alone firm).
   In panels B2 and B3, we find that, when liquidity is abundant, the diversified firm is
less prone to underinvestment, and has a lower marginal value of cash, compared to the
stand-alone firm. This is consistent with our previous analysis for the liquidation case. As
diversification reduces the volatility of the firm's cash flows, the diversified firm has less of
a need for liquidity (i.e., liquidity is less valuable), and is more inclined to invest instead
of hoarding cash.
   Interestingly, the opposite results hold when w is low (the two curves cross in both
panels B2 and B3). The intuition is as follows. As the volatility of the firm's cash flows is
reduced through diversification, an extra dollar of cash becomes more effective in helping
the diversified firm avoid costly equity issuance. When w is sufficiently low, the (marginal)
value of cash is larger for the diversified firm than the stand-alone firm, as the value-add of
preserving both divisions is very high. Therefore, the diversified firm reduces investment
more than the single-division firm. As a result, diversification can lead to a paradoxically
higher demand for precautionary savings, and hence more underinvestment, when the cash
situation is sufficiently dire.




                                               32
7.2       Relative Size of Divisions: z
In Figure 1, we considered a diversified firm with equal-sized divisions (z " 0.5). Recall
that in this case, z " 0.5 is an absorbing state. Therefore, the solution for the diversified
firm boils down to a single state variable (w) problem as in BCW (2011) but with a lower
volatility (due to the imperfect correlation between the two divisions' productivity shocks).
       Albeit insightful, the symmetric-division case with z0 " 0.5 is a rather special case.
In what follows, we examine the case in which z0  0.5. We show that, even with two
symmetric divisions, the model generates very rich dynamics along both the wt and zt
margins. In Figure 2 (liquidation) and Figure 3 (refinancing), we consider z " 0.1, which
means that division a accounts for 10% of the firm's capital stock, while division b accounts
for the remaining 90%.27

Liquidation case.

Panel A of Figure 2 plots the value of the firm for the z " 0.1 case, and compares it with
the z " 0.5 case analyzed earlier. When cash is abundant (high w), the balanced firm
(z " 0.5) is more valuable. This finding is intuitive--the diversification gains are highest
at z " 0.5, which translates in higher firm value. In contrast, in bad times (low w), the
balanced firm is less valuable. This is because, closer to w " 0, liquidation is more likely,
and liquidation is more costly when z " 0.5, as the firm would forgo half of its productive
assets. In contrast, in the event of liquidation, the z " 0.1 firm would optimally spin off
the smaller division (division a), and only forgo 10% of its productive assets.
       Panel B plots the marginal value of cash, and panels C and D the investment-capital
ratio for divisions a and b, respectively. The observed patterns are consistent with the
above interpretation. In high-w states, liquidity is less valuable for the more balanced firm,
as it faces lower volatility due to diversification. Given the lower need for cash, it is able
to invest more compared to the less balanced firm (z " 0.1). In contrast, in low-w states,
firms worry about liquidation. Since liquidation is more costly to the more diversified firm
(z " 0.5), it is more eager to prevent this scenario from happening. As a result, compared
  27
    Since the divisions are symmetric (i.e., they have the same mean and volatility of the productivity
shocks), we obtain the same results for z " 0.9, switching divisions a and b in the figures.



                                                  33
                                                      35
    1.5

                                                      30
    1.4

                                                      25
    1.3
                                                      20

    1.2
                                                      15

    1.1
                                                      10


     1                                                 5


    0.9                                                0
          0   0.05   0.1   0.15   0.2   0.25                0   0.05   0.1   0.15   0.2   0.25



    0.1                                              0.1




   0.05                                             0.05




     0                                                 0




  -0.05                                             -0.05




   -0.1                                              -0.1




  -0.15                                             -0.15
          0   0.05   0.1   0.15   0.2   0.25                0   0.05   0.1   0.15   0.2   0.25




Figure 2: Liquidation case--comparison of diversified firms with z " 0.1 and z " 0.5. In
panel A, the vertical lines mark the payout boundary w.


to the z " 0.1 firm, the more diversified firm reduces investment more aggressively to
preserve cash, and cash has a higher marginal value.
   Overall, the patterns from Figure 2 imply a dark and bright side of diversification from
the perspective of liquidity management, even for a value-maximizing conglomerate. In
good times, diversification reduces the need for liquidity and creates value. In bad times,
diversification can hamper the conglomerate's liquidity management by making spinoffs
more costly and destroys value.




                                               34
   1.42                                                                     1.2



    1.4                                                                       1



   1.38                                                                     0.8



   1.36                                                                     0.6



   1.34                                                                     0.4



   1.32                                                                     0.2



    1.3                                                                       0
           0   0.02   0.04   0.06   0.08   0.1   0.12   0.14   0.16                0   0.02   0.04   0.06   0.08   0.1   0.12   0.14   0.16



   0.08                                                                    0.08


   0.06                                                                    0.06


   0.04                                                                    0.04


   0.02                                                                    0.02


      0                                                                       0


   -0.02                                                                   -0.02


   -0.04                                                                   -0.04


   -0.06                                                                   -0.06
           0   0.02   0.04   0.06   0.08   0.1   0.12   0.14   0.16                0   0.02   0.04   0.06   0.08   0.1   0.12   0.14   0.16




Figure 3: Refinancing case--comparison of diversified firms with z " 0.1 and z " 0.5. In
panel A, the vertical lines mark the optimal payout boundary w and the equity issuance
amount m.


Refinancing case.

In Figure 3, we analyze the refinancing case. When equity financing is less costly than
liquidation, both firms choose to issue equity when they run out of cash (w " 0). Thus, the
more balanced firm (z " 0.5) no longer bears the higher liquidation costs arising from the
liquidation of a relatively large division. As a result, the benefits from diversification--i.e.,
the lower volatility of the balanced firm's cash flows--dominate, and the more balanced
firm is always more valuable than the z " 0.1 firm, as shown in panel A.
   Interestingly, panel B shows that the marginal value of cash is lower for the more
balanced firm in good times (high w), but higher in bad times (low w). Moreover, as


                                                                      35
    0.4                                                                       0.4


   0.35                                                                      0.35


    0.3                                                                       0.3


   0.25                                                                      0.25


    0.2                                                                       0.2


   0.15                                                                      0.15


    0.1                                                                       0.1


   0.05                                                                      0.05


      0                                                                        0

          0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9   1               0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9   1



    0.4                                                                       0.1


   0.35                                                                      0.09

    0.3                                                                      0.08

   0.25                                                                      0.07

    0.2
                                                                             0.06

   0.15
                                                                             0.05

    0.1
                                                                             0.04

   0.05
                                                                             0.03
      0
                                                                             0.02
          0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9   1               0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9   1




Figure 4: Solution regions for a firm with two symmetric divisions in the liquidation (panel
A) and refinancing (panels B and C) cases. Panel D plots the equity issuance amount m.


shown in panels C and D, the more balanced firm cuts investment in low-w states.
   While this pattern mirrors the one in Figure 2, the rationale is different for low w.
In bad times--due to the higher degree of diversification--an extra dollar of cash is more
effective in helping the more balanced firm avoid issuing costly equity. As a result, the
more balanced firm has a stronger preference for liquidity closer to w " 0.


7.3           Characterization of Solution Regions
In Figure 4, we characterize our model's solution by regions for the liquidation case (panel
A) and two variants of the refinancing case (panels B and C, along with the respective
equity issuance amount m reported in panel D). As we have two state variables, the cash-


                                                                        36
to-capital ratio w and the relative size z of division a, all regions are defined by pw, z q. The
horizontal and vertical axes correspond to w and z , respectively. (When z " 0 or z " 1,
the firm is a stand-alone firm.) The solid line corresponds to the payout boundary w as a
function of z , wpz q. The function wpz q is part of the "payout region" and separates this
region from the "interior region." If wt  wpzt q, the firm is in the payout region and pays
out its excess cash wt ´ wpzt q to the shareholders.

Liquidation case.

In panel A, we consider the liquidation case. As can be seen, the payout boundary is
the lowest when the firm's z reaches the absorbing state z " 0.5, and increases as the
firm becomes less balanced. Intuitively, since the volatility of the firm's cash flows is
lowest at z " 0.5, the balanced firm has the lowest demand for precautionary savings;
the more unbalanced the firm is, the higher the volatility, and the higher the demand for
precautionary savings.
       When the firm runs out of cash (w " 0), it hits the liquidation boundary. Since
liquidation is more costly for larger divisions (as the firm forgoes more of its productive
assets), the firm optimally liquidates the smaller of the two divisions--that is, the firm
liquidates division a when z  0.5 (represented by the line with the ` markers), and
division b when z  0.5 (dotted line).28 This prediction is consistent with the empirical
evidence of Maksimovic and Phillips (2001), who find that multi-division firms are more
likely to spin off their smaller divisions.

Refinancing case.

In panel B, we turn to the refinancing case. For our baseline parameters, refinancing is less
costly than liquidation. Accordingly, when the firm runs out of cash (w " 0), it now hits
the refinancing boundary (represented by the dashed line), and responds by issuing equity
to replenish its cash. The firm has no incentive to issue equity sooner, as doing so would
forgo the option of avoiding costly equity issuance.
       We plot the corresponding equity issuance amount m in panel D (solid line). As is
  28
       When z " 0.5, the firm is indifferent between spinning off either division a or b.



                                                       37
shown, both the payout boundary w and the equity issuance amount m are the lowest at
z " 0.5, and are higher the higher the imbalance between the two divisions. The intuition
is the same as in the liquidation case--since the balanced firm is better diversified (and
hence faces lower volatility), it can more easily afford to pay a dividend, and needs less
financing conditional on issuing equity.
   In panel C, we depart from our baseline parameters by assuming that equity financing
has a higher fixed cost ( " 2%). In this case, we find that refinancing is not always
preferred to liquidation. When one of the divisions is sufficiently small (specifically, when
z  0.03 or z  0.97), liquidation is less costly (as the firm only forgoes a relatively small
fraction of its productive assets), and the firm prefers to spin off the smaller division as
opposed to issuing costly equity. When z P r0.03, 0.97s, the firm issues equity when it
exhausts its cash holdings.
   Finally, we observe in panel D that the equity issuance amount is always higher when
 " 2% (compared to the baseline case with  " 1%). Due to the higher fixed costs of
issuing equity, firms resort to higher amounts in order to reduce the odds of bearing the
fixed costs again in the future.
   Note that our finding that the firm may find both external financing and division sale
(liquidation) to be optimal on the equilibrium path is not possible in BCW (2011). This
is because our model features two divisions, and whether equity financing or liquidation
is optimal for a financially distressed firm depends on z (in addition to w). This result
illustrates how, at the conceptual level, the analysis of a financially constrained multi-
division firm can be fundamentally different compared to that of a single-division firm.


7.4    Early Liquidation
With two symmetric divisions (i.e., the structural parameters µ,  ,  , , and         are the
same for both divisions), liquidating a division when w  0 ("early" liquidation) is never
optimal. However, with asymmetric divisions, early liquidation can be optimal.
   We consider such a parameterization in Figure 5. Specifically, we assume that the two
divisions have different productivity (µa " 24% and µb " 16%) and different liquidation
values. Moreover, we set the correlation coefficient between the divisional productivity


                                             38
       0.4                                                                       0.4


    0.35                                                                        0.35


       0.3                                                                       0.3


    0.25                                                                        0.25


       0.2                                                                       0.2


    0.15                                                                        0.15


       0.1                                                                       0.1


    0.05                                                                        0.05


        0                                                                           0

             0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9   1                0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5    0.6   0.7    0.8   0.9   1




Figure 5: Early liquidation. This figure plots the solution regions for a diversified firm
with asymmetric divisions with µa " 24%, µb " 16%, and  " 0.9. In panel A, the
                                                                               FB
more productive division (division a) has a lower liquidation value ( a {qa         " 0.1 and
     FB                                                             FB              FB
 b {qb  " 0.7). In panel B, it has a higher liquidation value ( a {qa " 0.7 and b {qb  " 0.1).


shocks to  " 0.9 so that the diversification benefits are lower than in our baseline analysis.
The other parameters are the same as in Table 1 pertaining to the firm with symmetric
divisions.
       In panel A, we consider the case where the more productive division (division a) has a
                                                      FB                                                                FB
lower liquidation value than the other division ( a {qa  " 0.1 and                                                  b {qb        " 0.7). In this
case, it is optimal for the firm to voluntarily liquidate division b before running out of cash.
This is because the diversification benefit of keeping division b is limited (due to the high
 and small size 1 ´ z of division b), and the cost of liquidating division b is relatively low
                                                                               FB
(due to the relatively high liquidation value                              b {qb        and small size 1 ´ z of division b). Both
forces make the firm willing to liquidate early in order to enhance its liquidity and mitigate
underinvestment going forward, especially in low-w states.
       In panel B, we turn to the more realistic scenario in which the more productive division
                                                       FB                                                                     FB
(division a) also has a higher liquidation value ( a {qa  " 0.7 and                                                       b {qb        " 0.1). The
firm now liquidates division a before running out of cash when division a is sufficiently
small (z close to 0). Note that, in this case, the firm liquidates the division with the
higher productivity in low-w states.29 This is because liquidating the division with a
  29
    This is consistent with the empirical evidence of Ma, Tong, and Wang (2020), who find that, in financial
distress, innovative firms are more likely to liquidate their most productive assets (specifically, their core


                                                                           39
higher liquidation value generates more cash, which is highly valuable in low-w states, even
though doing so eliminates the division with the higher productivity.
    Importantly, this finding illustrates that, when taking risk management considerations
into account, it can be misleading to rank divisions solely based on their productivity (µ).
We discuss this point in more detail in the next section.


7.5     Resource Allocation with Different Volatilities
In Figure 6, we examine the resource (re-)allocation across two asymmetric divisions. A
real-world relevant case is when one division has high µ and high  , while the other has low
µ and low  , which provides an economically meaningful tradeoff. We set µa " 20.5% and
a " 40% for division a, and µb " 19.5% and b " 9% for division b. All other parameters
are the same as in our baseline, and we consider policies at z " 0.5.
    Panel A plots the investment-capital ratio for both divisions in the liquidation case.
Perhaps surprisingly, headquarters channels more of the firm's resources toward the low-µ
and low- division, as opposed to the high-µ and high- division. This pattern is especially
pronounced when the firm is low on cash (low w). Intuitively, the firm prefers to reduce
its risk exposure and preserves its going concern value by investing in the low-µ and low-
division, especially in low-w states where the likelihood of liquidation is higher.
    Panel B considers the refinancing case. As can be seen, the optimal capital allocation
differs depending on w. In bad times (low w), more resources are allocated toward the
low- division. The intuition is analogous to the liquidation case. In low-w states, the
firm's primary concern is to manage risk and reduce the probability of tapping costly
external equity financing, rather than generate higher expected cash flows. In contrast,
in good times (high w), headquarters allocates more of the firm's resources toward the
high-µ division--as in static models of "winner picking" (e.g., Stein, 1997). The reason
we obtain the static model intuition in high-w states is because, when cash is abundant,
profit-generating considerations dominate risk management considerations. Conversely, the
reason the two lines do not cross in panel A is because liquidation is too costly and hence
risk management considerations dominate for all levels of w.
patents) if doing so allows them to raise more cash.



                                                   40
                                                                     0.05
   0.06
                                                                    0.045
   0.04
                                                                     0.04
   0.02
                                                                    0.035
      0
                                                                     0.03
   -0.02
                                                                    0.025
   -0.04
                                                                     0.02
   -0.06
                                                                    0.015
   -0.08
                                                                     0.01
    -0.1
           0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8                0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8




Figure 6: Resource allocation with different volatilities. This figure plots division-specific
investment-capital ratios as a function of w (fixing z " 0.5) for a firm with asymmetric
divisions with µa " 20.5% and a " 40% for division a, and µb " 19.5% and b " 9% for
division b, respectively. The dotted line marks the payout boundary w.


    These findings highlight the importance of considering a dynamic setting in order to
characterize the mechanics of internal capital markets. In static models of winner picking,
headquarters allocates resources to the more productive units (i.e., based on µ). In a
dynamic setting, firms can run out of cash, and hence need to engage in risk management.
As our model shows, when cash is scarce, headquarters may optimally channel resources
toward the low-risk division (i.e., based on  ). These considerations motivate a broader
formulation of the winner picking role of internal capital markets: when headquarters
allocates resources to divisions, it does so not only based on productivity, but also based
on risk.
    From this perspective, the within-firm allocation of resources can be viewed as a dynamic
portfolio choice problem where different divisions offer very different risk-return tradeoffs.
Unlike the standard portfolio choice problem (e.g., Merton, 1971), the risk-neutral firm
in our model is endogenously risk averse, and the instruments used by the firm (e.g.,
equity issuance) are different from those used by households. As described above, this
endogenous risk aversion depends on both the firm's liquidity (w) and the size distribution
of its divisions (z ).
    Our findings have important implications for capital budgeting. Standard corporate
finance textbooks prescribe that capital budgeting should be done based on the WACC

                                                               41
of the stand-alone project, and the project's idiosyncratic risk should not matter. Our
framework shows that this prescription is misguided. Indeed, ignoring idiosyncratic risk
and the balance sheet of the firm when doing capital budgeting is incorrect; depending on
the firm's liquidity, costs of external financing, and liquidation costs, it may be optimal to
invest in a lower-NPV project (based on the project's WACC) if the project's idiosyncratic
risk is sufficiently low. Adding a new project (or a new division) changes the firm's entire
balance sheet composition and risk profile. As such, the firm should evaluate the new
project by computing the net value difference caused by introducing the new project into
the firm, as opposed to evaluating the project as if it were a stand-alone project.30


8        Quantitative Analysis: Corporate Socialism
In this section, we incorporate the socialism cost induced by the division managers' rent-
seeking behavior into the quantitative analysis presented in the preceding section. Cor-
porate socialism is economically interesting when the divisions have different productivity.
We assume that division a is more productive than division b. As described in Section 3,
corporate socialism makes the productive division less productive. Specifically, the pro-
ductivity of division a is lowered from µa to µ
                                              pa , which translates into a revenue loss of
Gc " K a pµa ´ µ
               pa q in the model.
       In what follows, we set the productivity of the two divisions to µa " 0.24 and µb " 0.16.
Moreover, we set the socialism parameter to c " 0.686, using the estimate obtained by
Matvos and Seru (2014). The other parameters are the same as in our baseline. The full
set of parameters used in this section are summarized in the last column of Table 1.
  30
    Consider a setting where the unconditional CAPM holds under MM (i.e., for a financially unconstrained
firm.) For a financially constrained firm, the unconditional CAPM does not hold but instead the conditional
CAPM holds as the firm is endogenously risk averse (BCW, 2011). With financing constraints and multiple
divisions, both w and z affect the firm's risk-return tradeoff, and hence influence corporate investment and
capital budgeting decisions. As a result, the firm's cost of capital depends on both w and z for a multi-
division firm. We can show that a conditional CAPM--where beta depends on both w and z --holds for
the financially constrained multi-division firm.




                                                    42
    1.7                                                                                   25


    1.6
                                                                                          20
    1.5


    1.4
                                                                                          15

    1.3

                                                                                          10
    1.2


    1.1
                                                                                           5
      1


    0.9                                                                                    0
           0   0.02   0.04   0.06   0.08   0.1   0.12   0.14   0.16   0.18   0.2                0   0.02   0.04   0.06   0.08   0.1   0.12   0.14   0.16   0.18   0.2



    0.2
                                                                                        0.04

   0.15                                                                                 0.02

                                                                                           0
    0.1
                                                                                        -0.02

   0.05
                                                                                        -0.04

                                                                                        -0.06
      0

                                                                                        -0.08
   -0.05
                                                                                         -0.1

    -0.1                                                                                -0.12

                                                                                        -0.14
   -0.15
           0   0.02   0.04   0.06   0.08   0.1   0.12   0.14   0.16   0.18   0.2                0   0.02   0.04   0.06   0.08   0.1   0.12   0.14   0.16   0.18   0.2




Figure 7: Liquidation case--comparison of diversified firms with and without socialism.
The firms have asymmetric divisions with µa " 24% and µb " 16%. The divisions are of
equal size (z " 0.5). In panel A, the vertical lines mark the payout boundary w.


Liquidation case.

In Figure 7, we consider the liquidation case with (solid line) and without (dashed line)
socialism, for a firm with balanced divisions (z " 0.5). In panel A, we find that the value of
the firm is always lower with socialism, consistent with the "dark side" models of internal
capital markets. This finding is intuitive. Influence activities reduce the firm's productivity,
which in turn reduces the value of the firm. Moreover, we find that the payout boundary
is lower with socialism. As socialism reduces the firm's productivity, it makes payout more
desirable from the shareholders' perspective.
   Interestingly, we find that the difference in valuation shrinks as we move closer to the


                                                                                   43
    0.4                                                                       0.4


   0.35                                                                      0.35


    0.3                                                                       0.3


   0.25                                                                      0.25


    0.2                                                                       0.2


   0.15                                                                      0.15


    0.1                                                                       0.1


   0.05                                                                      0.05


     0                                                                         0

          0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9   1               0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9




Figure 8: Liquidation case--comparison of policy regions for diversified firms with and
without socialism. The firms have asymmetric divisions with µa " 24% and µb " 16%.


liquidation boundary (w " 0). This reflects the lower cost of liquidating a division when
the firm is subject to socialism--by spinning off a division, the firm becomes a stand-alone
firm that is free of socialism frictions. Accordingly, the option to spin off a division is more
valuable with socialism than without. Indeed, when w " 0, spinning off one division fully
addresses the socialism problem, and hence the average q with socialism at w " 0 is the
same as without socialism (q " 1.31).
   This insight has implications for liquidity management. With socialism, it is less costly
to replenish the firm's liquidity through a spinoff. As a result, liquidity is less valuable with
socialism than without, especially when the firm is low on cash. This is consistent with
the pattern in panel B, showing that the marginal value of cash is lower with socialism,
especially in low-w states. This also explains the pattern in panels C and D, showing that,
with socialism, the firm is less prone to underinvestment in low-w states (as it has less of
a need to preserve cash by reducing investment). In contrast, in high-w states, the lower
productivity (due to socialism frictions) dominates, such that investment is lower for the
firm with socialism.
   In Figure 8, we plot the solution regions. Without socialism (panel A), the solution
regions are similar to those in panel A of Figure 4, except that they are no longer symmetric
around z " 0.5 due to the higher productivity of division a (compared to division b). In
particular, when the firm runs out of cash (w " 0), it is now less likely to liquidate division


                                                                        44
a relative to division b. That is, the firm liquidates division a only when it exhausts its
cash (w " 0) and it is sufficiently small compared to division b (z  0.38).
       Panel B reports the solution regions with socialism. When the firm is subject to social-
ism frictions, division b (the low-productivity division) is liquidated as soon as z exceeds a
certain threshold (that is, when it is sufficiently small). This threshold is marked by the
dashed vertical line (z " 0.738). As long as z  0.738, the firm instantly liquidates division
b regardless of its w. Whether the firm makes a dividend payment or not when liquidating
division b depends on the level of w. Formally, wpz q is given by

                                       wpz q " zwa ´ b p1 ´ z q ,                                       (58)

where wa is the optimal payout boundary for a stand-alone firm with only division a, as in
BCW (2011). Equation (58) defines the straight solid line in panel B.
       If w is sufficiently large, in that w  wpz q, the firm makes a one-time dividend payment
w ´ wpz q when liquidating division b. Otherwise (i.e., if w  wpz q), the firm pays no
dividend when liquidating division b. These two regions are marked in Panel B as "division
sale with payout" and "division sale with no payout," respectively, above the z " 0.738
threshold.31
       Below the threshold (i.e., when z  0.738), liquidation only occurs at w " 0. The
firm liquidates division a when z  0.38 and liquidates division b when 0.38  z  0.738.
Moreover, we see that the firm is more willing to pay out as z increases, as it is more willing
to spin off division b, which replenishes the firm's liquidity and eliminates socialism.

Refinancing case.

In Figure 9, we turn to the refinancing case. In panel A, we observe again that the value
of the firm is higher without socialism. In contrast to the liquidation case, we find that
the wedge between the two curves barely changes, even in low-w states. This is because,
for our parameter values, when firms run out of cash (w " 0), they prefer to issue equity
  31
    In our numerical example, the payout boundary for a stand-alone firm with only division a is wa " 0.29.
A diversified firm with z " 0.9 and w " 0.22 immediately sells division b and becomes a stand-alone firm
with division a and a cash-capital ratio of w{z ` b p1 ´ z q{z " 0.22{0.9 ` 0.07 " 0.31, which is larger than
wa " 0.29. Therefore, the firm pays out the excess cash 0.31 ´ 0.29 " 0.02 per unit of division a's capital
stock to shareholders.

                                                     45
    1.7                                                                       1

                                                                            0.9
    1.6
                                                                            0.8
    1.5
                                                                            0.7
    1.4
                                                                            0.6

    1.3                                                                     0.5

                                                                            0.4
    1.2
                                                                            0.3
    1.1
                                                                            0.2
      1
                                                                            0.1

    0.9                                                                       0
           0   0.02   0.04   0.06   0.08   0.1   0.12   0.14   0.16                0   0.02   0.04   0.06   0.08   0.1   0.12   0.14   0.16



                                                                           0.02
   0.14
                                                                           0.01
   0.12
                                                                              0

    0.1                                                                    -0.01

   0.08                                                                    -0.02

                                                                           -0.03
   0.06
                                                                           -0.04
   0.04
                                                                           -0.05
   0.02
                                                                           -0.06

      0                                                                    -0.07

   -0.02                                                                   -0.08
           0   0.02   0.04   0.06   0.08   0.1   0.12   0.14   0.16                0   0.02   0.04   0.06   0.08   0.1   0.12   0.14   0.16




Figure 9: Refinancing case--comparison of diversified firms with and without socialism.
The firms have asymmetric divisions with µa " 24% and µb " 16%. The divisions are of
equal size (z " 0.5). In panel A, the vertical lines mark the payout boundary w and the
equity issuance amount m, respectively.


as opposed to liquidating a division. For this reason, the firm with socialism no longer
benefits from the lower cost of spinning off a division. This is further reflected in panel B,
where we observe no noticeable difference in the marginal value of cash with and without
socialism.
   In panels C and D, we find that investment in both divisions is higher for the firm
without socialism. This finding is intuitive--without the socialism cost, the firm is more
productive and hence generates higher cash flows that are used to sustain higher levels of
current and future investment. Moreover, we observe that investment is relatively higher in
division a, that is, the firm channels relatively more resources toward the more productive


                                                                      46
       0.4                                                                                                      0.4


   0.35                                                                                                        0.35


       0.3                                                                                                      0.3


   0.25                                                                                                        0.25


       0.2                                                                                                      0.2


   0.15                                                                                                        0.15


       0.1                                                                                                      0.1


   0.05                                                                                                        0.05


        0                                                                                                            0

             0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6        0.7         0.8         0.9         1                          0         0.1     0.2     0.3       0.4   0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9



                                                0.1


                                               0.09


                                               0.08


                                               0.07


                                               0.06


                                               0.05


                                               0.04


                                               0.03


                                               0.02
                                                      0         0.1         0.2         0.3       0.4    0.5   0.6           0.7     0.8     0.9         1




Figure 10: Refinancing case--comparison of solution regions for diversified firms with and
without socialism. The firms have asymmetric divisions with µa " 24% and µb " 16%.


division.32
       Figure 10 plots the solution regions for the refinancing case. Panel A refers to the setting
without socialism. Compared to the liquidation case (Panel A of Figure 8), the firm finds it
optimal to spin off division a only when it is sufficiently small (z  0.004), and chooses to
issue equity for all other values of z . Because the firm can issue equity at a cost, the model
generates a hump-shaped prediction for the equity issuance amount, m, as a function of z
(represented by the dashed line in Panel C). The intuition is that a more diversified firm
can afford to hold less cash, and hence has less of a need to issue large amounts. Because
of the divisions' asymmetry, the firm with z " 0.41 has the lowest demand for cash. As the
  32
       Note the different scale of the vertical axis in both panels.



                                                                                                        47
more productive division's relative size, z , increases beyond z " 0.41, the firm's increasing
productivity calls for greater funding needs, which explains why the equity issuance amount
m increases with z .
       Panel B of Figure 10 characterizes the various regions with socialism. As in the liqui-
dation case (panel B of Figure 8), we find that the low-productivity division b is liquidated
when it becomes sufficiently small. If z  0.742, where 0.742 is the threshold marked by
the dashed vertical line, the firm instantly liquidates division b regardless of its w. Whether
the firm immediately makes a dividend payment or not upon liquidating division b depends
on its level of w. Similar to panel B of Figure 8, the straight line in panel B corresponds
to the endogenous payout boundary wpz q defined by equation (58).33
       In the regions to the left of this threshold (i.e., z  0.742), when the firm runs out
of cash (w " 0), it liquidates division a for z  0.06, liquidates division b for z  0.63,
and issues equity for values of z P p0.06, 0.63q. Note that the range of z values for which
divisions are liquidated is larger than in panel A. This again reflects the lower cost of
spinning off a division when the firm is plagued with socialism frictions. Finally, the solid
line in panel C represents the equity issuance amount m when z P p0.06, 0.63q. The pattern
is again hump-shaped. Note that the curve with socialism is lower than the one without
socialism--due to the lower productivity of the firm plagued with socialism, the optimal
refinancing amount is lower.34


9        Conclusion
In this paper, we provide a tractable model in which investment, cross-divisional trans-
fers, division sale (spinoff), cash management, external financing, and dividend payout are
  33
      In our numerical example with socialism, the optimal payout boundary for a stand-alone firm with
only division a is wa " 0.22.
   34
       Note the extensive non-monotonicity of the payout boundary in panel B, which reflects the richness of
our model. On the left of the z " 0.742 threshold, w follows a similar hump-shaped pattern as in panel A,
except in the bordering regions. In particular, when z approaches the z " 0.742 threshold from the left, w
decreases sharply, as the firm anticipates the cash inflow from the likely spinoff of division b. Similarly, in
the z region where liquidation of division a is potentially optimal (z  0.06), the pattern follows another
hump-shaped pattern that reflects the tradeoff between the expectation of higher liquidity through the
likely spinoff of division a and the loss of diversification benefits (net of the gain from eliminating socialism
frictions).



                                                       48
jointly characterized for a multi-division firm that faces costly external finance. Our model
provides a rich set of novel predictions, ranging from a refined formulation of the "winner
picking" role of internal capital markets to a characterization of the optimal spinoff decision.
Moreover, we develop a q theory of investment for financially constrained multi-division
firms, in which division-level investment is set such that the ratio between marginal q and
the marginal cost of investing in each division equals the marginal value of cash.
   Our model lends itself to several extensions. In particular, as in BCW (2011), one could
extend the model by including debt financing (in the form of a credit line) and financial
hedging (e.g., through the reliance on options and futures contracts). While doing so would
enrich the model, adding these components would not reverse our main predictions.
   Finally, our analysis leaves several avenues open for future research, of which we high-
light two here. First, while our model allows for rent-seeking behavior of the division
managers, it does not speak to the optimal contract design. In this regard, enriching our
model with a dynamic contracting framework--e.g., of the type studied by Malenko (2019)
for capital budgeting--could be a fruitful extension. Doing so would provide a characteriza-
tion of the optimal contract that arises taking into account the complexity and intertwined
nature of the multi-division firm's policies.
   Second, our model could be used to analyze the dynamics of M&As. In particular, a
merger between two stand-alone firms that become a two-division firm could be studied by
integrating key institutional features of M&As into a variant of the model developed in this
paper. Such a model would provide insights into the role (and intertwined nature) of both
financing and operating synergies. While the latter has received considerable attention in
the literature, much less is known of the former, let alone the interconnections between
the two synergies, and the dark side of internal capital markets for the newly formed
conglomerate after a successful M&A.




                                                49
References
Abel, Andrew B., and Janice C. Eberly, 1994, A unified model of investment under un-
    certainty, American Economic Review 84(5), 1369-1384.
Abel, Andrew B., and Stavros Panageas, 2020, Precautionary saving in a financially-
    constrained firm, NBER Working paper 26628 (National Bureau of Economic Re-
    search, Cambridge, MA).
Alchian, Armen A., 1969, Corporate management and property rights, in Manne, Henry
    G., ed.: Economic Policy and the Regulation of Corporate Securities (American En-
    terprise Institute, Washington, DC).
Bakke, Tor-Erik, and Tiantian Gu, 2017, Diversification and cash dynamics, Journal of
    Financial Economics 123(3), 580-601.
Biais, Bruno, Thomas Mariotti, Guillaume Plantin, and Jean-Charles Rochet, 2007, Dy-
     namic security design: Convergence to continuous time and asset pricing implications,
     Review of Economic Studies 74(2), 345-390.
Bolton, Patrick, Hui Chen, and Neng Wang, 2011, A unified theory of Tobin's q, corporate
    investment, financing, and risk management, Journal of Finance 66(5), 1545-1578.
Bolton, Patrick, Neng Wang, and Jinqiang Yang, 2019, Investment under uncertainty with
    financial constraints, Journal of Economic Theory 184, 1-58.
Coase, Ronald H., 1937, The nature of the firm, Economica 4(16), 386-405.
Cooley, Thomas F., and Vincenzo Quadrini, 2001, Financial markets and firm dynamics,
    American Economic Review 91(5), 1286-1310.
Cooper, Russell W., and John C. Haltiwanger, 2006, On the nature of capital adjustment
   costs, Review of Economic Studies 73(3), 611-633.
D´
 ecamps, Jean-Paul, Thomas Mariotti, Jean-Charles Rochet, and Stphane Villeneuve,
    2011, Free cash flow, issuance costs and stock prices, Journal of Finance 66(5), 1501-
    1544.
DeMarzo, Peter, and Yuliy Sannikov, 2006, Optimal security design and dynamic capital
   structure in a continuous-time agency model, Journal of Finance 61(6), 2681-2724.
DeMarzo, Peter, and Michael Fishman, 2007, Optimal long-term financial contracting,
   Review of Financial Studies 20(6), 2079-2128.
DeMarzo, Peter, Michael Fishman, Zhiguo He, and Neng Wang, 2012, Dynamic agency
   and the q theory of investment, Journal of Finance 67(6), 2295-2340.
Dittmar, Amy, 2004, Capital structure in corporate spinoffs, Journal of Business 77(1),
    9-43.



                                           50
Duchin, Ran, 2010, Cash holdings and corporate diversification, Journal of Finance 65(3),
   955-992.
Duchin, Ran, and Denis Sosyura, 2013, Divisional managers and internal capital markets,
   Journal of Finance 68(2), 387-429.
Dumas, Bernard, 1991, Super contact and related optimality conditions, Journal of Eco-
   nomic Dynamics and Control 15(4), 675-685.
Eberly, Janice C., Sergio Rebelo, and Nicolas Vincent, 2009, Investment and value: A
    neoclassical benchmark, Working paper, Northwestern University.
Eckbo, B. Espen, and Karin S. Thorburn, 2008, Corporate restructuring: Breakups and
    LBOs, in Eckbo, B. Espen, ed.: Handbook of Empirical Corporate Finance (North-
    Holland/Elsevier, Amsterdam).
Giroud, Xavier, and Holger M. Mueller, 2015, Capital and labor reallocation within firms,
    Journal of Finance 70(4), 1767-1804.
Glaser, Markus, Florencio LopezDeSilanes, and Zacharias Sautner, 2013, Opening the
    black box: Internal capital markets and managerial power, Journal of Finance 68(4),
    1577-1631.
Gomes, Joao F., 2001, Financing investment, American Economic Review 91(5), 1263-
   1285.
Gomes, Joao F., and Dmitry Livdan, 2004, Optimal diversification: Reconciling theory
   and evidence, Journal of Finance 59(2), 507-535.
Graham, John R., 2000, How big are the tax benefits of debt? Journal of Finance 55(5),
    1901-1941.
Guedj, Ilan, and David S. Scharfstein, 2004, Organizational scope and investment: Ev-
   idence from the drug development strategies and performance of biopharmaceutical
   firms, NBER Working paper 10933 (National Bureau of Economic Research, Cam-
   bridge, MA).
Hall, Robert E., 2001, The stock market and capital accumulation, American Economic
     Review 91(5), 1185-1202.
Hayashi, Fumio, 1982, Tobin's marginal q and average q : A neoclassical interpretation,
    Econometrica 50(1), 215-224.
Hennessy, Christopher A., and Toni M. Whited, 2007, How costly is external financing?
   Evidence from a structural estimation, Journal of Finance 62(4), 1705-1745.
Hugonnier, Julien, Semyon Malamud, and Erwan Morellec, 2015, Capital supply uncer-
   tainty, cash holdings, and investment, Review of Financial Studies 28(2), 391-445.




                                          51
Jensen, Michael C., and William H. Meckling, 1976, Theory of the firm: Managerial
    behavior, agency costs and ownership structure, Journal of Financial Economics
    3(4), 305-360.
Kuppuswamy, Venkat, and Bel´ en Villalonga, 2016, Does diversification create value in the
   presence of external financing constraints? Evidence from the 2007-2009 financial
   crisis, Management Science 62(4), 905-923.
Leland, Hayne E., and David H. Pyle, 1977, Informational asymmetries, financial struc-
    ture, and financial intermediation, Journal of Finance 32(2), 371-387.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr., and Edward C. Prescott, 1971, Investment under uncertainty,
    Econometrica 39(5), 659-681.
Ma, Song, Joy T. Tong, and Wei Wang, 2020, Bankrupt innovative firms, Working paper,
    Yale University.
Maksimovic, Vojislav, and Gordon M. Phillips, 2001, The market for corporate assets:
   Who engages in mergers and asset sales and are there efficiency gains? Journal of
   Finance 56(6), 2019-2065.
Maksimovic, Vojislav, and Gordon M. Phillips, 2002, Do conglomerate firms allocate
   resources inefficiently across industries? Theory and evidence, Journal of Finance
   57(2), 721-767.
Maksimovic, Vojislav, and Gordon M. Phillips, 2013, Conglomerate firms, internal capital
   markets, and the theory of the firm, Annual Review of Financial Economics 5(1),
   225-244.
Malenko, Andrey, 2019, Optimal dynamic capital budgeting, Review of Economic Studies
    86(4), 1747-1778.
Matsusaka, John G., 2001, Corporate diversification, value maximization, and organiza-
   tional capabilities, Journal of Business 74(3), 409-431.
Matvos, Gregor, and Amit Seru, 2014, Resource allocation within firms and financial
   market dislocation: Evidence from diversified conglomerates, Review of Financial
   Studies 27(4), 1143-1189.
Matvos, Gregor, Amit Seru, and Rui C. Silva, 2018, Financial market frictions and diver-
   sification, Journal of Financial Economics 127(1), 21-50.
Merton, Robert C., 1971, Optimum consumption and portfolio rules in a continuous-time
    model, Journal of Economic Theory 3(4), 373-413.
Meyer, Margaret, Paul R. Milgrom, and John Roberts, 1992, Organizational prospects,
   influence costs, and ownership changes, Journal of Economics and Management Strat-
   egy 1(1), 9-35.
Milgrom, Paul R., 1988, Employment contracts, influence activities, and efficient organi-
    zation design, Journal of Political Economy 96(1), 42-60.

                                           52
Milgrom, Paul R., and John Roberts, 1988, An economic approach to influence activities
    in organizations, American Journal of Sociology 94(1), 154-179.
Modigliani, Franco, and Merton Miller, 1958, The cost of capital, corporation finance, and
   the theory of investment, American Economic Review 48(3), 261-297.
Myers, Stewart C., and Nicholas S. Majluf, 1984, Corporate financing and investment
   decisions when firms have information that investors do not have, Journal of Financial
   Economics 13(2), 187-221.
Nikolov, Boris, Lukas Schmid, and Roberto Steri, 2019, Dynamic corporate liquidity,
    Journal of Financial Economics 132(1), 76-102.
Ozbas, Oguzhan, and David S. Scharfstein, 2010, Evidence on the dark side of internal
   capital markets, Review of Financial Studies 23(2), 581-599.
Rajan, Raghuram, Henri Servaes, and Luigi Zingales, 2000, The cost of diversity: The
    diversification discount and inefficient investment, Journal of Finance 55(1), 35-80.
Riddick, Leigh A., and Toni M. Whited, 2009, The corporate propensity to save, Journal
    of Finance 64(4), 1729-1766.
Scharfstein, David S., and Jeremy C. Stein, 2000, The dark side of internal capital markets:
    Divisional rent-seeking and inefficient investment, Journal of Finance 55(6), 2537-
    2564.
Shapiro, Matthew D., 1986, The dynamic demand for capital and labor, Quarterly Journal
    of Economics 101(3), 513-542.
Shin, Hyun-Han, and Ren M. Stulz, 1998, Are internal capital markets efficient? Quarterly
    Journal of Economics 113(2), 531-552.
Stein, Jeremy C., 1997, Internal capital markets and the competition for corporate re-
     sources, Journal of Finance 52(1), 111-133.
Williamson, Oliver E., 1975, Market and hierarchies: Analysis and antitrust implications
     (Free Press, New York, NY).




                                            53
Appendices

A       HJB Equation and Verification Theorem
In this appendix, we formulate our stochastic control model and then provide a verification
theorem for the model solution characterizing both the firm's value function and its optimal
decision rules.
    Given an external financing policy  " t p1q ,  p2q , ¨ ¨ ¨ ; M p1q , M p2q , ¨ ¨ ¨ u, the firm's cash
balance process W satisfies
                        $
                        &dWt " dYt ` pr ´ qWt dt ´ dUt                                     t P p piq ,  pi`1q q;
                                                                                                                             (A.1)
                        %W piq " W piq ` M piq                                             t "  piq .
                                   ´


We may then express the optimization problem (14) as
                                «
                                                            ÿ            piq   `                                          
               max E                          e´rt dUt ´           e´r             pKa       b
                                                                                      piq ` K piq q ` p1 `  qM
                                                                                                               piq
            I a ,I b ,U,,              0                    piq 
                                                                                                                 ff          (A.2)
                                                                                                             (
                                 ` e´r P a pKa
                                               , W q1t "b u ` P b pKb
                                                                      , W q1t "a u                                    ,


where the second term accounts for the financing amount M piq and the financing cost
 ¨ pKta ` Ktb q ` M piq at t "  piq .
   The associated HJB variational inequality for this optimization problem is
                  !                    )
               max L0 F, 1 ´ FW , F
                                  r ´ F " 0,                                       K a  0,     K b  0,       W  0,           (A.3)

where
                     !
           L0 F " max pI a ´ a K a qFK a ` pI b ´ b K b qFK b
                            I a ,I b

                                                       pa K a ` µb K b ´ pI a ` I b ` Ga ` Gb qsFW
                                           `rpr ´ qW ` µ
                                            1" 2 a 2     2
                                                                                         )
                                           ` a   pK q ` b  pK b q2 ` 2a b K a K b FW W ´ rF .
                                            2

Here, FrpK a , K b , W q is the firm's value conditional on external financing or division sale
given in equation (46).
                        Kta
   By using zt " K a `     Kb
                              and wt " K aW  t
                                            `K b
                                                 , we obtain the following dynamics for pwt , zt q
                            t          t                     t     t




                                                                       54
between the consecutive rounds of refinancing:
                                    "                                 `         
            dwt " pr ´ qwt dt ` zt pµa dt ` a dZta q ` p1 ´ zt q µb dt ` b dZtb
                     "                    `b                      
                  ´ pia          a                    b
                        t ` ga pit qq zt ` it ` gb pit q p1 ´ zt q dt
                        "                                  
                  ´ wt zt pia                       b
                              t ´ a q ` p1 ´ zt qpit ´ b q dt ´ dut ,                         (A.4)
                               "                        
            dzt " zt p1 ´ zt q pia            b
                                 t ´ a q ´ pit ´ b q dt ,                                     (A.5)

                                                    dUt
where is    s   s
       t " It {Kt for s " a, b and dut "            a `K b
                                                   Kt
                                                             is the incremental dividend payout dUt
                                                        t
scaled by the firm's total capital stock. At any refinancing time t "  piq , wt satisfies:

                                          w piq " w piq ´ ` mpiq ,                            (A.6)

                   M piq
where mpiq "   K apiq `K b piq
                                 denotes the scaled net financing at stopping time  piq . By using
                         
the model's homogeneity property, we can simplify the three-state variable HJB variational
inequality equation (A.3) to the two-state variable equation (51) for f pz, wq.
    The following verification theorem characterizes the firm's value function and optimal
policies for the optimization problem (A.2).
Proposition A.1 (Verification theorem). Let f pz, wq be a solution to the HJB equation
(51) satisfying certain regularity conditions. We define the interior region (IR), payout
region (PR), and the external financing/division sale region (ED) as follows:

             IR " tpz, wq : Lf pz, wq " 0, fw pz, wq  1, f pz, wq  f
                                                                   rpz, wqu,
             P R " tpz, wq : fw pz, wq " 1u,
             ED " tpz, wq : f pz, wq " frpz, wqu,

where frpz, wq is as given in equation (49). The external financing/division sale region
consists of two sub-regions: the division sale region (SR) and external financing region
(ER):

                    SR " tpz, wq : f pz, wq " f
                                              rpz, wq, f pz, wq  j pz, wqu ,
                    ER " tpz, wq : f pz, wq " f
                                              rpz, wq, f pz, wq " j pz, wqu ,

where j pz, wq is as given in equation (48).
   The payout boundary is the intersection of IR, the complement of IR, and payout region
(PR), i.e., B P " IR P R. Similarly, the division sale boundary is the intersection of IR
and SR: B S " IR      SR, and the external financing boundary is the intersection of IR and
ER: B E " IR ER. The firm's value is given by F pK a , K b , W q " pK a ` K b q ¨ f pz, wq,
              Ka
where z " K a  `K b
                    and w " K aW`K b
                                     .
   In addition, the optimal strategy pia     b
                                        t , it , Ut , ,  q is given as follows:


                                                    55
 (a) Optimal investment pia    b
                          t , it q in the interior region IR:


                                      1 a       f pzt , wt q ` p1 ´ zt qfz pzt , wt q
                                 1 ` ga pit q "                                        ´ wt ,    (A.7)
                                                             fw pzt , wt q
                                      1 b       f pzt , wt q ´ zt fz pzt , wt q
                                 1 ` gb pit q "                                 ´ wt ,           (A.8)
                                                         fw pzt , wt q

      where pzt , wt q is the solution of (A.4)-(A.6) associated with the optimal strategy;
 (b) Payout strategy Ut :                                   t
                                                   Ut "          1tpz ,w qPBP u dU ;             (A.9)
                                                             0


 (c) External financing strategy  " t p1q ,  p2q , ¨ ¨ ¨ ; M p1q , M p2q , ¨ ¨ ¨ u:
                                         !                                    )
                   pn`1q                          pnq
                               " inf t P p              ,  s : pzt , wt q P ER ,                (A.10)
               M pn`1q " pK a ` K b q arg max f pz pn`1q , w pn`1q ` mq ´  ´ p1 `  qm , (A.11)
                                                          m0


      where  p0q " 0;
 (d) Division sale strategy  " minta , b u:

                a " inf tt  0 : pzt , wt q P SR, f pzt , wt q  zt pa pwt
                                                                       a
                                                                         {zt qu               (A.12)
                                                                          b    b
                b " inf tt  0 : pzt , wt q P SR, f pzt , wt q  p1 ´ zt q p pwt {p1 ´ zt qqu . (A.13)

Proof. Define                                t
                                      Nt "       e´rh dUh ` e´rt F pKta , Ktb , Wt q .          (A.14)
                                             0

Let Utc be the continuous part of Ut and Uh " Uh ´ Uh´ be the discrete jump at time h.
Using Ito's Lemma, we obtain:
                   t                         t
    Nt " N0 ` e L0 F dh ` e´rh p1 ´ FW qdUh
                       ´rh                       c
              0               0
            ÿ        ´                                                            ¯
                 ´rh            a      b                         a      b
         `     e      Uh ` F pKh ´ , Kh´ , Wh´ ´   U h q ´ F p K h´ , Kh´ , Wh´ q   .           (A.15)
             0ht


    First, we show that the last term in equation (A.15) is non-positive for any feasible
strategy. By the mean-value theorem, there exists u P r0, Uh s such that
                   ÿ                 ´                                                      ¯
                               ´rh             a     b                     a     b
                           e          Uh ` F pKh´ , Kh´ , Wh´ ´ Uh q ´ F pKh´ , Kh´ , Wh´ q
                 0ht


                                                                 56
                  ÿ        ´                                   ¯
            "                         a
                       e´rh Uh ´ FW pKh ´ , K b
                                             h´ , Wh´ ´ u q  Uh  0,
                 0ht


where the inequality follows from the HJB equation.
   As F satisfies the HJB variational inequality (A.3) and dUtc  0 for any feasible Ut ,
the second and third terms in (A.15) are non-positive for any feasible strategy and equal
to zero for the proposed strategy defined in equations (A.7)-(A.13). Therefore, we have
shown that Nt is a martingale for the proposed strategy defined by equations (A.7)-(A.13)
and is a supermartingale for any alternative (feasible) strategy.
   Because Nt is a supermartingale, for any feasible strategy pI  a , I
                                                                      b , U
                                                                          t ,        piq , 
                                                                              piq , M      q, we
                                                                  t    t
have
           a    b
       F pK0 , K0 , W0 q  ErN piq  s
                             « pi^
                                 q
                                                                                       ff
                               ^   
                                                   p i q
                                           h ` e´r
                                     e´rh dU       ^     
                                                          F pKa        b
                         " E                                  piq ^ , Kpiq ^ , Wpiq ^q
                                    0
                                 « piq                                                            ff
                                   ^   
                                                 h ` e        piq ^
                           E               e´rh dU          ´r        rpK apiq , K bpiq , W
                                                                      F    ^        ^      piq ^q ,
                                    0

                                                                                                (
where F rpK a , K b , Wt q " max P a pK a , Lb ` Wt q, P b pK b , La ` Wt q, J pK a , K b , Wt q and the
            t    t                      t      t               t   t             t     t
                                                  rpK a , K b , Wt q implied by equation (A.3). For
last inequality follows from F pKta , Ktb , Wt q  F    t     t
                            a b     piq     piq
the proposed policy pIt , It , Ut ,  , M ,  q defined by equations (A.7)-(A.13), the above
inequalities hold with equality, which implies the optimality of the proposed policy.


B      Proofs of Lemmas and Proposition 5.1
In this appendix, we first state and prove two lemmas about the properties of the firm's
value function and decision rules, and then provide a proof for Proposition 5.1.
    In the frictionless first-best world, the MM financing irrelevance theorem holds.
Lemma B.1. In the first-best world, the value of a two-division firm is equal to the sum
of the value of two stand-alone firms, i.e.

                          F F B pK a , K b , 0q " Pa
                                                   FB
                                                      pK a , 0q ` PbF B pK b , 0q ,                    (B.1)

where PsF B pK s , 0q represents the first-best value for a firm with a single division s ps " a, bq.
The first-best investment level for division s satisfies35

                                          1 s        µs ´ is ´ gs pis q
                                    1`   gs pi q   "                    .
                                                       r `  s ´ is
  35
    For the first-best benchmark model to be well defined, we require that µs  pis ` gs pis qqpr ` s q. In
particular, for the case of quadratic adjustment cost, we have the following parameter restrictions for both
divisions: pr ` s q2 ´ 2pµs ´ pr ` s qq{s  0 for s " a, b. Also see BCW (2011).

                                                      57
For the case with quadratic adjustment costs given in equation (57), the first-best investment
in division s is given by

                            Is            a
                    is :"      " r `  s ´  pr ` s q2 ´ 2pµs ´ pr ` s qq{s .
                            Ks

Proof. Our proof follows from the MM financing irrelevance theorem and application of
the HJB equation together with the first-order conditions for each division's optimization
problem as in BCW (2011).
   Consider a diversified firm with zero cash holding. Its value is F F B pK a , K b , 0q. Consider
a portfolio with investments in two cash-less single-division firms whose capital stock is
K a and K b , respectively. Their values are Pa FB
                                                   pK a , 0q and PbF B pK b , 0q, respectively. As
investors can replicate the cash flow process for the diversified firm by holding a portfolio of
two stand-alone firms (by following the same investment, liquidation, and payout strategies)
with probability one, equation (B.1) has to hold. Otherwise, the investor can make strictly
positive profit with probability one by holding the "cheaper" investment option and short
the other portfolio.
   Next, we provide a lemma showing that a productive single-division firm should post-
pone liquidating itself whenever possible.
Lemma B.2. Consider a financially constrained firm with a single division, s. Under the
condition given in equation (6), i.e., µs  s pr ` s q, if the firm ever chooses to liquidate
itself, it will only do so when exhausting its cash holding, i.e., when W " 0.

Proof. Consider two feasible (suboptimal) strategies, D and D   p for the single-division firm
with pK0 , W0 q at time 0. Under strategy D, the firm liquidates its capital stock at time 0
and immediately obtains its liquidation value s K0 ` W0 . Under strategy D   p , the firm does
not liquidate itself at time 0, instead it immediately makes a payout with amount p1 ´ qW0
at time 0 for some P p0, 1q satisfying36

                                   pµs ´   s pr   ` s qqK0   W0 .                                     (B.2)

Additionally, under strategy D p , the firm pays no dividends to shareholders, does not invest
over the time period p0, p
                         t q, and liquidates at pt, where p
                                                          t will be defined later.
                                                    s
   We may then write down the dynamics of Kt and Wt under strategy D          p for t P p0, p
                                                                                            tq as:

                            dKts " ´s Kts dt ,                                                        (B.3)
                            dWt " pr ´ qWt dt ` Kts dAst
                                 " pr ´ qWt dt ` Kt pµs dt ` s dZts q .
                                                  s
                                                                                                      (B.4)

       Next, we define two stopping times 0 " inf tt  0 : Wt " 0u and p
                                                                      t " 0 ^ , where 
  36
    Importantly, under condition (6), i.e., µs     s pr   ` s q, we know there exists a value of   such that
equation (B.2) holds.



                                                    58
is a sufficiently small positive constant satisfying

                                         pµs ´   s pr` s qq K0 ´  W0
                                                                     .                    (B.5)
                                                 µs pr ` s qK0

Condition (B.2) ensures that the right-hand side of equation (B.5) is positive.
   Next, we show that the firm's value at time 0 under strategy Dp is higher than its value
under strategy D.
   By integrating equations (B.3)-(B.4), we obtain the following at time pt:

                     s    ´s t
                    Kt
                     p " e     K0 ,                                                       (B.6)
                                     p

                                             µs   ´              ¯
                    Wt   " epr´qt W0 `             epr´qt ´ e´s t K0
                                 p                       p      p
                                         r ` s ´ 
                     p

                                         t p
                                 pr´qt
                              `e       K0 e´pr`s ´qt s dZts .                             (B.7)
                                     p              p

                                                    0


   The firm's value under strategy D
                                   p at time 0 is

                         p`               
      p1 ´ qW0 ` Ee´rt           s
                              s Kt
                                 p   ` Wt
                                        p
                       ´pr`s qt                         ´t  µs    ´
                                                                     ´t  ´pr`s qt
                                                                                  ¯
      W0 ` s K0 ` pe        ´ 1q s K0 ` pe ´ 1q W0 `                e ´e            K0
                              p                          p            p         p
  "
                                                        r ` s ´ 
      W0 ` s K0 ` p´pr ` s qptq s K0 ` p´p tq W0
            µs
      `           p1 ´ pr ` s qp
                               tqppr ` s ´ qptqK0
        r ` s ´ 
                                                                (
  "   W0 ` s K0 ` rpµs ´ s pr ` s qq K0 ´  W0 s ´ µs pr ` s qK0p
                                                               t pt
      W0 ` s K0 ,                                                                 (B.8)

where the first equality uses equations (B.6)-(B.7), the first inequality follows from the
inequality ex  1 ` x for x P R, and the last inequality follows from condition (B.5).
    As the firm's value at time 0 under strategy D is W0 ` s K0 , strategy D   p dominates
strategy D. Even though strategy D is not optimal, we have shown that postponing firm
                                     p
liquidation is necessarily part of the optimal strategy. In summary, a single-division firm
should never liquidate itself before running out of cash.

Proof of Proposition 5.1.
Proof. The firm can always set ia      b
                                  t " it " 0, although it is generally suboptimal. Therefore,
in the first-best world, the average q for division s is at least larger than µs {pr ` s q as we
can see from equation (24). We thus conclude that liquidating a division in the first-best
world is never optimal as long as the economically meaningful conditions given in equation
(6), i.e., µs {pr ` s q  s hold.


                                                        59
    Consider three different liquidation strategies for a diversified firm. Recall f pz, wq is the
scaled firm value for the conglomerate and ps pwq is the scaled firm value for a single-division
firm with division s.
    First, liquidating both divisions simultaneously yields f pz, wq " a z ` b p1 ´ z q ` w.
Second, liquidating division a yields f pz, wq " p1 ´ z qpb pwb q, where wb " p a z ` wq{p1 ´ z q.
Third, liquidating division b yields f pz, wq " zpa pwa q, where wa " p b p1 ´ z q ` wq{z .
    Lemma B.2 implies that f pz, wq " zpa pwa q  z ¨ p a ` wa q " z a ` b p1 ´ z q ` w as
liquidating division b only rather than liquidating both divisions simultaneously yields a
higher payoff. Similarly, f pz, wq " p1 ´ z qpb pwb q  p1 ´ z q ¨ p b ` wb q " p1 ´ z q b ` a z ` w.
As liquidating only one division yields a higher value of f pz, wq than liquidating both
divisions simultaneously, a multi-division firm always prefers selling one of its divisions
than liquidating the whole firm.




                                                60
