                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 A Q-THEORY OF BANKS

                                      Juliane Begenau
                                         Saki Bigio
                                     Jeremy Majerovitz
                                       Matias Vieyra

                                     Working Paper 27935
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27935


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2020




We would like to thank Youngmin Kim, Adam Su, and Mengbo Zhang for research assistance.
We thank Andrew Atkeson, Haelim Anderson, Patrick Bolton, Dean Corbae, Pablo D'Erasmo,
Andrea Eisfeldt, Francesco Ferrante, Mark Gertler, Kinda Hachem, Valentin Haddad, Benjamin
Hebert, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Anton Korinek, Hanno Lustig, Ken Miyahara, Gaston Navarro,
Andrea Prestipino, Jose-Victor Rios-Rull, Pari Sastry, Jesse Schreger, Jeremy Stein, Robert
Townsend and Pierre-Olivier Weill for many useful comments. We are also grateful to Elena
Loutskina, Thorsten Koeppl, David Martinez-Miera and Adrián Pardo for discussing our paper.
We thank the MFM Winter 2019 Meeting, the Banco de Mexico, the Philly Fed, and the
Columbia 2020 Junior Finance Conference. Previous versions of the paper circulated under the
title "Data Lessons on Bank Behavior." These are our views and not necessarily those of the
Bank of Canada, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Juliane Begenau, Saki Bigio, Jeremy Majerovitz, and Matias Vieyra. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Q-Theory of Banks
Juliane Begenau, Saki Bigio, Jeremy Majerovitz, and Matias Vieyra
NBER Working Paper No. 27935
October 2020
JEL No. G21,G32,G33

                                          ABSTRACT

We document five facts about banks: (1) market and book leverage diverged during the 2008
crisis, (2) Tobin's Q predicts future profitability, (3) neither book nor market leverage appears
constrained, (4) banks maintain a market leverage target that is reached slowly, (5) pre-crisis,
leverage was predominantly adjusted by liquidating assets. After the crisis, the adjustment shifted
towards retaining earnings. We present a Q-theory where leverage notions differ because book
accounting is slow to acknowledge loan losses. We estimate the model and show that it
reproduces the facts. We examine counterfactuals: different accounting rules produce a novel
policy tradeoff.

Juliane Begenau                                  Jeremy Majerovitz
Graduate School of Business                      MIT Department of Economics
Stanford University                              Morris and Sophie Chang Building
655 Knight Way                                   Building E52
Stanford, CA 94305                               77 Massachusetts Avenue
and NBER                                         Cambridge, MA 02142
begenau@stanford.edu                             jmajic@mit.edu

Saki Bigio                                       Matias Vieyra
Department of Economics                          Bank of Canada
University of California at Los Angeles          234 Wellington St. W
8283 Bunche Hall                                 Ottawa, ON K1A 0G9
Box 951477                                       Canada
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477                       mvieyra@bankofcanada.ca
and NBER
sbigio@econ.ucla.edu
1     Introduction
Models of banks are important because they shape financial regulation and, through regulation,
macroeconomic outcomes. However, developing suitable frameworks for policy analysis is a fine-
tuning process in which regulators and academics alike are constantly reassessing their models.
In fact, bank regulation was entirely redesigned in the aftermath of the Great Recession, only to
meet a global wave of regulatory forbearance in the first major crisis that followed, the Covid-19
crisis. Hence, the continuous development of banking models is a macroeconomic priority and
understanding the dynamics of bank leverage, in particular, is critical to that process.
    This paper presents a novel theory of banks. Our theory is motivated by five stylized facts
that inform us about the dynamics of bank leverage. A unifying theme among these facts are
both cross-sectional and time series variations in Tobin's Q, i.e., variations in the market-to-book
equity ratio. A novel aspect of our theory is the slow recognition of loan losses on banks' accounting
statements. This slow loan loss recognition causes the fundamental value of loans, which does take
into account loan losses, to differ from the book value of loans, which does not. We label the ratio
of fundamental-to-book values as little q , which differs from big Q (Tobin's Q). In our theory,
variations in Q are in part driven by variations in q . Quantitatively, slow loan loss recognition is
essential to explain the five stylized facts. We argue that our Q-theory improves our understanding
of bank leverage dynamics and illustrates an important policy tradeoff.
    The five facts that motivate our Q-theory are:

    1. Banks' book and market leverage ratios behaved very differently during the 2008-2009 crisis.
       Market leverage rose dramatically during the crisis whereas book leverage remained constant.
       In particular, between 2007 Q3 and 2014 Q4, bank holding companies lost 54% of their market
       capitalization. Book equity losses were only 7% and this loss was entirely made up by equity
       issuances.

    2. Market values capture information that book values do not: in particular, information on
       future portfolio losses and profitability.

    3. The cross-section of market leverage shows a large dispersion across banks. That disper-
       sion is considerably smaller for book leverage and few banks were close to their regulatory
       constraints, even in the midst of the crisis.

    4. Banks appear to operate with a target for the market leverage ratio. The adjustment to that
       target is slow: In response to an unexpected negative net-worth shock, proxied by a shock
       to stock returns, market-leverage increases on impact and take several years to return to the
       initial level. By contrast, book leverage does not respond on impact and the overall response
       is muted.



                                                  1
   5. Prior to the crisis, in response to an unexpected negative net worth shock, banks would
      primarily sell assets to return to their market-leverage target. Post-crisis, banks intensified
      the use of retained earnings and equity issuances, and reduced the extent of adjustment
      through asset sales as means to return to their market leverage targets.

Fact 1 emphasizes the difference between the banks' book value of equity and their corresponding
market value.1 Understanding this difference is important because in models we must take a stance
on whether book or market equity (or both) is the relevant state variable.2 This stance matters
for evaluating the quantitative performance of models: empirically, book-measured leverage and
market-measured leverage lead to different inferences about the time series properties of leverage
and the price of risk (see the debate between Adrian et al. 2014 and He et al. 2017), but typically
both measures co-move in models. Fact 2 implies that market valuations are informative about
bank losses much earlier than when losses are reported on the balance sheet.3 Fact 3 points to a rich
cross-section of market and book leverage ratios. Even before the 2008 crisis, the cross-sectional
dispersion of market leverage was wide. During the crisis, both the average market-leverage and
its cross-sectional dispersion increased dramatically.4 In terms of book leverage, the pre-crisis
distribution was more concentrated and most banks maintained a substantial equity buffer beyond
the regulatory requirements. In the midst of the 2008-2009 crisis, the regulatory capital ratio of
the vast majority of banks remained far above their regulatory limits, even among banks whose
market valuations eroded significantly.5 Taken together, these facts suggest that although market
values of bank equity are good predictors of bank health, banks' market leverage does not appear
to be constrained as it increased dramatically for many banks during the crisis. In turn, book
equity values are not a timely predictor of bank health, but regulatory constraints are explicitly
stated in terms of book equity. Since, book values take time to incorporate information on losses,
regulatory constraints may not be binding even after a negative shock to banks' assets. In this
paper, we argue that models should account for (i) the differences between book and market equity,
and (ii) how the slow loan loss recognition mechanism affects the tightness of banks' regulatory
constraints.
    1
      This dichotomy between the banks' book and market values of equity has prompted policy discussions in earlier
banking crisis (see post savings and loan crisis survery in Berger et al., 1995).
    2
      Papers that study the asset pricing implications of intermediary net worth (e.g., He and Krishnamurthy, 2013
and Brunnermeier and Sannikov 2014) focus on market measures of equity, while papers focused on the effects of
regulation focus on book measures of equity (e.g., Adrian and Boyarchenko 2013; Begenau 2020; Adrian and Shin
2013; Corbae and D'Erasmo 2019; Begenau and Landvoigt 2020).
    3
      This observation is consistent with Blattner et al. (2019). This conclusion is also shared with the accounting
literature (see Laux and Leuz, 2010) that explains how banks have flexibility in accounting for losses. In fact, this
was an issue raised by the United States Congress after the Savings and Loans crisis (General Accounting Office,
1990).
    4
      This suggests a countercyclical average leverage ratio. He et al. (2010) and He et al. (2017) document that
market-based leverage for intermediaries is countercyclical. Using the book equity definition, Adrian and Shin
(2013) show that broker dealer leverage is procyclical.
    5
      An extreme example is Citibank, a bank that experienced market-based losses of up to 90% with only a minor
changes in its book equity.


                                                         2
    Facts 4 and 5 relate to the adjustment dynamics of banks' balance sheet after a negative shock
to their assets. It is challenging to empirically identify such shocks: according to Fact 2, accounting
measures of bank equity do not convey all available information about shocks to bank wealth. On
the flip side, market valuations may capture additional information not contained in books. But
market valuations are also affected by variation in risk premia unrelated to an individual bank's
health. To tackle this identification challenge, we exploit the cross-sectional variation in banks'
stock returns and estimate impulse-responses to innovations in individual bank stock returns. The
strategy builds on the efficient-market hypothesis: The idea is that once we introduce adequate
statistical controls, idiosyncratic deviations from the average market returns pick-up idiosyncratic
information about banks' effective net worth that is not contained in their books. Thus, we
contend that idiosyncratic return shocks proxy for net worth shocks. Once we construct a time
series of return shocks for each bank, we estimate the average impulse-responses of market and
book leverage, liabilities, dividends, equity, and other variables to a return shock. These impulse
responses shed light on the adjustment process after shocks that affect bank net worth.
    Fact 4 is obtained from this impulse-response analysis: The main observation is that the
behavior of banks is consistent with a pattern where they maintain a target for market-based
leverage, but the adjustment process to return to that target is gradual. Namely, in response
to a negative return shock, which mechanically increases market-leverage on impact, banks take
actions to slowly reduce market-leverage to their targets. This gradual response indicates that
frictions prevent banks from immediately returning to their leverage targets.6 Fact 5 describes the
actual deleveraging process, both before and after the 2008 financial crisis. Pre-crisis, a bank that
experienced negative return shocks relied predominantly on the reduction of liabilities to lower
its leverage, with almost no change in book equity.7 During and after the financial crisis, the
deleveraging process was faster, but the reduction of bank debt slowed down. Instead, the increase
in the deleveraging speed followed from an increase in retained earnings and equity issuance.8 Facts
5 suggests that there was a regime shift in the frictions that govern the leverage dynamics. Taken
together, Facts 4 and 5 call for a theory that can account for the slow balance-sheet adjustment
process and how this process changed over time.
    The paper presents a partial-equilibrium model of banks that meets the challenges brought
by these facts. To reproduce these facts, the model features (1) meaningful differences between
book and market values, (2) accounting valuations that are less responsive than market values to
loan default shocks, (3) a rich cross-section of book and market leverage ratios, (4) an endogenous
leverage ratio target and frictions that lower the speed of adjustment to that target, (5) a regime
   6
     Gropp and Heider (2010) document that banks capital ratios appear to follow a target leverage ratio and
analyzes the empirical drivers of that target capital ratio.
   7
     This is consistent with Figure 2 in Adrian and Shin (2013).
   8
     One interpretation of this fact is that the cost of liquidating assets increased during the crisis, presumably
because the adverse selection problem gets worse. This interpretation is consistent with models proposed by Gorton
and Ordonez (2011) and Dang et al. (2017).



                                                        3
shift that can explain the switch in the deleveraging process.
    In our model, banks are owned by diversified shareholders. Banks maximize the value of the
discounted stream of dividend income, under risk neutrality. Banks issue deposits and loans, where
loans are exposed to default shocks. The supply (demand) of deposits (loans) is perfectly elastic.
The expected return spread between loans and deposits is positive and constant, a feature that
makes the return on equity increasing in leverage. However, loan default shocks expose a bank to
liquidation risk, if its leverage is too high. In particular, a bank is liquidated if it violates regulatory
constraints or if it becomes insolvent. As in Leland and Pyle (1977a), there is a tradeoff between
levered returns and liquidation risk. This tradeoff induces a notion of a target for fundamental
leverage, which differs from book or market leverage.9 This tradeoff is present even though banks
are owned by diversified shareholders and thus, behave as risk-neutral firms. The model has
several frictions that drive a wedge between book and market values, and produce a slow return
to the market-leverage target. First, banks do not raise equity and have a preference for dividend
smoothing. This friction prevents market leverage from adjusting immediately via equity finance.
Furthermore, this friction drives a wedge between a dollar inside and outside the bank, one source
of variation in Tobin's Q.10 Second, the market value of loans reflects losses that book values do
not. Specifically, only a fraction of loan defaults are recognized immediately in the books and the
full recognition of losses takes time. Delayed accounting is a second source of variation in Tobin's
Q. The combination of dividend smoothing and delayed accounting already produces smooth
responses of market leverage, similar to those observed in the data. Finally, the theory features
cost of reselling loans, modeled as price adjustment costs in the spirit of O'Hara (1983) or Shleifer
and Vishny (1997).
    We calibrate the parameters of the model except for three parameters that we estimate. Each
of these three parameters corresponds to a financial frictions in the model. We estimate these
parameters to gauge the importance of each friction to explain our facts. Concretely, we estimate
the parameters that govern banks' dividend smoothing motive, delayed loan loss recognition, and
the loan-adjustment cost. We estimate these parameters by matching the impulse responses to
return shocks of market leverage, book leverage, and liabilities. Identification is obtained as follows:
the difference between the responses of market and book leverage, are informative about the
delayed recognition of losses. Once this parameter is obtained, the response of market leverage
and liabilities, are informative about the degree of dividend smoothing and loan adjustment costs,
respectively. A striking result is that to match the pre-crisis responses, the estimation requires
virtually no loan adjustment costs. That is, to match the pre-crisis impulse responses, the model
    9
      In corporate finance, it is standard to explain a leverage target through either tradeoff theory (a tax advantage)
or a risk-return tradeoff (e.g. Kraus and Litzenberger, 1973, Leland and Pyle, 1977a, Myers, 1984, Hennessy and
Whited, 2005, Frank and Goyal, 2011). An early dynamic model of banks, O'Hara (1983), a leverage target follows
from undiversified ownership that induces risk-averse behavior.
   10
      Because of its importance, a slow adjustment of leverage was the topic of Darrell Duffie's presidential address
to the American Finance Society in 2010 (Duffie, 2010).



                                                           4
only needs dividend smoothing and delayed loan loss recognition. The economic intuition behind
this result is that, because banks do not recognize losses immediately and prefer to stay levered,
they do not take immediate actions to delever when hit by a loan default shock. This reflects in
an immediate responses of market leverage upon the shock, but only a negligible response of book
leverage. Over time, banks delever gradually, as loan losses are slowly recognized on the books. As
losses are slowly recognized, the regulatory constraints tighten over time. As a result, banks need
to reduce debt, but only at the pace at which losses are recognized. Through this channel, delayed
accounting is enough to explain the slow responses of market leverage through a slow reduction of
liabilities during the pre-crisis sample.
    To rationalize the change in the impulse responses after the 2008 financial crisis, we feed the
model with a common aggregate loan loss shock of 2.5% and then re-estimate the model. For the
post-crisis moments, the estimation needs to account for an effect that speeds up the adjustment of
market leverage, but slows down the reduction in liabilities. Because the market-to-book ratio (on
impact) is about the same for the pre- and post-crisis samples, the estimate of the parameter that
governs the recognition of loan losses remains the same. Hence, to explain the regime change in the
deleveraging pattern, the estimation calls for an increase in loan adjustment costs, from a negligible
to a non-negligible value. This increase in adjustment cots, permits the model to explain the even
slower response of liabilities in the post crisis.11 In turn, the estimation of post-crisis parameters
needs a reduction in the dividend smoothing motive, to explain the more intensive use of retained
earnings as a deleveraging device and the overall faster decline in leverage. These larger estimate of
adjustment costs speaks to a reduction in liquidity in the secondary market for loans, which is itself
consistent with systemic delayed accounting after an aggregate shock. The reduction in dividend
smoothing is interpreted as greater pressure to cut back on dividends upon a negative shock in the
aftermath of the crisis, even for banks that were not pressured by policy. The model is not only
able to reproduce the impulse responses of the data, but also goes a long way in explaining the
cross-sectional variation in Tobin's Q and the predictive power of Tobin's Q, items that estimation
procedure does not target. Furthermore, with an aggregate shock of 2.5%, the model explains
about 50% of the observed decline in Tobin's Q during the crisis, exclusively attributed to changes
in q , that is, excluding changes in investor risk-premia.12
    Our Q-theory allows us to study the effects of changing the degree of slow loan loss recognition
for bank equity growth and lending. This reveals a tradeoff: more lenient accounting rules allow
banks to increase their fundamental leverage beyond regulatory limits. However, more lenient
accounting rules also mitigate the effects of loan losses as banks are no longer forced to reduce
their assets immediately in order to adjust their leverage back to target. This creates a tension
between riskier banks and a milder lending contraction thanks to laxer accounting rules. All in all,
  11
      The aggravation of adjustment costs is consistent with adverse selection in the secondary loans market, which
is in turn consistent with the idea that banks can delay the recognition of losses.
   12
      Atkeson et al. (2018) explain the reduction in the aggregate market-to-book ratio of banks post-crisis since the
financial crisis with a reduction in government guarantees.


                                                          5
the mechanism of delayed loan loss recognition acts like counter-cyclical regulation that allows the
capital requirement constraint to remain slack during a crisis with the advantage of being bank
specific.

Related Literature. The financial crisis of 2008 has renewed interest in banking models as
banks are viewed to be critical in reallocating resources in the economy--e.g. Adrian and Shin
2010; Rampini and Viswanathan 2012; Jermann and Quadrini 2012; Gertler et al. 2012; Adrian
and Shin 2013; He and Krishnamurthy 2012; Brunnermeier and Sannikov 2014; Gertler et al. 2016.
Bank leverage is at the heart of these theories that can be organized into some where markets
impose constraints on leverage and others where regulation limits leverage. From a theoretical
angle, more equity and lower leverage relax financial constraints and allow a bank to expand its
lending. Models in this category include Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010); Brunnermeier and Sannikov
(2014); He and Krishnamurthy (2013); Gertler et al. (2016); Nu~ no and Thomas (2017).13 For these
models, a market based equity value is the natural empirical counterpart because it measures the
value of equity that affects incentives. The second group of models takes regulation as a given
institutional feature. Such models study the effects of declines in equity buffers (Adrian and
Boyarchenko, 2013; Begenau, 2020; Bianchi and Bigio, 2017; Martinez-Miera and Suarez, 2011;
Corbae and D'Erasmo, 2019). The present paper makes two contributions: First, it presents
a set of facts that shed light on the relevant state variables and constraints that affect bank
decisions. Second, the paper presents a Q-theory of banks that is consistent with these facts. A
key contribution of this paper is to show how both market and equity based measures are relevant
state variables. In particular, we put forth the idea that delayed accounting is important and
quantify the tradeoffs involved in the design of different accounting regimes for financial stability
and economic growth.
    In terms of models with market based constraints, our empirical findings suggest that such
constraints operate in richer ways than conceived by many of these models. Although some of
these models can generate the counter-cyclical movements in market leverage that we see in the
data, they typically cannot account for the cross-sectional changes in leverage: upon an aggregate
shock, most of these models would predict a compression of the distribution of leverage at a higher
level after a large shock as more banks get closer to their constraints.
    In addition, these models cannot account for the lack of responses in book values because book
and market values co-move in those models. Adrian et al. (2016) raises a similar point when they
argue that "as for market leverage, we show that virtually all the cyclical variation of market
  13
    Financial frictions on banks matter for the provision of credit --and hence economic performance. Examples of
these frictions include costly verification (Townsend, 1979; Bernanke and Gertler, 1989), lack of commitment (Hart
and Moore, 1994), or moral hazard (Holmstrom and Tirole, 1997, 1998). Bernanke and Gertler (1989) and Kiyotaki
and Moore (1997) were the first to model the connection between firm equity and aggregate outcomes. A different
perspective is taken by Diamond and Rajan (2000) who argue that deposits through bank runs (a l`    a Diamond and
Dybvig, 1983) act as a disciplining device in the presence of agency frictions.



                                                        6
leverage is driven by fluctuations in the book-to-market ratio, reflecting the valuation changes of
free cash flows generated by the bank." To meet this challenge, models based on market-constraints
would need to generate changes in time and in the cross section of leverage ratios. In our model,
due to delayed loss recognition, regulatory constraints become more slack upon an aggregate shock,
book values barely move, but the average market leverage and its dispersion increase.
    Our model shares elements with He and Krishnamurthy (2013) and Brunnermeier and Sannikov
(2014) in that banks equity accumulates slowly over time (see the survey by Gertler et al., 2016).
Unlike these papers though, bankers are risk-neutral despite smoothing dividends. Like this papers,
banks face market-based constraints. Regulation that limits book leverage also connects this paper
to the work by Adrian and Boyarchenko (2013). Our paper is also connected with Milbradt (2012)
because we distinguish between the fundamental value of assets and book assets where losses are
not registered in real time. We differ from Milbradt (2012) in that we focus on aggregate and
cross-sectional bank lending and leverage dynamics. Furthermore, we do not interpret delayed
accounting as exclusively resulting from accounting practices, but also as following from deliberate
evergreening practices as described in Caballero et al. (2008).
    Our evidence on the gradual adjustments in market leverage relates to two other theories on
adjustment costs (see Hayashi, 1982, for a neoclassical Tobin Q theory). In finance, adjustment
costs are not thought of as stemming from physical constraints. Instead, one financial literature
strand rationalizes the slow adjustment of leverage with equity issuance costs and asymmetric
information. Early models of equity issuance costs based on agency problems are Myers (1977, a
debt overhang model) and Myers and Majluf (1984, a private information model). Adjustment
costs on assets arise naturally when banks hold informationally sensitive assets, typically viewed
as a specialty of banks--e.g., Leland and Pyle (1977b); Diamond (1984a); Williamson (1986);
Tirole (2011); Dang, Gorton, Holmstr¨     om and Ordonez (2017); Shachar (2012); Hachem (2011).
In a more recent strand of work, DeMarzo and He (2016) and Gomes et al. (2016), a leverage
target and slow adjustment emerge due to long-term debt and default, i.e. as the result of debt
dilution. A novel feature of our Q-theory is that slow moving leverage can exclusively result from
the delayed loss recognition mechanism. Furthermore, to explain the pre-crisis patterns, our model
only needs delayed loss accounting. However, for the post-crisis the model needs higher balance
sheet adjustment costs which are consistent with these theories.
    The closest papers to ours are Corbae and D'Erasmo (2019) and Rios-Rull et al. (2020). Like
these papers we also try to match cross-sectional bank leverage data. The novelty of our work
relative to these studies is that our focus is on the importance of book and market-value differences
that followed from delayed accounting in shaping bank decisions. Finally, our paper also relates
to the literature on macro-prudential bank regulation. Some authors, hold the view that marking
assets to market can amplify crisis by worsening financial frictions (Shleifer and Vishny, 2011; Laux
and Leuz, 2010; Plantin and Tirole, 2018). In the midst of the Covid-19 crisis, questions such as
how and if to mark loans to market and how much regulatory forbearance is good for the economy

                                                 7
are once again at the center of the discussion (Blank, Hanson, Stein and Sunderam, 2020). Our
focus on delayed accounting suggests policy should also evaluate the role of evergreening practices
in the formation of zombie banks (Caballero et al., 2008). In the final part of the paper, we study
the effect of delayed loan recognition and also highlight a policy-relevant tradeoff.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents our set of five facts while
section 3 presents the model and its results. Section 4 concludes.


2      Five Stylized Facts
Data. We use panel level data on top-tier United States Bank Holding Companies (BHCs).14
BHCs provide a comprehensive picture of the activities of a financial organization beyond the
narrower accounts of their commercial bank subsidiaries. We take BHC accounting data (balance
sheet and income statements) from the FR-Y-9C regulatory reports filed with the Federal Reserve.
We merge the accounting data with market data from the Center for Research in Security Prices
(CRSP). We focus on the sample period from 2000 Q1 to 2015 Q4.15 BHCs file FR-Y-9C forms if
they have assets above $500 million.16 This sample is highly representative of the banking sector.
Appendix Section A.2 presents the time series of key balance sheet variables for all BHCs in our
sample and the four largest BHCs: Bank of America; J.P. Morgan, Citigroup, and Wells Fargo.


2.1     Characteristics of bank equity
Book equity versus market equity of banks. In most models of banks, net worth is a key
state variable that puts a cap on leverage. However, bank net worth can be measured in terms of
accounting measures (book equity) or market value (market equity). Figure 1 presents the time
series of book equity and market equity aggregated across all BHCs in our sample (left panel) and
the same time series for the four largest BHCs (right panel).17 The figure shows a stark discrepancy
between market and book equity, particularly during the crisis. This discrepancy raises the question
of which empirical counterpart best captures the economic concept of net worth. Just looking at
book equity, it is hard to detect that 2008-2009 where the years of a major financial crisis! The
sharp drop in market equity, on the other hand, clearly indicates a crisis. The pattern for the
  14
     A bank holding company is an umbrella company that holds banks and other financial institutions. A com-
mercial banks is a single bank that provides traditional banking services such as deposits and loans. For example,
Citibank, a commercial bank, is held by Citigroup, a BHC that holds Citibank and other banks, including non-
commercial banks.
  15
     We extend the sample when we estimate impulse response functions. When constructing aggregate time series,
we drop entrants to correct for the entry of major financial institutions such as Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley.
Without this correction, aggregate bank assets increase due to the reclassification of large actors such as Morgan
Stanley and Goldman Sachs into bank holding companies.
  16
     Prior to 2006 Q1, this threshold was $100 million, and the threshold became $1 Billion in March 2015.
  17
     Book equity for publicly traded BHCs is close to book equity for all BHCs, which shows that the publicly traded
sample compromises most of the banking sector (weighted by equity).


                                                         8
largest banks is very similar.18 Citigroup is an extreme example of the discrepancy between book
and market values: Citigroup lost 90% of its market capitalization, but its book equity remained
intact.19
    This difference between market and book equity is not the result of the composition of public
equity injections. Although public equity injections are counted as preferred equity in accounting
books, and market equity is measured relative to common equity, Figure 1 shows that preferred
equity cannot explain the discrepancy between market and book equity.20
    To get a quantitative sense of how much book and market equity differed during the crisis, in
Table 1 we present the percentage change in bank market equity valuations (top two rows) and
book equity valuations (middle two rows) together with the change in the S&P 500 stock return
index from the beginning of the crisis in 2007 Q3 to the end of 2008, 2009, and 2010 respectively.
We report simple percentage changes in the real value (columns "real change") as well as the
changes in fitted log-linear trend (columns "log-linear"). Between 2007 Q3 and 2008 Q4, the
market capitalization of the banking sector dropped by 54% compared to a 42% drop in the S&P
500. By 2010 Q4, market equity was still down 30% from its value in 2007 Q3. Much of this
rebound followed from new equity issuances. By contrast, book equity did not fall during the crisis
and actually increased substantially post crisis. In fact, recorded book equity losses were entirely
made up for by new equity issuance. This large discrepancy implies that banks' average Tobin's
Q, defined as the ratio of the market­to­book equity ratio, drastically declined during the crisis
and remained much lower thereafter.21 To summarize, our first fact is:

Fact 1. Book values and market values diverged substantially during the crisis.

    The divergence between book and market equity during the crisis is already known from other
studies (see for example Adrian and Shin, 2010; He et al., 2017). However, this variation in Tobin's
Q is a common thread in the paper and begets the question of what empirical counterpart of equity
should be used in macro models? We next turn to some cross-sectional evidence that sheds some
light on this question.

Information content in market equity and book equity.                A natural question is whether
differences between the market and book equity valuations reflect differences in the informational
content of these measures. Conceptually, book measures are backward looking in that they register
historical losses. By contrast, market equity measures are forward looking in that they price future
expected cash flows. Still, this conceptual difference does not imply that both measures contain
  18
      The discontinuities in the individual bank series reflect mergers and acquisitions, e.g. the acquisition of Wachovia
by Wells Fargo during the crisis.
   19
      Citigroup suffered heavy losses during the crisis and did not undergo any major mergers or acquisitions, making
it a particularly clean example case.
   20
      Preferred equity rose temporarily during the crisis due to the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP). Note
that preferred equity is included in book equity, but not in market equity.
   21
      We are referring to the market-to-book equity ratio as Tobin's Q, as opposed to the market-to-book assets ratio.


                                                            9
different information: In principle, we can write a model where the history of events is encoded
in bank balance sheets, and the information contained in the books is enough to predict future
cash flows. In such a case, the informational content of market values would be the same while
the time-series and cross-sectional variation of Tobin's Q would only respond to changes in risk
premia.
    However, we suspect that market and book value measures contain different information: one
reason is that changes in the underlying market value of loans (see filing instructions for FR-Y-9C
BHCs regulatory reports) reflect default expectations. This expectations are not updated in loan
accounting books. During our sample period, a loan is only written off once the loss has occurred, in
contrast to when the loss is expected.22 This alone could produce difference in the informational
content.23 Another reason is the delayed acknowledgment of known losses. If banks can delay
recognizing losses, or refinance non-performing loans to avoid registering losses (evergreening),
book values will be over-optimistic. If market participants can update their valuations quickly,
detecting these losses, differences in informational content will emerge. A casual indication that
market values contain more information can be seen from Figure 2, which shows that loan charge-
offs peaked in 2010 when the economy was no longer officially in a recession. The decomposition
of net charge-offs shows that these losses were heavily driven by real estate consistent with the
nature of the crisis.24
    Next, we analyze the differences in informational content formally. Our strategy builds on the
following idea: If market equity values contain more information about bank profitability than
book equity values, then Tobin's Q, i.e. the market-to-book equity ratio, should predict future
profitability once controlling for book equity. In addition, Tobin's Q should be correlated with
contemporaneous predictors of future performance. In Figure 3, we show binned scatter plots of
(logged) outcomes on the log market-to-book ratio (market capitalization over book equity), for
a pre-crisis quarter (2006 Q1) in navy and a post-crisis quarter (2009 Q1) in maroon--the plots
control for log book equity.25 The top left panel shows the log return on equity over the past
  22
      At the time of writing, a new accounting standard has been developed. According to this standard, loan
losses should be calculated according to "current expected credit losses" (CECL). Publicly traded banks began to
follow CECL (expected loss accounting rules) since January 1st 2020. Smaller banks were supposed to follow over
the next year. However, on March 27, 2020 (https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/
bcreg20200327a.htm), the Fed moved to provide an optional extension of the regulatory capital transition for the
new credit loss accounting standard.
   23
      In Appendix A.3 we survey important contributions from the accounting literature on the issue of delayed loss
recognition. See also Bushman (2016) and Acharya and Ryan (2016) for useful discussions.
   24
      When a bank has a loss that is estimable and probable, it first provisions for loan losses, which shows up as PLL.
Later when the loss occurs, the asset is charged off and thus taken off the books, which shows up as charge-offs,
although occasionally the bank can recover the asset later. Net charge-offs is charge-offs minus recoveries. We show
a decomposition by category for net charge-offs but not for PLL because the FR Y-9C does not provide information
on PLL by loan category.
   25
      To control for log book equity, the left and right-hand side variables are residualized on log book equity, and
then the mean of each variable is added back to maintain the centering. It is important to control for log book
equity to prevent spurious results due to ratio bias (see Kronmal, 1993). Log book equity is part of the right hand
side, and also appears on the left hand side of many of these regressions; it would have a mechanical effect if it were


                                                          10
year plotted against the log market-to-book ratio. Banks with higher Tobin's Q earn a higher
return on equity. The top right panel examines the log return on equity over the next year: higher
market-to-book ratios predict higher future profits. These correlations are especially strong in the
post-crisis quarter. Banks with higher market-to-book ratios also have a lower share of delinquent
loans (bottom left panel) and, in the post-crisis quarter, have a lower net charge-off rate on their
loans over the next quarter (bottom right).
    The results suggest that market participants have some ability to predict future profitability
and incorporate this into their valuation, beyond what they see in accounting books.26 This is
consistent with the view that books are slow to reflect true conditions. Indeed, the results suggest
that banks with lower profitability and more delinquencies have lower Tobin's Q, and Tobin's Q
predicts future loan writedowns and future profitability. Our second fact is the take-away from
this analysis.

Fact 2. Tobin's Q predicts future cash flows in the cross-section of banks. That is, market values
capture information that book values do not, and book values do not fully respond to shocks.

The Time Series and Cross-Section of Book and Market Leverage. Models of banks
typically impose constraints on either market or book leverage. In this section, we show the time
series pattern of banks' market and book leverage ratios and their cross-sectional differences. In
the left panel of Figure 4, we plot the aggregate market and book leverage for the entire sample of
public BHCs. In the right, we show the corresponding series for the four largest banks. A common
pattern is evident: Book leverage rose only moderately pre-crisis and actually fell during the crisis.
Market leverage, by contrast, spiked dramatically during the crisis and remained almost twice as
high for at least four years.
    In terms of the cross-section, Figure 5 presents different sections of the distribution of market
leverage over time. The figure plots the median market leverage (in maroon) and each 10th
percentile (in blue). Market leverage increased across the board and took a long time to return to
its pre-crisis levels. Strikingly, the distribution of market leverage fans out, with a substantial 10%
of banks sustaining market leverage ratios of nearly 80. This suggests that there was no strictly
binding ceiling on market leverage in the midst of a deep financial crisis.
    Whereas constraints on market leverage are a theoretical possibility that has to be validated
empirically, regulatory constraints are indisputable. Regulation is based on book equity ratios.
Does the cross-section of book leverage show evidence of distress? How many banks were close
to violating their regulatory constraints during the crisis? Figure 6 presents the share of BHCs
not controlled for.
  26
     Of course, an alternative explanation is that market equity over-reacts to information about future profitability.
However, the fact that book equity did not decline during the crisis suggests that sluggishness of books plays a role.
Also, to the extent that discount rate variation will affect most banks similarly it is unlikely to drive the results in
this cross-sectional regression.



                                                          11
that have been below different levels of regulatory capital ratios.27 We can observe that the
vast majority of banks kept a capital buffer above the regulatory minimum. The distance to the
regulatory constraints shortened for a significant number of banks during the crisis, but still, only
a minority of banks were close to their regulatory constraints. We summarize these observations
into:

Fact 3. Most banks keep an equity buffer above the regulatory capital ratio minimum; fewer banks
did so during the crisis. Market leverage and the dispersion of market leverage increased substan-
tially during the crisis.

    Fact 3 poses a challenge for standard models of banks. We should expect systemic loan defaults
during a crisis like 2008 and this should lead to an increase in market leverage for all banks, provided
that liabilities are not liquidated immediately. At the same time, we should expect substantial
reallocation of assets from highly levered banks toward banks with lower leverage. This means
that we should expect a compression in the dispersion of leverage in the cross-section. Figure 5
suggests that there was no such compression. This observation suggests a delay in the reallocation
of assets across banks. In terms of regulatory constraints, this third fact suggests that only a
minority of banks hit their regulatory constraints. In light of fact 2, we argue that this is partially
due to the slow response of book values. Interestingly, the share of banks near the regulatory
limits rose to its peak in the first quarter of 2010, at least 2 years after the first symptoms of a
mortgage crisis. From the perspective of models of banks, we contend that neither regulatory nor
market constraints bind operate in a static way. Of course, just because a constraint is not actively
binding we can conclude a constraint does not affect banks. On the contrary, banks may worry
that it will bind in the future, and take steps to avoid hitting the constraint and that is the spirit
of our Q-theory. The next section analyzes the dynamic responses of banks to shocks.
  27
     Under Basel II (the regulatory standard in place during the crisis), bank holding companies were subject to
regulatory minimums on their total capital ratio and their tier 1 capital ratio. These capital ratios are computed
as Qualifying Capital/Risk-Weighted Assets, and thus a bank with a higher capital ratio has lower leverage. Basel
II required banks hold a minimum Tier 1 capital ratio of 4% and a minimum total capital ratio of 8%. In order
to be categorized as "well-capitalized," banks had to meet minimum capital ratios that were two percentage points
higher (6% and 10% respectively). Being categorized as well-capitalized is desirable because banks that are not
well-capitalized are subject to additional regulatory scrutiny (Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, 1998,
2006). After the crisis, tighter capital requirements were phased in under Basel III. The minimum total capital
ratio stayed at 8% throughout our sample period, but the Tier 1 capital ratio rose to 4.5% in 2013, 5.5% in 2014,
and finally settled at 6% starting in 2015. Also under Basel III, additional capital ratios (e.g. tier 1 leverage
and common equity capital ratio) began being monitored (however these ratios are quite similar to the preexisting
Tier 1 and total capital ratios), and starting in 2016, a "capital conservation buffer" and special requirements for
systemically important financial institutions were introduced (Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, 2011).
Kisin and Manela (2016) study whether banks violate different regulatory constraints and find that typically banks
do not fail multiple regulatory constraints.




                                                        12
2.2     Characterizing bank leverage and balance sheet dynamics
This section analyzes the dynamics of leverage and the balance sheet. This analysis is informative
about the constraints faced by banks and their process of leverage adjustment, as we will argue.

Empirical framework. We empirically investigate whether and how a target leverage ratio and
adjustment costs drive the leverage dynamics of banks. To test this hypothesis, we estimate the
following panel regressions:

                                      k
               log(yi,t ) = t +           h · log(1 + i,t-h ) + h · P ostt log(1 + i,t-h ) + i,t ,                 (1)
                                    h=0

where i indexes over banks, t indexes over quarters, yi,t is the outcome of interest, t is a time fixed
effect, i,t denotes our measure of a cash flow shock to net-worth (i.e., the idiosyncratic excess stock
return innovations over the past quarter for bank i in quarter t; see detailed description below),
and P ostt is an indicator variable equal to one if the current quarter is post-crisis (we treat 2007 Q4
as first quarter for which P ostt = 1).28 These regressions allow us to construct impulse response
functions for liabilities, market leverage, market equity, and book equity.29 We include time-fixed
effects t to absorb aggregate shocks, e.g. changes in investors' discount rates or the price of
loans due to demand shocks. We thus recover a partial equilibrium supply-side impulse response,
estimated off of the cross-sectional variation in return shocks. In all specifications, we use k = 20.
Because of these many lags, we extend our data to 1990 Q3 in order to obtain precise pre-crisis
estimates.30 We cluster standard errors by bank. Finally, to report the impulse response function,
we sum the coefficients: the pre-crisis contemporaneous response is 0 , the next period is 0 + 1 ,
and so on. For the post-crisis, we also add the corresponding  terms.
    Before we show the results, we first discuss how we obtain the shock measure i,t . We follow
Gandhi and Lustig (2015) to adjust bank stock returns for aggregate risk factors. That is, we
                                         f
regress the excess stock returns ri,t - rt of bank i on a bank fixed effect i and a matrix of factors
  28
     One might favor an alternative specification which includes lags of the dependent variable in addition to con-
temporaneous and lagged returns. This faces two issues: Nickell bias and bad control. Including the dependent
variable as a lag will induce bias, as documented by Nickell (1981). Dealing with this bias is challenging, and may
result in poor precision. Perhaps more importantly, the lagged dependent variable is a "bad control," in that it is
endogenous to the regressor. We wish to back out the effect of a return shock in t - 3 on the change in liabilities
in t: if we condition on liabilities in t - 1, which is itself also affected by the past return shock, then we will not
identify our parameter of interest.
  29
     Since market returns are changes in market equity valuations, taking first differences in logs provides a tight
conceptual link between the outcome and the regressor. Using levels would mean that the outcome was highly
correlated with bank size. This would raise concerns about stationarity. Using levels could also result in a regression
that was heavily influenced by a few large banks, given the highly skewed bank size distribution. For the same
reason we do not weight our regressions: the bank size distribution is highly skewed, and so a weighted regression
would be equivalent to a regression with only the handful of the largest banks. If the variance of the residuals were
lower for larger banks, then using weights would yield a more efficient estimator. Empirically however, the variance
of the residuals does not appear to vary substantially by bank size.
  30
     This is the first quarter in which we can identify which banks are top-tier BHCs from the FR Y-9C.


                                                          13
Xt as follows:

                                           f
                        rit      -        rt          = i + Xt       i        +            i,t              .
                    Raw Return       Risk-Free Rate        factors loadings       Idiosyncratic Component


The vector of factor loadings  has dimension K × 1 and the matrix of factors Xt has dimension
T × K . We include the same factors as in Gandhi and Lustig (2015), namely the three Fama-
French factors (Fama and French, 1993), a credit factor calculated as the excess return on an index
of investment-grade corporate bonds, and an interest rate factor calculated as the excess return
on an index of 10-year U.S. Treasury bonds.31 See Appendix Section B.1 for further details on
the risk-adjustment process. The idea behind risk-adjusting returns and using their innovations
is that we want to isolate information about banks' cash flows, as opposed to discount rates,
which are driven by aggregate movements in the factors.32 Crucially, we rely on the efficient-
markets hypothesis according to which excess return variations should be unpredictable ex ante
after adjusting for the risk-premium. By stripping out the predictable components of returns, the
innovations i,t to the risk-adjusted returns are ex-ante unpredictable across banks. This forms
the basis of our identification strategy: we treat cross-sectional variation in i,t as unanticipated
shocks that perturb bank equity. In the Appendix (see Figure 4), we show for the largest four
banks that the time series of i,t indeed resembles white noise. In Section 2.2, we conduct a variety
of robustness check to validate our identification strategy and interpretation of i,t as cash flow
shocks. For the rest of the paper, we refer to these innovations i,t as return shocks.

Impulse responses. How do shocks affect banks' balance sheet, financing, and payout choices?
We estimate impulse response functions for liabilities, market capitalization, book equity, market
leverage, and the common dividend rates, and show the results in Figure 7. To normalize the
effect, we report the response to a negative one percent return shock. The y-axis of our plots
shows the contemporaneous response (-0 for pre-crisis and -0 - 0 for post-crisis) as quarter
1, the cumulative response one quarter later (-0 - 1 and -0 - 1 - 0 - 1 ) as quarter 2, and
so on. If banks maintain a target market-leverage ratio, we would expect banks to respond to
a negative wealth shock (which mechanically increases market leverage) by moving back towards
their target leverage. As we can see from the impulse response function of market leverage in Panel
a) of Figure 7, the data is consistent with an adjustment back to target that appears to be slow,
presumably due to adjustment costs. As discussed before, adjustment costs are a key ingredient
of our Q-theory.
  31
     The three Fama-French factors are downloaded from Ken French's website. The credit factor is the excess return
on the Dow Jones Corporate Bond Return Index that we download from Global Financial Data. The interest rate
factor is the U.S. 10-year Government Bond Total Return Index (ltg) that we also download from Global Financial
Data. We use the one-month risk-free rate from Ken French's website to calculate excess returns.
  32
     The results for simply adjusting returns with a time-fixed effect are qualitatively and quantitatively similar,
and are also reported in the Appendix Section B.2.


                                                           14
    The impulse response of log market leverage, defined here as log(Liabilities/Market Capitalization),
is simply the difference between the response of log market capitalization (Panel b) and log lia-
bilities (Panel c).33 The impulse response function for log market capitalization reveals that in
the quarter of impact of a return shock, a mechanical effect on the denominator dominates and
explains the jump in market leverage. The adjustment on the numerator is slow, and the effect
of return shocks on market leverage does not vanish, even after five years. This yields our fourth
fact:

Fact 4. Banks appear to operate with a target leverage ratio to which they only return slowly after
shocks, suggesting adjustment costs, consistent with the Q-theory.

    A few noteworthy differences in the pre-crisis and post crisis impulse responses emerge from Fig-
ure 7. First, banks adjust their leverage ratios more quickly during the post-crisis years compared
to the pre-crisis. As a way to delever and return to the target leverage ratio, banks can increase
equity and/or decrease liabilities. Second, Panel b) shows that during the pre-crisis period market
equity did not change after a shock decreases market equity (a return shock mechanically lowers
equity one-for-one). Third, by contrast, in the post-crisis period, half of the impact is reversed
over 5 years. In particular, panel c) shows that banks decrease liabilities by around 0.6% during
the pre-crisis period and but only by 0.2% in the post-crisis in response to a 1% returns shock.
Panel d), in turn, shows that book equity values adjust slowly in the pre-crisis and post-crisis. This
is consistent with Section 2.1, where we showed that book values respond only slowly to losses
that are more quickly reflected in market returns. The final observation regards the behavior of
dividends: In Panel e) of Figure 7, we estimate the impulse response of the common dividend
rate.34 The response of the common dividend rate to a negative return shock (top left panel) is
surprisingly positive pre-crisis. This is driven by the mechanical initial effect on the denominator.
Market equity falls in response to a negative return shock. Post-crisis, the initial positive me-
chanical effect is overtaken by the negative effect on dividends. All in all, these impulse responses
show that banks switched from responding exclusively by decreasing assets and liabilities in the
pre-crisis period to a combination of balance sheet and equity adjustment in the post-crisis period,
with equity adjustments being more important. To summarize, our final stylized fact is:

Fact 5. Prior to the crisis, banks adjusted leverage primarily by reducing debt keeping equity
unchanged. Post-crisis leverage adjustments appear more gradual. During this period, banks also
adjusted leverage by raising equity.

Identification and Robustness. Our interpretation of the estimates relies on the assumption
that bank specific variations in risk-adjusted bank stock returns identify cash flow shocks on the
  33
     The       impulse      responses       of      leverage    instead       defined       as      log(Liabilities    +
Market Capitalization)/Market Capitalization) are nearly identical.
  34
     For this ratio, we use  log(1 + yi,t ) as the outcome variable in our specification 1, since log(1 + yi,t ) provides
an approximation to percentage points, and since flow variables such as dividends can be equal to zero.


                                                           15
existing portfolio, such as specific default shocks, as opposed to shocks to the profitability of future
business opportunities. We conduct various analyses to alleviate identification concerns including a
narrative approach to validate our interpretation of the return shocks as unanticipated and specific
cash flow shocks.
    As stated above, one could be concerned that the return shocks capture idiosyncratic informa-
tion about the relative profitability of the banks' future portfolio (e.g. the default rate on future
mortgages of a bank) and thus affect the bank's problem through channels other than perturbing
equity. If a bank's expected return on its future assets falls, the bank would want to reduce equity
or lower its scale for a reason that would be unrelated to a target leverage ratio and adjustment
costs.
    To investigate this concern, we study how banks' liquid asset ratios respond to a negative
return shock. If negative return shocks indeed predict lower future investment opportunities rather
than current cash flows, we would expect banks to respond to these shocks by moving their
portfolio into liquid assets. We test this notion by looking at the impulse response function of
banks' liquidity ratio, calculated as (cash + treasury bills) / total assets. The impulse response
function in Appendix Figure 9 shows no statistically significant response pre-crisis. There is a
small temporary response post crisis that is reversed within a few quarters (recall that we show
cumulative responses).35 In sum, banks do not tilt their portfolios towards safe and liquid assets in
response to our return shock, which pushes against a story of worsening investment opportunities.
    The lack of response of the liquid asset ratio is suggestive for our interpretation of the return
shocks. However, we cannot fully rule out that the shock picks up information about the profitabil-
ity of future assets. To provide additional corroborating evidence for our identification strategy, we
use a narrative approach, detailed in Appendix B.3. To this end, we take the largest positive and
largest negative values of the return shocks i,t over the sample period for each of the four largest
banks (J.P. Morgan Chase, Bank of America, Citigroup, and Wells Fargo). We then search various
newspapers for articles that mention the name of any of the four banks in the quarter for which
the absolute value of i,t was high. Table 5 in the Appendix lists the results of our newspaper
article search. In most cases, we can find supporting evidence for our i,t estimates. For example,
in the second quarter of 2009 Bank of America had a high and positive value of i,t . Our article
search revealed that Bank of America fared better in the stress test and exceeded expectations.
In 1999 Q1 Citigroup had a large positive i,t . This coincided with a Wall Street journal article
that stated that Citigroup had exceeded profit expectations even though profits fell. In 2001 Q1, a
negative shock at Wells Fargo coincided with news reports that stated that Wells Fargo's venture
capital portfolios had incurred significant losses.
    In Appendix Section B.3, we provide additional robustness checks. We verify that our results
  35
    This is not a perfect test as perhaps banks would also want to raise liquidity in response to a cash flow shock
on their current portfolio. A hypothetical example is the following. Suppose the bank was caught in unfair lending
practices that causes a lawsuit. Banks might respond by increasing their cash holdings to prepare for the upcoming
lawsuit.


                                                        16
are not driven by mergers or by specific events during the crisis by excluding mergers and the crisis
years 2008 and 2009 from our sample. For more details refer to Appendix Section B.3.36


2.3     Taking stock
In this section we presented five facts about bank leverage, a key variable in models of banks.
The denominator of leverage, net worth, can have two different empirical counterparts, book or
market equity. However, these two measures diverge during the Great Recession (fact 1) and in
ways related to their informational content (fact 2). Importantly, leverage constraints based on
market equity measures, did not seem to put a cap on market-leverage during the crisis (fact 3).
Furthermore, regulatory constraints, which depend on book leverage, seemed to be circumvented
by delaying losses. We also argued that banks operate as if they have a market leverage target, but
the adjustment to that target is slow (fact 4). Furthermore, pre-crisis, banks would predominantly
reduce liabilities as means to delever, but the deleveraging pattern changed in the post-crisis and
retained earnings gained a predominant role to the point that leverage adjusted faster (fact 5).
     What do these facts mean for macro-finance oriented banking models? They call for a theory
that can explain book and market-value differences and can account for slow responses of leverage.
They also call for thinking of leverage constraints as not binding directly, but rather affecting
banks in a dynamic sense. In the neo-classical Q-theory of investment (Hayashi, 1982) the dis-
crepancy between market and book measures follows physical adjustment costs which create a
wedge between the average and the marginal cost of capital. Since bank assets consists mainly
of financial contracts, it is difficult to interpret this difference as the result of decreasing returns
to technology. However, there is a tradition in finance that explains financial adjustment costs
through various financial frictions. For example, the illiquidity of loans can result from asymmetric
information--Leland and Pyle, 1977b; Diamond, 1984b; Dang, Gorton, Holmstr¨            om and Ordonez,
2017-- or from fire sale costs as in Shleifer and Vishny (1997). Thus, taking the insights from
the neoclassical Q-theory, one route is to explain the slow adjustments and variation in Q through
asset adjustment costs.
     A model with only loan adjustment costs would not explain why book equity reacted so little
during the crisis (upon a large shock) and would not explain the predictive power of Tobin's Q.
For that reason, the Q-theory we develop in the next section, is motivated by the idea of delayed
accounting. We introduce loan adjustments costs, for comparison and because they are needed
to explain the fifth fact, but we will show that delayed accounting can explain the discrepancies
between book and market values, the predictability of Tobin's Q,the lack of binding constraints and
also, the delayed responses in market leverage. In particular, delayed accounting can explain the
slow adjustment of market leverage because upon a shock, leverage does not have to be adjusted
  36
    We also test for heterogeneous impulse responses by type of bank. We do not find evidence of sizable hetero-
geneity, but we have limited statistical power to detect these differences.



                                                      17
immediately to satisfy regulatory constraints. Rather, liabilities are reduced gradually as losses
are slowly recognized.
    There is substantial work on delayed accounting in the accounting literature. In particular, like
us, Laux and Leuz (2010) also argue that delayed accounting was a prevalent phenomenon during
the Great Recession. In Appendix A.3, we further detail the bank accounting literature (Bushman,
2016 and Acharya and Ryan, 2016 also offer useful discussions). In macro-finance, delayed account-
ing is a topic that has been overlooked, with some exceptions. Among these exceptions, Milbradt
(2012) distorted incentives brought about by Level 3 fair-value accounting and Caballero et al.
(2008) note that regulatory constraints may be a factor contributing to evergreening. Motivated
by the facts presented in this paper, we argue that delayed accounting is furthermore important
to explain the dynamics of book and market leverage. We also argue that delayed accounting has
important policy implications. We will argue that with delayed accounting, banks can weather
loan losses and hope for recovery of some of the loans. On the flip side, delaying expected losses
allows banks to maintain greater leverage, or continue to extend loans to businesses that should
fail (Caballero et al., 2008; Blattner et al., 2019).


3      Q-Theory
We now present our Q-theory of banks. The theory is inspired by the facts presented in Section
2. The main innovation is that the dynamics of leverage are affected by accounting rules. The
model has three frictions: first, equity financing frictions prevent banks from offsetting loan losses
with equity issuances. Second, delayed loan-loss recognition induces a dynamic tradeoff between
loan origination and the tightening of future regulatory constraints. Finally, we introduce loan
adjustment costs that, although not central to our theory, allow us to contrast our Q-theory with
models of adjustment costs and to fit the post-crisis responses. Later in the section, we match
the model with the data and discuss the model's ability to replicate the facts we highlight above.
Proofs and derivations are contained in Appendix C.


3.1     The Model
Environment. Time is continuous, infinite, and indexed by t.37 There is a continuum of banks.
Loan defaults are the only source of risk. Each bank maximizes the expected discounted value of
dividends, Ct . Banks are risk-neutral, but prefer to smooth dividends across time. Their objective
function is defined recursively as
  37
     We choose a continuous-time setup for computational reasons: An earlier version of this paper, presented the
same model in discrete time. Whereas the cross-sectional properties of both models are quantitatively practi-
cally identical, the speed of computation is substantially faster in continuous-time, something that facilitates the
estimation step.




                                                        18
                                                           
                                          Vt = Et             f (Cs , Vs ) ds ,
                                                       t

where:                                                                            1-
                                           C 1- - {1 + (1 -  ) V } 1-
                             f (C, V )                         1-                       .
                                        1-    {1 + (1 -  ) V } 1- -1
Ct denotes dividend payouts at time t and f is a Duffie-Epstein aggregator with a time discount
rate  > 0, an intertemporal elasticity of substitution (IES) of 1/, and risk aversion of  .38
The Duffie-Epstein aggregator is the continuous-time counterpart of Epstein-Zin preferences. The
recursive formulation allows us to characterize banks as risk-neutral (assuming   0), as is
standard in the theory of the firm.39 At the same time, we retain flexibility to introduce dividend
smoothing motives that deliver smooth dividend payout patterns that are consistent with the
empirical evidence, e.g., Lintner (1956); Dickens et al. (2002); Leary and Michaely (2011).

Bank balance sheet. Banks hold long term loans that are funded with deposits and equity. At
each instant, a fraction  of loans matures. Maturity is innocuous, but is introduced to distinguish
between loan flows and stocks. Loan default shocks are governed by a Poisson process Nt : a default
event occurs with instantaneous probability  , and a constant fraction  of loans defaults during
said event.
    Book accounting and fundamental values differ.40 Defaults are recognized slowly in the ac-
counting values, whereas they are immediately captured in the fundamental values. We denote
the fundamental value of loans by Lt , and the book value of loans by L  ¯ t . Deposits, denoted Dt ,
are risk-free, and thus their accounting and fundamental values coincide. The bank state variables
are L, L,¯ D .


Financing frictions Banks face an equity financing friction: banks cannot issue equity and
must rely on retained earnings to grow equity. As we noted, the bankers' utility embeds a dividend
smoothing motive that violates the assumptions of the Modigliani-Miller theorem. The assumption
of no equity finance can be relaxed, by defining utility over net dividends.
  38
     With other forms of dividend adjustment costs, dividend smoothing and risk-aversion are coupled together. In
the model, however, the bank can be risk-averse (due to its franchise value) or risk-loving (due to the option to
default), as we explain later.
  39
     Similar objective functions for banks are found in Bianchi and Bigio (2017) and Di Tella and Kurlat (Forth-
coming). We are the first to model dividend smoothing in isolation from risk-aversion.
  40
     This is a novel feature of our model and critical to capture banks' ability to engage in evergreening and to avoid
the recognition of losses immediately (see empirical evidence in Blattner, Farinha and Rebelo (2019)). Evergreening
as described in Caballero, Hoshi and Kashyap (2008) occurs when banks roll over a loan that won't be paid. The
objective is to avoid registering losses. Since rolling over a loan does not require new funds, evergreening allows the
bank to reduce its accounting equity without a cost.




                                                           19
Laws of motion. The law of motion for the fundamental value of loans is

                                          dL = (-L + I ) dt - LdN.                                                (2)

The change in the fundamental value equals new issuance I , net of maturing loans L, minus the
defaulting fraction of loans, L in the events of default dN = 1.
   The law of motion for book loans is

                                 ¯ = (-L + I ) dt -  L
                                dL                   ¯ - L dt -  LdN.                                             (3)

This law of motion is similar to Equation (2). It fully captures the flow of repaid principal and
new loans, (-L + I ) dt. Differently from Equation (2), the loan default shock affects the book
value with a delay. When the fraction  of loans L defaults, only a fraction   [0, 1] is recognized
immediately.41 The term  L    ¯ - L reflects the speed of loss recognition:  is the rate at which
the gap between L ¯ and L closes. This partial recognition of losses in the model is motivated by
the discussion of evergreening and internal-valuation accounting above.
   The law of motion for deposits is:

                                dD = rD D - rL +  L +  (I, L) + C dt.                                             (4)

The bank issues deposits to pay out dividends C , to fund the cost of new lending,  (I, L), and
to pay the interest rD on deposits. The bank receives an inflow of deposits from the interest rL
earned on loans and from the repayment of maturing loans L. The interest rates rL and rD are
exogenous and constant.42

Loan market friction. The loan market is simplified for tractability. Each instant, banks choose
a flow of new loans It . The cost of issuing loans (in deposits) is

                                             
                                               (I/L -  )2 L,
                                         (I, L) = I +
                                             2
where   0. Given L,  (I, L) determines the increase (or decrease) in bank funds that stem from
issuing (selling) new loans.43
  41
      If  = 0, books do not acknowledge any fraction of the loss on impact. If  = 1, the book and fundamental
                                                                                                             ¯ 0  L0 ,
values are equal since losses are fully accounted for immediately. An initial condition for any bank is that L
                         ¯
which guarantees that Lt  Lt .
   42
      A constant interest margin is consistent with the empirical evidence in Atkeson, d'Avernas, Eisfeldt and Weill
(2018) or Wang (2018). It is important to note that constant net-interest rate margins are not informative about
bank interest rate risk exposure, as shown by Begenau et al. (2015) and Begenau and Stafford (2019). Gomez et
al. (2020) and Haddad and Sraer (2019) present empirical evaluations of banks' interest rate exposures.
   43
      This function has the following properties: First,  (L, L) = L, that is, the bank does not incur a higher
issuance cost when it replaces maturing loans. Second,  (I, L) is increasing in I (I (I, L) > 0) for any I > I    ¯
                                                                                                 ¯
( - 1/ ) L. Note that the bank would never choose to sell assets (negative issuance) below I , as the bank would



                                                         20
    The function  induces an exogenous portfolio readjustment cost. For I > L the convexity in
I in  (I, L) can be interpreted as representing decreasing returns to lending activities. For I < L
the marginal cost of selling can represent fire sale costs, as in Shleifer and Vishny (2011), different
areas of lending expertise, or adverse selection in the secondary loans market.

Notation. Before we proceed, we define the ratio of the fundamental value to the book value of
loans by qt  Lt /L¯ t  [0, 1]. The fundamental value of bank equity is Wt  Lt - Dt . In addition, we
define leverage as t  Dt /Wt . Our notion of qt is purposely chosen to relate to Tobin's Q, which
measures the ratio of market-to-book values: In our model, market values differ from fundamental
values due to the external funding frictions and the accounting rules. Hence, qt and Tobin's Qt are
different but related concepts.
    Since the laws of motion feature drifts and jumps produced by defaults, we introduce the
following notation: We use µx W to denote the drift of a variable x; µx is the drift scaled by wealth
W . Similarly, we use J x W to refer to the jump in x, in proportion to W .

Liquidation. Banks continue to operate as long as they satisfy two constraints. First, banks
are subject to a regulatory requirement that stipulates that deposits cannot exceed a fraction  of
their book loans D   L  ¯ , for  < 1. We can express this regulatory constraint more conveniently:

                                                  / (q -  ) .                                                  (5)

Notice that the higher the q , the tighter the constraint. This constraint is the main constraint
of interest in our theory. Second, banks are subject to a market-based leverage constraint. The
constraint requires bank leverage to be below  ¯:

                                              ¯  (1 - ) /.
                                                                                                               (6)

The value of    ¯ guarantees solvency in all states, (1 - ) L - D > 0.
    If either the market or regulatory conditions are violated, the bank is liquidated. The value after
liquidation is an exogenous value proportional to equity Vo  vo W 1- . Because of its franchise
value, the bank has incentives to avoid defaults: when active, it earns a positive intermediation
spread. The problem is that a bank cannot fully control its leverage since loans are subject to
random default shocks and adjusting leverage takes time. Let r be the states where regulatory
liquidations occur and m the states where market liquidations occur. The overall states that
trigger liquidations are   r  m .
actually have to pay another bank to take its loans. Third,  (I, L) is convex in I , II (I, L)  0. The latter
property captures that the greater the loan issuance, the costlier each additional unit of I becomes, i.e. the bank
has to issue more deposits on the margin. When a loan is sold, the bank receives less deposits in return for each
additional unit I < L that is sold.



                                                        21
Bank problem. At each t, banks choose a dividend payout C and a flow of new loans I to solve
the following problem:

Problem 1 [Bank's Problem] The bank's policy functions are the solutions to:

                     ¯ D                       ¯ D µL W + VL    ¯ D µL W + VD L, L,¯
                                                                                 ¯ D µD W
   0 = max f C, V L, L,                + VL L, L,          ¯ L, L,
           {C,I }
                                 ¯ D - V L, L,
           + V (1 - ) L, (1 -  ) L,         ¯ D

                                               ¯ D = vo W 1- if
subject to: (2), (3), (4) and liquidation V L, L,                                 ¯ D  .
                                                                               L, L,

  This problem is a standard Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equation, associated with the
Duffie-Epstein preferences. The last term is the change in value that results from liquidation.

Market value of equity. To construct market returns, we need an asset pricing model of banks.
For that, we assume that banks are owned by outside investors. Investors can hold bank shares,
but cannot lend or issue deposits directly. Because of this friction, the market value of equity
diverges from W, the fundamental value of bank equity. Hence, we distinguish between three
concepts of bank equity: market value, accounting value, and the fundamental value. Investors
price bank shares according to the net-present value of discounted dividends. We assume investors
are diversified so that a bank's idiosyncratic risk does not affect their discount factor. Because
we are interested in the cross-sectional behavior of banks, we abstract from expected aggregate
shocks and shocks to investor risk premia. For that reason, we endow the investor with a constant
discount rate I .44
    We construct a pricing equation for the bank's equity and map the underlying default shocks to
the return shocks, to be able to build the analogue impulse responses to those presented in Section
2. The market value of a bank, S L, L,  ¯ D , satisfies the following recursive representation:



         ¯ D               ¯ D + SL L, L,
                                        ¯ D µL W + SL         ¯
                                                         ¯ D µL           ¯ D µD W(7)
  I S L, L,         = C L, L,                       ¯ L, L,     W + SD L, L,
                                            ¯ D - S L, L,
                      + S (1 - ) L, (1 -  ) L,         ¯ D .

This captures the dividend flow C L, L,  ¯ D determined by the payout policy. Naturally, this
recursive representation reflects the law of motion of the bank's state variables. The valuation
takes into account how changes in the state variables will affect future valuations, considering the
effect of loan defaults. We assume that upon liquidation, the investor receives zero for her equity.
    An important point is that, implicitly, Equation (7) assumes that investors observe dN . Thus,
information about losses is contained in market prices, but not in book values. This is important
  44
   In principle, we could allow discount rates to vary with time, I   t , which would not change the cross-sectional
implications of the model. For simplicity, we set investors' discount rate to a constant.


                                                        22
for our analysis, because it implies that market values are indeed informative about loan default
shocks, beyond the information content in books, as we argue in Section 2.
    The ratio of market to accounting book values, Tobin's Q, is given by:

                                                                  ¯ D
                                                             S L, L,
                                            ¯ D 
                                       Q L, L,                 ¯-D .
                                                               L

We exploit this expression in Section 3.4. In the model, variation in Q will result from changes in
the value of loans that are not immediately recognized on the books.

The optimization problem of banks. The bank's problem is scale invariant, as we show
formally in Appendix 1. Banks with the same  and q but different W are scaled replicas. We
express the dividend rate as c  C/W and the loan growth rate by   I/L -  . The growth rate
of bank equity satisfies the following stochastic differential equation:
                                                                                          
     dW       L          D                    2                                           
             r ( + 1) - r  -                                          -
            =                                   ( + 1)                          c          dt + (- ( + 1)) dN,        (8)
     W                                       2                                            
                 net interest income                                      dividend rate         loss after default
                                       capital loss from adjustment
                                                                                                      J W
                                             µW


where µW denotes the drift and J W the jump in wealth after a default. The first term of Equation
(8) captures the interest income on loans per unit of wealth,  + 1, net of the interest on leverage,
. The second term is the net capital loss from adjusting the loan portfolio: when the issuance
rate equals the maturing fraction of loans, loan issuances do not eat up bank capital. The greater
the deviation, the greater the cost. The third term is the dividend rate. The final term is the
jump in wealth after a default: the jump scales with leverage, . Hence, the expression captures
how leverage increases risk. In turn, the law of motion for leverage is

                                                                   ( + 1)
                             d =  - µW ( + 1) dt +                           dN.                                      (9)
                                                                1 -  ( + 1)
                                           µ
                                                                           J 

The drift in leverage is the difference between the growth rate of loans, , and the growth rate of
equity, µW , scaled by leverage  + 1. The jump in leverage J  reveals how leverage changes with
defaults. The jump in leverage increases with leverage. Finally, q has the following law of motion

                                                                       -  q
                           dq = ( + ) (1 - q ) q dt + -                              q dN,                           (10)
                                                                      1 -  q
                                        µq
                                                                          J q


where µq denotes the drift and J q its jump. Notice that q drifts to one with the loan growth and
loss recognition rates, {, }. The term (1 - q ) q is intuitive: when q is close to zero, the ratio does

                                                        23
not move because the numerator is very small relative to the denominator; when q is 1 accounting
loans already reflect the fundamental value and issuances do not change this aspect. The following
proposition is a characterization of the banks' problem and market values:

Proposition 1 [Bank's Problem] Given {, q }, V L, L,  ¯ D = (1 + v (, q )) W - 1, C L, L,
                                                                                       ¯ D =
                      ¯ D = ( (, q ) +  ) · L, where {v, c, } solve
c (, q ) · W and I L, L,

                     0 = max f (c, v ) +        v µ + vq µq             + (1 + v ) µW                    (11)
                          {c,}
                                           change in financial ratios       equity growth
                                                       q                W
                      +       1 + v  + J ,q + J               1+J            - (1 + v ) in (, q ) /
                                             default jump in wealth


and v = vo for {, q }  . The bank's market value is S L, L,            ¯ D  s (, q ) · W , where s
solves a version of (11) where f (c (, q ) , s) is substituted with c (, q ) - I s. Finally, Tobin's Q is
                                       -1
Q (, q ) = s (, q ) × ((q -1 - 1)  + 1) .

    A takeaway from this proposition is that the model is scale invariant. Also, a key object of
interest is the equity multiplier function, v : the term 1 + v represents how a unit of bank net
worth is transformed into a unit of certainty-equivalent net-present value of dividends. Itself, v ,
is the solution to the (HJB) Equation (38). The novelty of this HJB is that it takes into account
the growth of equity and the evolution of bank ratios. Notice that although the model is not
stationary in levels, it is stationary in ratios. For common {, q }, the dividend and lending policies
scale with W . Since the problem is scale invariant, the market capitalization is also proportional to
W , where the price per unit of wealth s depends only on {, q }. Below, we describe how v governs
the dynamics of leverage, through its influence on the dividend and issuance policies, given q .


3.2       Inspecting the Mechanism
We next proceed to explain the model's mechanics, turning on one friction at a time. Formal
results are relegated to Appendix C.

Immediate accounting without loan adjustment costs. To shed light on the mechanics
of our Q-theory, we first solve for the case where default shocks are instantaneously recognized
( = 1) and there are no adjustment costs ( = 0). In this case, q = 1 at all times so  plays no
role. Since q = 1, only the regulatory liquidation matters and the liquidation boundary is given by
a threshold leverage,  = {| > / (1 -  )}. Also, since  = 0, the bank can choose a jump in the
stock of loans and deposits, and hence, controls a jump in .45 We refer by J    ¯x to the controlled
(endogenous) jump for any variable x.
 45
      In this version, the path of loans does not have to be continuous even in the absence of shocks.



                                                             24
    A key object for the dynamics is the shadow liquidation boundary, . The shadow boundary
is the leverage rate such that upon a loan default shock, leverage jumps exactly to the boundary
of the liquidation set. Thus,  solves:

                                                   + J  = / (1 -  ) ,

where J  is the jump in leverage after a default shock, starting from a leverage .
  For this limiting case of the model, the multiplier v is a constant and leverage solves:
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
              max      (1 + v ) rL - rD  +               (1 + v ) 1 + J W I [  ] + vo I [ > ]                      .   (12)
          [0,/(1- )]                                                                                            
                       value of levered returns                 wealth upon default shock   liquidation value


This problem clarifies that leverage results from a tradeoff between intermediation profits and
liquidation risk. The first term in the objective describes how leverage increases levered returns:
intermediation profits, rL - rD , increase equity at the margin. In turn, the marginal value of
equity is the multiplier 1 + v . The second term is the value after a loan default. Defaults occur
with intensity  and lead to two possibilities. The bank can avoid liquidation, if   , and in
that case, the cost of default is only the reduction in the bank's scale by 1 + J W . Otherwise,
the bank is liquidated and recovers vo per unit of equity. Because the objective is piece-wise
linear, the target leverage is a corner solution. The interesting parameter combination satisfies
  rL - rD  [  (1 + v ) , vo ].46 Under this combination, the expected return of increasing leverage
is positive up to  = . Past the shadow boundary, the hazard of default makes the benefit of
increasing leverage negative. Hence, under those parameters, the bank sets its target leverage to
 = .47
    To guarantee that  =  always, the endogenous jump must neutralize the jump caused by
defaults, J¯ = -J  (). With neither delayed accounting nor loan adjustment costs, the bank
can do that adjustment at no cost. When dN = 0, the dividend and the loan issuance rates are
constant. In particular, c is given by a formula that captures wealth and substitution effects48

                                              c (v ) = 1/ (1 + v )1-1/ .                                               (13)
  46
      Otherwise, leverage is set to zero or the bank is liquidated upon its first default: If rL - rD <  [1 + v  ¯], the
expected return of increasing leverage is negative and  = 0. If rL - rD >  [1 + v             ¯], the bank would like to
lever up as much as possible. If vo > rL - rD >  the return spread exceeds the bank's expected liquidation
value vo . In that case, the bank operates at the fringe of solvency, setting  to its permissible limit. As soon as
it suffers a loan default, the bank is liquidated. Generically, leverage can be set to either of three values depending
on parameters: to zero, to the shadow boundary value or the liquidation boundary value.
   47
      Critical to this result is that risk-aversion is zero. Otherwise, leverage would involve an additional tradeoff
between return and equity growth risk.
   48
      Here, 1 + v acts like a total return on wealth. When  > 1 ( < 1), the substitution (wealth) effect dominates
and the bank retains (pays out) more dividends as v increases.




                                                           25
Given c , the loan issuance rate  is such that leverage is constant, µ = 0. Finally, the equity
multiplier solves:
                         0 = f (c (v ) , v ) + (1 + v ) µW +  J W - 1 .

    Turning back to our motivating facts, this limit case produces a leverage target, as desired.
However, the impulse response of leverage to a return shock looks like a blip with no persistence.
In turn, the response of total liabilities looks like a one time shock. Clearly, other aspects of the
model are needed to match all the facts highlighted above.

Delayed accounting without loan adjustment costs.               We now study the case with only
delayed accounting ( < 1 and  = 0). This case explains most of the intuition of the general
model. In this case, since losses are not recognized immediately, in general q < 1. The liquidation
region therefore depends on q, and (q ) = | > min / (q -  ) ,        ¯ . As a result, the shadow
boundary is no longer a scalar, but a function of q , which we now label  (q ). To construct the
shadow boundary, we must consider the jumps J q and J  . The shadow boundary  (q ) solves:

                                                                         ¯ .
                           (q ) + J  ( (q )) = min                      ,                       (14)
                                                      q+   Jq   (q ) - 
As with immediate loss accounting, a loan default takes the bank from a point {, q } in the shadow
boundary to a point in the boundary of the liquidation set . Again, for suitable parameter
conditions, the dynamics are such that a bank will immediately delever until it reaches another
point in the shadow liquidation boundary  (q ). The necessary loan sale to return to the shadow
boundary induces a jump J     ¯ , but it also alters q , inducing a jump J   ¯q . Hence, the bank no
longer returns to the same leverage, but rather a loan default takes the bank from a point {q, }
in the shadow boundary to another point, {q ,  } = q + J q + J       ¯q ,  + J  + J¯ , in the shadow
boundary.
    It is important to understand the choices of {, q } and {c, } along the boundary to understand
the ability to match the data impulse-responses. Figure 1 allows us to sketch these dynamics: the
y -axis represents values of  and the x-axis values of q . Starting from an arbitrary point {q, } in
the shadow boundary a loan default event takes the bank to a point on the boundary of . Since
the bank survives, but wishes to avoid a future liquidation, it immediately sells assets to delever.
This takes the bank to another point in the shadow boundary, the point  (q ) . Absent defaults,
when dN = 0, the state variable {, q } drifts along the shadow boundary. This is because to the
right of the boundary, liquidation risk is positive. To the left of the boundary, the bank prefers to
lever up to increase its equity return. Hence, the choice of issuances and dividends must guarantee
a smooth drift along the shadow boundary, taking the bank slowly to q = 1, as shown in the figure.
Because the shadow boundary has a negative slope, q (q ), the bank must guarantee a decline in
leverage as q increases with the pace of loan loss recognition.
    Turning to the impulse responses: on impact, q falls whereas  increases. As a result, market

                                                 26
leverage features a jump by more than book leverage, a feature of our impulse responses. After the
period of impact,  will fall along the boundary whereas q approaches 1. This is consistent with a
mean reversion in market leverage, with only a modest response in book leverage, as in the data.
We can also describe in detail the dynamics of liabilities in the model. With delayed accounting,
each point in the boundary is associated with a value v (q ). The dividend policy is modified to:
                                                                                
                                                        (1 + v (q ))
                                 c = 1/                                              .                       (15)
                                                                                
                                                                               1/ 
                                                1 + v (q ) +   vq (1+(  q ))
                                                                    q (q )


The expression reveals that even under delayed accounting, the dividend choice is still governed
by a race between wealth (in the numerator) and substitution effects (in the denominator). The
substitution effect is modified because on the margin, the choice of dividends affects q indirectly.49
Once dividends are determined, to stay at the shadow boundary, issuances {} must satisfy the
restriction that q (q ) = µ /µq . We can obtain a formula for issuances that guarantees that the
bank stays in the shadow boundary:

                                      (q ) = µW (q )  (q ) -  (1 -  (q ))                                    (16)

with the weight given by

                                        (1 +  (q ))      (1 +  (q ))
                               (q )                 /                - q ( q ) .
                                         q (1 - q )       q (1 - q )

The intuition for the slow adjustment of liabilities that we find in the impulse responses is also
found in the formula. Upon a default shock, losses are recognized slowly on the books, at the rate
. As losses are recognized, and q increases, banks must take gradual actions to delever because
their fundamental leverage is too high. The expression for issuances captures how issuances are
chosen to reduce leverage. Leverage has a tendency to fall because retained earnings increase
equity, µW (q ); recall that q (q ) has a negative slope. Hence, the higher the growth in equity,
the less the need to reduce loan issuances to reduce leverage. By contrast, a higher  implies
that losses are recognized faster. Hence, with a higher , the bank requires lower (and possibly
negative) issuances. Since liabilities increase one for one with issuances, the expression captures
how liabilities fall after a default shock. This formula captures the pattern for issuances, which
fall with the rate of loan loss recognition. However, notice that the issuance rate only affects
liabilities slowly, which unlike the version without delayed accounting, is capable of explaining the
slow response of liabilities.
    To summarize, the model with delayed accounting is consistent with dynamics where, upon a
  49
     Because leverage must stay in the boundary, (1 + ) /q (q ) measures the change in q corresponding to a change
in leverage that keeps the bank along the boundary. The change in q effectively has a price of vq .


                                                        27
                         
                                       (q )
                     ¯
                     


                                       (q )     default jump: {q + J q ,  + J  }
               ¯ - J
               
                                                                           ¯q ,  + J  + J
                                               controlled jump: {q + J q + J            ¯ }

                                                       {q, }
                                                             (1) - J 
                     0                                       q
                                                         1


                              Figure 1: Illustration of {, q } dynamics.


default shock, the bank takes quick actions to return to the shadow boundary. Once at the shadow
boundary, the bank continues a slow deleveraging, which induces a slow response of market leverage
and total liabilities, as we observed in the data. Thus, even though there are no loan adjustment
costs, the adjustment of leverage is gradual along the shadow boundary as losses are recognized
slowly in the balance sheet. This slow adjustment forms the basis of our Q-theory.

Delayed accounting and loan adjustment costs.                    We now discuss the dynamics allowing
for loan adjustment costs ( < 1 and  > 0). Loan adjustment costs only introduce inertia to
any attempt to deviate from  = 0, but the mechanics are very similar to those of the earlier
case. From the previous limit cases, we know that banks have a target for leverage that trades
off returns for liquidation risk. We also know that without adjustment costs, upon receiving a
default shock banks delever rapidly to return to the shadow boundary and then drift slowly along
the shadow boundary. Loan adjustment costs slow down the endogenous response on impact and
slightly perturb the dynamics along the shadow boundary.
    Unfortunately, this case must be solved numerically. Figure 8 presents a numerical solution
to v , the drift of  and the policy functions {, c}, for different values of  in the x-axis and for
various cross sections of q . The figure is constructed under the calibration detailed in the following
section. Panel (a) depicts v . The tradeoff between returns and liquidation risk is evident from the
shape of v : for a fixed q , the value v is first increasing, but becomes flatter as leverage approaches
the shadow liquidation boundary. Past the liquidation region, the value function jumps to a value
equal to its liquidation value. From the figures, we can also observe that v is decreasing in q , a
reflection that a bank that seems better capitalized in its books faces less regulatory constraints.
    Panel (b) presents the drift of leverage for various values of q . The figure shows how, in this
complete version of the model, leverage is again mean reverting. The target leverage is the point
where the expected change in  is zero: when leverage is low, the drift is very high, reflecting
the effort to increase leverage. To the right of the shadow boundary, the drift is negative and,

                                                  28
furthermore, very steep, reflecting a slightly smoother version of the jumps that occur without
adjustment costs.
    As before, the behavior of leverage is governed by the bank's payout and lending policies. The
dividend rate in this case solves:

                                                               (1 + v )
                                  c = 1/                                                .                   (17)
                                                ((1 + v ) - v ( + 1))1/

Relative to the dividend policy in Equation (13), the substitution effect is also corrected by the
change in the value function as a result of the change in leverage produced by dividends.
   The loan growth policy solves:

                                                                           (1 - q ) q
                       ((1 + v ) - v ) ·               =              vq              + v .                 (18)
                                                                            ( + 1)
                   marginal cost of change in assets
                                                           marginal benefit of change in financial ratios


The left-hand side is the marginal cost of changing loans, deviations from  . These deviations
cost  in equity, have a marginal value of (1 + v ), but carry an effect by increasing leverage v .
The right-hand side is the marginal benefit of changing the bank's ratios. Panels (c) and (d) of
Figure 8 show how the desire to delever is reflected in the banks loan growth and payout policies.
When leverage is low, the bank has incentives to lever up; it cuts back on dividends and lending.
Close to the liquidation boundary, the bank is eager to delever. It cuts back the growth of loans,
and slashes dividends. The effects are more dramatic the more realistic its books.
    The desire to remain in the neighborhood of the shadow boundary is still present. This is
evident from the invariant distribution depicted in Figure 10, but not from the Equations (17) and
(18), because this desire is encoded in the shape of v which is not evident from the formula. This
is why it is important to describe the mechanics of the model in layers. For completeness, Figure
9, is the analogue of Figure 8, along the q -dimension.


3.3    Calibration and Estimation
We now describe the calibration and estimation procedures and then investigate the model's ability
to reproduce the five facts. We use quarterly data from 1990 Q3 to 2015 Q4, as described in
Section 2, to produce target moments. Thus, all corresponding model moments are also at the
quarterly frequency. To keep the parametrization tractable, we calibrate rL , rD , , , , I , , , 
independently, matching model moments to target moments in the data. Then, conditional on
these calibrated parameters, we jointly estimate {, ,  }, the parameters that govern the delay in
the balance sheet responses. As in Section 2, we break the sample into two periods, corresponding
to the pre- and post-crisis periods, and estimate pre- and post-crisis values for {, ,  } to match
the impulse response functions to return shocks as discussed in Section 2. The parameter values


                                                             29
are listed in Table 2. Table 3 presents both targeted and untargeted moments in the data and the
corresponding model moment.

Calibrated parameters . The exogenous returns on loans and deposits, rL and rD , are respec-
tively set to 1.01% and 0.51%, consistent with the quarterly yield on loans (total interest income
on loans divided by total loans) and the rate banks pay on their debt (total interest expenses
divided by interest bearing liabilities) in bank call reports. These values are consistent with the
calibration in Corbae and D'Erasmo (2019).
    We set the capital requirement parameter  to 92.6% in order to reflect a Tier 1 risk-based
capital ratio requirement of 8%, a value for which a bank is considered well capitalized.50 This
means that banks' book leverage ratio (debt to book equity) cannot exceed 14.
    The parameters {,  } directly speak to our Q-theory. Whereas  accounts for loan loss recog-
nition on impact,  governs the speed of loan-loss recognition over time. We estimate  , but
calibrate  because we have a direct counterpart for . Namely, we set  to 4%. With this value
for , 65% of unrecognized losses are recognized within 10 quarters.51 This delay is consistent with
Figure 2, panel (d), where the net charge-offs taper off by the end of 2010, about two and a half
years after the trough in bank market values.
    In our model, banks choose a book leverage ratio on the shadow boundary. The distance
between the shadow boundary and the liquidation set is determined by the size of the idiosyncratic
loan default shock . Thus, once  is fixed, we pick  = 0.25% to match the ergodic mean of banks'
book leverage ratio to the average pre-crisis book leverage ratio of 10.6. We choose the pre-crisis
period to calibrate this idiosyncratic shock parameter as the post-crisis sample is more likely to
capture the effects of the financial crisis, an aggregate event.
    Market leverage is a function of the market price of equity, which in turn is increasing in
the bank's discount rate, . Therefore, given a value for book leverage which is pinned by the
regulatory parameter,  affects market leverage by moving dividends and, therefore, the market
price of equity. We set  to 0.25% to target an average market leverage of 6.8 for the pre-crisis
period. Note that while most of the parameters discussed in this section are calibrated as if they
influenced only their target moment,  and  alone do not pin down book leverage and market
leverage. We would ideally estimate  and  jointly with  , , and  , if we were not limited by
computational tractability. For this reason, the targets are not matched exactly.
    Finally, given the value for default shocks , the default intensity  is set to match a mean net
charge-off rate of 0.48% per year in the full sample. We use the full sample of net charge-off rates
to allow for a larger time series as credit events are rare. Also, because investors are risk-neutral,
their discount factor I approximately equals the average market return on bank shares. Thus, we
set I to 3.5% to approximately produce that value for bank market equity returns.
 50
      See the publication by the Federal Reserve.
 51
      See Appendix C.7 for the derivation.


                                                    30
Estimated parameters. We estimate {, ,  }, the parameters that govern the speed of the
responses of the bank's balance sheet, using simulated method of moments. Each parameter in
this subset is directly associated with a different friction that impacts the balance sheet adjustment
process after a loan default shock. Thus, these parameters determine the model's ability to replicate
facts 4 and 5.
    We estimate these parameters to match the impulse response functions of market leverage,
book leverage, and bank liabilities to a return shock in the data. These impulse responses ren-
der a transparent identification: the sensitivity of loan adjustment costs,  , governs the cost of
deleveraging through asset sales. Thus,  impacts the speed at which banks can delever by selling
liabilities along the shadow boundary. A higher  translates into a slower response of liabilities to
a return shock. In turn, the desire to smooth dividends is governed by --see Equation (17). Thus,
 governs the speed at which leverage falls through the effect of dividends on retained earnings. A
lower value of  turns the bank's objective closer to linear and makes the bank deleverage faster by
cutting back dividends and increasing retained earnings. Hence, the response of market leverage is
informative about . Finally, recall that  governs how much of a loan default shock is recognized
on impact. Therefore,  directly maps into the response of book leverage, on impact. For that
reason, because  governs the response only on impact, we only use the first period response of
book leverage as a target to identify  .
    To produce analogue estimated impulse responses to return shocks in the model, we solve and
simulate the model. We run the same specification for the impulse responses of Section (2). Given
that the impulse responses of liabilities and market leverage pre­crisis and post-crisis differ, we
estimate values for  and  for both periods; we label these values as {pre ,  pre } and {post ,  post },
correspondingly for these estimates. We construct excess return shocks by first calculating the
realized equity returns between adjacent quarters and the cross-sectional equity return. The bank
specific return shock is then just the difference between a bank's individual realized equity return
and the cross-sectional average of the realized equity returns. The latter absorbs any potentially
time varying aggregate effects on banks' equity returns, similar to only using a time fixed-effect
specification. Formally, the model is overidentified because each impulse response in the data
contains effectively 21 moments, one for each h in Equation (1). However, model generated
moments such as these are highly correlated so the effective degree of over-identification is lower.52
    To generate a panel of banks as in the data, we first compute the stationary distribution
by simulating 10,000 banks until the cross-sectional mean and standard deviation of  and q
are approximately constant. We then take this cross-section as initial condition and simulate 66
quarters that represent the pre-crisis period. With this sample, we run the same pre-crisis cross-
sectional regressions on model simulated data, as we did with the actual data, to estimate pre
and  pre . To simulate the post-crisis, we hit the stationary pre-crisis economy with an aggregate
shock and continue simulating for an additional 33 quarters. That is, to estimate the post-crisis
 52
      Each impulse response is well approximated by only two moments, a jump on impact and a persistence.


                                                       31
parameters, post and  post , we start banks from their pre-crisis stationary distribution and hit all
banks at once with a 2.5% aggregate loan default shock in one quarter. We chose a 2.5% default
shock as this number is in line with the accumulated loan default shocks from 2008 through 2010,
consistent with our assumed length of loan default recognition. Once again, we estimate the same
regression and construct impulse response functions on the model simulated data as we did with
actual bank data. We discuss the values from this estimation and the resulting model fit in the
next paragraph.

Estimated Values, Model Fit, and Interpretation. To match the initial impulse response
of book leverage,  needs to be small, about 1%. The impact response of book leverage to the
return shocks does not change across periods. For this reason, we estimate  only for the pre-crisis
period. The pre-crisis period estimates of the other parameters are pre = 2.3 and  pre = 0.01. For
this low adjustment cost value, the effect of  on the model is negligible in the pre-crisis in the
sense that the dynamics of the model are almost identical to not having adjustment costs. This is
interesting because it means that delayed accounting--and dividend smoothing--can account for
all of the slow balance sheet adjustment after shocks.
    The post-crisis impulse responses of market leverage and bank liabilities produce values of
 post
      = 1.7 and  post = 4.0. This means that unlike in the pre-crisis period, the post-crisis period
model estimation requires loan adjustment costs to fit the data. The estimation thus reflects some
of the narratives around the financial crisis: a higher value of  implies that banks face higher
costs to selling loans. This feature fits the narrative of aggravated fire sale externalities during the
post-crisis period. In turn, a lower value for  makes the banks' objective closer to being linear.
This means that banks accept larger adjustments to dividend payouts and, therefore, can rely
more on internal equity accumulation as a mechanism to delever. This estimate is in line with the
fact that banks cut dividends during the period.53 We return to these results when we discuss the
model's ability to reproduce the impulse responses again in Section 3.4.
    To conclude the evaluation of the calibration, Table 3 compares the moments generated by
the model and those obtained from the data: our model fits most data moments well, with the
exception of pre-crisis leverage and (untargeted) dividends. The model fits the charge-off rates
both in the pre-crisis as in the post-crisis. Average market-equity returns in the model match the
data during the pre-crisis sample, but differ for the crisis sample. This is because in both cases, we
calibrate parameters to their pre-crisis values. With a value of 9.4, the model overshoots its 6.8 data
target for market leverage during the pre-crisis period. As noted above, market leverage depends
on more parameters than just  so matching market leverage closely is more difficult without a
computationally intensive joint estimation. The model fits the untargeted market leverage moment
during the post crisis period perfectly. The model hits book leverage in the targeted pre-crisis
period, but does not generate the same reduction in book leverage as in the data. This is not
 53
      See for example, https://www.ft.com/content/7a4aa5bc-0a85-11de-95ed-0000779fd2ac.


                                                  32
surprising because our model abstracts from an increase in bank capital requirements during the
post-crisis period that forced banks to decrease book leverage. Finally, our model generates a
similar level in the market-to-book equity ratio during the pre-crisis (1.53 in the data vs. 1.32 in
the model) and a reduction in the market-to-book equity ratio in the post crisis (0.90 in the data
vs. 1.108 in the model). Thus, our simple model explains about one-third of the reduction in the
market-to-book ratio of banks from the pre- to the post-crisis.
    The bottom panel of Table 3 shows the cross-sectional average and standard deviations of key
model variables. It also includes the two unobservable state variables of our model: fundamental
leverage  and q , the discrepancy between banks' fundamental value of assets and their corre-
sponding accounting value. Fundamental leverage is 18 in the pre-crisis period and jumps to 22 in
response to the 2.5% aggregate default shock. The average value for q is 0.977, implying that fun-
damental values and accounting values differ by 2.3%. The post-crisis q is slightly lower compared
to the pre-crisis q . The loan growth rate is about 2.4% and the growth rate of equity is around
1.2%. Our model also produces values of equity (equity price) of 1.91 in the pre-crisis and 1.97
in the post-crisis. The valuation is roughly constant across periods. While bank dividends fall
slightly during the post-crisis period but banks operate with higher leverage (and therefore higher
equity growth).
    The distribution of the state variables and market leverage are reported in Figure 10. Panel
(a) shows how the distribution of {, q } traces out a shadow boundary. Panel (b) contrasts the
distribution of market leverage with the distribution in the data. Although book leverage has
virtually no dispersion, market leverage captures substantial variation driven entirely by variations
in q .


3.4    Taking Stock: Matching facts 1 to 5
Fact 1. Market and book equity value divergence. The first fact we highlight in the paper
is the divergence between book and market bank equity values during the financial crisis of 2008.
We now discuss the extent to which variations in Tobin's Q can be explained with our model. In
our Q-theory, Tobin's Q can diverge through changes in the price per share s and the discrepancy
between book and fundamental values, captured by q . To that end, we produce an approximation
of the law of motion of q in our model (see Equation 10). We denote by x the aggregate version
of a variable x. The law of motion for aggregate q is approximately

                              dq
                                  ( + ) (1 - q ) q -  (1 -  q ) q .
                              dt

Setting dq /dt = 0, we obtain an approximate value of q = 0.977 using our pre-crisis model values
(see Tables 2 and 3). This approximated value is identical to the average simulated value of q
reported in Table 3. With an aggregate loan default shock of 2.5%, common to all banks, the


                                                 33
jump in the aggregate q is approximately,

                                             (1 -  q )
                                   Jq = -              q  -2.4%.
                                            (1 -  q )

Thus, since the initial q is close to one and  is close to zero, the jump in q is almost equal to the
size of the aggregate default shock.
    We can decompose that jump in Tobin's Q into the effect that is exclusively attributed to the
jump in q as opposed to a change in banks' stock price. This approximate response is given by

                               Q due to q  J q · ( + 1) = -45%.

The approximation states that the jump in Tobin's Q attributed to q is the jump in J q times
fundamental leverage. The value of this approximation is rather large. A 2.5% shock in loan losses
gets amplified almost twenty times. Recall that although book and market leverage are around
10, fundamental leverage is about 20, due to the initial accounting differences. Hence, although q
is close to 98% in normal times, implying that books are an almost accurate description of reality,
small unrecognized losses get magnified by fundamental leverage, accounting for a decline of almost
45% in Tobin's Q.
    The quality of this approximation is good and telling of the contribution of delayed accounting
in rationalizing the changes in Tobin's Q in the data. In the simulations used to construct Table
3, we feed the model with a 2.5% loan default shock. With this shock, on impact the induced
reduction in average Tobin's Q at the moment of the shock is 28%. In the simulations, the isolated
effect of little q on the drop in big Q is 53%, close to the analytic approximation above. The
overall effect is offset by an increase in the market value per unit of fundamental wealth, s, which
increases by 25%; recall that the marginal value s increases with the jump in . Thus, the 28%
drop in Q that our model can generate accounts for two thirds of the change in the Tobin's Q
during the 2008 financial crisis which fell by 42%. Our Q-theory explains this large portion of the
decline without changes in aggregate risk-premia, any changes in the regulatory landscape, or any
decline in implicit government guarantees.

Fact 2. Predictive Power. Our second fact of interest is the predictive power of Tobin's Q in
terms of book-equity returns and loan charge-off rates up to even two years. Our model captures
this effect because market values capture losses that are unrecognized in books. We replicate
Figure 3 with data generated by the model (see Figure 13 in the Appendix). This figure shows
that market equity contains predictive power for return on equity and loan losses over and above
the information contained in book equity. To see why, recall that without considering the changes
in the price per unit of real equity, upon a default shock, returns fall approximately by J W . A
bank's charge-off rate per unit of equity is approximately  · (1/q - 1) ( + 1) . Since, the jump J q


                                                 34
is correlated with the jump J W , the predictability follows by construction.

Fact 3. Equity Buffer. The third fact highlights that banks keep a buffer of book equity away
from the maximal leverage allowed by regulation. Earlier we discussed that liquidation is not
desirable because of liquidation costs. For this reason, banks stay at a shadow boundary, which
guarantees solvency in case of a default shock event. Note that in our model, while the default event
is random, the size of the default shock is not. In our model, average book leverage is 12.4, almost
2 points below the maximal admissible value given the regulatory constraint. The model also
predicts that in a recession, the fraction of banks near the regulatory constraint increases. While
our model features little cross-sectional variation in book leverage, it captures some of the cross-
sectional dispersion in market leverage as can be seen in Figure 11b. All cross-sectional dispersion
in market leverage must come from dispersion in equity valuation and cross-sectional differences in
fundamental value to accounting value of bank assets as our model features negligible dispersion
in book leverage. Thus, even though we abstract from features in the data that could generate
dispersion in book leverage, for example different business models, the accounting mechanism alone
generates dispersion in market leverage.

Fact 4. Target leverage and slow adjustments. Banks appear to have a target leverage ratio
but respond only slowly to deviations from it (see the impulse response estimation described in
Section 2). Figure 12a compares the pre-crisis impulse responses to return shocks of total liabilities
(left panel) and market leverage (right panel) of the model with the data. The black lines represent
the average estimated response from the data--the shaded area their 95% confidence interval. The
blue lines represent the analogue impulse response in the model. The red line represents the model
responses corresponding to the model without balance sheet adjustment costs and accounting
frictions.
    The figure shows that the model generates an initial (mechanical) jump and slow adjustment
of market leverage as well as the slow adjustment of liabilities as in the data. Note that in the
pre-crisis period, our Q­theory does not rely on loan adjustment costs to reproduce the data as 
is near zero. Once we allow for accounting values to differ from fundamental values, i.e.,  < 1,
our model does not require further adjustment costs to generate slow adjustments of the liabilities.
The red lines in Figure 12a also show that a dividend smoothing motive cannot account for the
impulse response function of the data without accounting frictions. In fact, without accounting
or balance sheet frictions (red lines), banks immediately reduce assets in response to a negative
wealth shock leaving leverage unchanged.

Fact 5. Post-crisis leverage adjustment. During the crisis and immediate post-crisis period,
bank leverage adjusted faster compared to the pre-crisis period. Unlike the pre-crisis, adjustments
in leverage were driven by increases in equity. The response of assets as captured by the response


                                                 35
in liabilities was slower during this period. To capture these features, our model needs higher
balance sheet adjustment costs and a lower dividend smoothing motive as captured by a higher
estimated value for  and lower estimated value for , respectively. A higher estimated value for
 in the post-crisis means that selling assets is costlier. These post-crisis estimates are consistent
with several narratives regarding the aggravation of frictions during the crisis. The reduction in 
during the crisis/post crisis period means that the model responds to shocks with an increase in
retained earnings (and therefore a reduction in dividends) that leads to more equity. The estimated
lower value for  could reflect pressures by regulators to cut dividends during the crisis to bolster
banks' equity position. All in all, our Q-theory generates all five facts fairly well.


3.5    Effects of Accounting Rules
In the previous sections, we argued that delayed accounting is key to explain the five facts this
paper highlights. But why should we care about accounting rules? We argue that a reform toward
more transparent accounting rules, accounting that leads to faster loss recognition, involves a
tradeoff that policy makers should be aware off. Namely, faster accounting involves a tradeoff
between the scale of bank losses and the speed of adjustment after these losses.
    To highlight that tradeoff, we solve the model for different values of . Recall that a lower
 means that losses are more slowly recognized. Lower values of  have the interpretation of
accounting rules that are less transparent. In the model, a lowering  has effects on the distribution
of state variables: on one hand it lowers the average q and on the other, it increases the fundamental
leverage, . Indeed, lower values of  provide banks with more slack to circumvent regulatory
constraints and this manifests in a higher fundamental leverage and a greater discrepancy between
the fundamental value and the book value of loans. Figure 13a reports cross-sectional means of q
and , as we vary  keeping other parameters in the pre-crisis values. The negative relationship
between q and  is evident from the figure. Strikingly, although the fundamental leverage ratio 
differs for different accounting rules, average book leverage is constant in each of these equilibria.
According to the model, to a regulator that uses accounting leverage to gauge the health of the
financial system, all of these economies will look the same. Yet, laxer accounting rules increases
the potential equity losses and will produce greater assets sales in response to those losses. This
feature highlights one aspect of the tradeoff: laxer accounting rules can lead to greater potential
losses.
    The other aspect of the tradeoff is that laxer accounting rules allow for a smoother adjustment
process to those equity losses. To see this, Figure 13b reports how bank loans respond to a negative
net worth shock, depending on . The lower the , the smaller the decline in bank loans in response
to a negative wealth shock. Given a 10% negative wealth shock, our baseline calibration of  = 4%
implies a 6% decline in loans after 5 years. Lowering  to 3% reduces the decline to 3.7%, while
with a value of  of 5%, loans fall by 7%. The reason for this pattern is that by delaying losses,


                                                 36
banks no longer need to sell additional loans to keep their book leverage constant. In that sense,
delayed accounting acts like an automatic bank-specific countercyclical buffer.
    We can transparently represent this tradeoff from the model's equilibrium equations. One side
of the tradeoff, the increased effect on risk (equity losses), can be read from how a lower  leads to
a higher  that increases -J W in Equation 8. The other side of the tradeoff, the slower adjustment
of liabilities after a default shock, can be read from how a lower  leads to a smaller reduction in
 in Equation 16.
    The result connects our model with the debate on whether accounting rules should incorporate
market based information to improve macro-prudential regulation. In the paper, we argued that
market values incorporate information on losses much faster than book values. Thus we can
envision how incorporating market values to accounting would increase . We also discussed
how delayed accounting can follow from either the backward looking nature of book values and
or evergreening, the continuous debt rollover of non-performing loans in order to avoid booking
equity losses. The literature has identified another tradeoff: On the one hand, marking assets
to market can exacerbate fire sale dynamics (Laux and Leuz, 2010; Ellul et al., 2011; Shleifer
and Vishny, 2011). If in particular market values are driven by risk premia, regulation should
insulate banks from changes in risk-premia that are not germane to the health of the banking
industry. On the other hand, the discretion in accounting rules opens the door to evergreening
which contributes to the creation of zombie loans and drags economic efficiency, Caballero, Hoshi
and Kashyap (2008); Huizinga and Laeven (2012); Blattner, Farinha and Rebelo (2019). While
a welfare analysis that quantifies this additional tradeoff is beyond the scope of this paper, we
believe that the race between the size and smoothing out of equity losses that we illustrate here
should also be part of that active tradeoff.


4    Conclusion
This paper summarizes five empirical facts about the dynamics of bank leverage. We use these
facts to explore what features banking models need to explain the data. Our empirical findings
suggest a theory wherein banks target market leverage, but where adjustments to that target are
gradual. A comparison between pre- and post-crisis responses suggests that, in contrast to the
pre-crisis period, in the post-crisis banks relied more on retained earnings than on asset sales to
readjust market leverage back to target.
    The paper presents a heterogeneous-bank model that distinguishes book from market values.
In our model, both measures of equity matter for banking decisions. A novel feature is that
banks have the ability to delay the recognition of losses on their books. The model produces an
endogenous target for leverage and features adjustment costs to the resale of assets. The model
reproduces the impulse responses that we estimated from the cross-sectional data. Strikingly,
the estimation highlights the exclusive role of delayed loss accounting to explain the data, and

                                                 37
puts little weight on standard adjustment costs. We also demonstrate that regulatory reforms
designed to accelerate loss recognition introduce a tradeoff between the scale of equity losses and
the posterior adjustment process.
    The model highlights the essential frictions that are necessary to reproduce the five empirical
facts. As part of the continuous fine-tuning process of banking models, future work can use our
model as a building block to study these frictions in general equilibrium.




                                                38
References
Acharya, Viral V. and Stephen G. Ryan, "Banks' Financial Reporting and Financial System
 Stability," Journal of Accounting Research, May 2016, 54 (2). 23, 2.3, A.3

Adrian, Tobias and Hyun Song Shin, "Liquidity and leverage," Journal of financial interme-
 diation, 2010, 19 (3), 418­437. 1, 2.1

   and , "Procyclical leverage and value-at-risk," The Review of Financial Studies, 2013, 27
  (2), 373­403. 2, 4, 7, 1

   and Nina Boyarchenko, "Intermediary Leverage Cycles and Financial Stability," 2013. New
  York Federal Reserve, Staff Report No. 567. 2, 1

  , Erkko Etula, and Tyler Muir, "Financial intermediaries and the cross-section of asset
  returns," The Journal of Finance, 2014, 69 (6), 2557­2596. 1

  , Nina Boyarchenko, and Hyun Song Shin, "On the Scale of Financial Intermediaries,"
  2016. New York Federal Reserve, Staff Report No. 743. 1

Atkeson, Andrew G, Adrien d'Avernas, Andrea L Eisfeldt, and Pierre-Olivier Weill,
 "Government Guarantees and the Valuation of American Banks," in "NBER Macroeconomics
 Annual 2018, volume 33," University of Chicago Press, 2018. 12, 42

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, "International Convergence of Capital Measure-
 ment and Capital Standards," Technical Report, Bank for International Settlements July 1998.
 27

  , "International Convergence of Capital Measurement and Capital Standards: A Revised Frame-
  work - Comprehensive Version," Technical Report, Bank for International Settlements 2006. 27

  , "Basel III: A global regulatory framework for more resilient banks and banking systems,"
  Technical Report, Bank for International Settlements June 2011. 27

Begenau, J. and T. Landvoigt, "Financial Regulation in a Quantitative Model of the Modern
 Banking System," Unpublished working paper. Stanford University and University of Pennsyl-
 vania, 2020. 2

Begenau, Juliane, "Capital requirements, risk choice, and liquidity provision in a business-cycle
 model," Journal of Financial Economics, 2020, 136 (2), 355­378. 2, 1

   and Erik Stafford, "Do Banks have an Edge?," Available at SSRN 3095550, 2019. 42

  , Monika Piazzesi, and Martin Schneider, "Banks' risk exposures," Technical Report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research 2015. 42

Berger, Allen N., Richard J. Herring, and Giorgio P. Szeg¨        i¿oe, "The role of capital in
 financial institutions," Journal of Banking & Finance, 1995, 19 (3), 393 ­ 430. The Role of
 Capital in Financial Institutions. 1

Bernanke, Ben and Mark Gertler, "Agency Costs, Net Worth and Business Fluctuations,"
 The American Economic Review, March 1989, 79 (1), 14­31. 13

                                               39
Bianchi, Javier and Saki Bigio, "Banks, Liquidity Management and Monetary Policy," 2017.
  Unpublished Manuscript. 1, 39

Blank, Michael, Samuel G Hanson, Jeremy C Stein, and Aditya Vikram Sunderam,
  "How Should US Bank Regulators Respond to the COVID-19 Crisis?," 2020. 1

Blattner, Laura, Luisa Farinha, and Francisca Rebelo, "When losses turn into loans: The
  cost of undercapitalized banks," 2019. 3, 2.3, 40, 3.5

Brunnermeier, Markus K. and Yuliy Sannikov, "A Macroeconomic Model with a Financial
 Sector," American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (2), 379­421. 2, 1

Bushman, Robert M., "Transparency, Accounting Discretion, and Bank Stability," FRBNY
 Economic Policy Review, August 2016, pp. 129­149. 23, 2.3, A.3

Caballero, Ricardo J., Takeo Hoshi, and Anil K. Kashyap, "Zombie Lending and Depressed
 Restructuring in Japan," The American Economic Review, 2008, 98 (5), 1943­1977. 1, 2.3, 40,
 3.5

Corbae, Dean and Pablo D'Erasmo, "Capital requirements in a quantitative model of banking
 industry dynamics," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2019. 2, 1, 3.3

Dang, Tri Vi, Gary Gorton, Bengt Holmstr¨      om, and Guillermo Ordonez, "Banks as
 secret keepers," The American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (4), 1005­1029. 8, 1, 2.3

DeMarzo, Peter and Zhiguo He, "Leverage Dynamics without Commitment," 2016. NBER
 Working Paper No. 22799. 1

Diamond, Douglas W., "Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring," The Review of
 Economic Studies, 1984, 51 (3), pp. 393­414. 1

  , "Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring," Review of Economic Studies, 1984, 51,
  393­414. 2.3

   and Philip H. Dybvig, "Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity," Journal of Political
  Economy, 1983, 91, 401­417. 13

   and Raghuram G. Rajan, "A Theory of Bank Capital," The Journal of Finance, 2000, 55
  (6), pp. 2431­2465. 13

Dickens, Ross N, K Michael Casey, and Joseph A Newman, "Bank dividend policy:
 explanatory factors," Quarterly journal of Business and Economics, 2002, pp. 3­12. 3.1

Duffie, Darrell, "Presidential Address: Asset Price Dynamics with Slow-Moving Capital," The
 Journal of Finance, 2010, LXV (4). 10

Ellul, Andrew, Chotibhak Jotikasthira, and Christian T Lundblad, "Regulatory pressure
  and fire sales in the corporate bond market," Journal of Financial Economics, 2011, 101 (3),
  596­620. 3.5

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, "Common Risk Factors in the Returns on Stock
  and Bonds," Journal of Financial Economics, 1993, 33, 131­156. 2.2

                                             40
Francis, Jennifer, J. Douglas Hanna, and Linda Vincent, "Causes and Effects of Discre-
  tionary Asset Write-Offs," Journal of Accounting Research, 1996. A.3

Frank, Murrayz and Vidhan K Goyal, "Trade-off and Pecking Order Theories of Debt,"
  Handbook of Empirical Corporate Finance: Empirical Corporate Finance, 2011, 2, 135. 9

Gandhi, Priyank and Hanno Lustig, "Size anomalies in US bank stock returns," The Journal
 of Finance, 2015, 70 (2), 733­768. 2.2

General Accounting Office, "Report to the Congress on the Bank Insurance Fund," Technical
 Report, General Accounting Office September 1990. 3

Gertler, M., N. Kiyotaki, and A. Prestipino, "Chapter 16 - Wholesale Banking and Bank
 Runs in Macroeconomic Modeling of Financial Crises," in John B. Taylor and Harald Uhlig,
 eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics, Vol. 2, Elsevier, 2016, pp. 1345 ­ 1425. 1

Gertler, Mark and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, "Financial intermediation and credit policy in business
 cycle analysis," Handbook of Monetary Economics, 2010, 3, 547. 1

  , , and Albert Queralto, "Financial crises, bank risk exposure and government financial
  policy," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2012, 59, S17­S34. 1

Goh, Beng Wee, Dan Li, Jeffrey Ng, and Kevin Ow Yong, "Market pricing of banks' fair
 value assets reported under SFAS 157 since the 2008 financial crisis," Journal of Accounting and
 Public Policy, jan 2015. 58

Gomes, Jo~ao, Urban Jermann, and Lukas Schmid, "Sticky Leverage," American Economic
 Review, 2016, 106 (12), 3800­3828. 1

Gomez, Matthieu, Augustin Landier, David Sraer, and David Thesmar, "Banks? ex-
 posure to interest rate risk and the transmission of monetary policy," Journal of Monetary
 Economics, 2020. 42

Gorton, Gary and Guillermo Ordonez, "Collateral Crises," 2011. 8

Gropp, Reint and Florian Heider, "The determinants of bank capital structure," Review of
 Finance, 2010, 14, 587­622. 6

Hachem, Kinda, "Relationship lending and the transmission of monetary policy," Journal of
 Monetary Economics, 2011, 58 (6), 590 ­ 600. 1

Haddad, Valentin and David A Sraer, "The banking view of bond risk premia," Technical
 Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2019. 42

Harris, Trevor, Urooj Khan, and Doron Nissim, "The Expected Rate of Credit Losses on
 Banks' Loan Portfolios," 2013. A.3

Hart, Oliver and John Moore, "A Theory of Debt Based on the Inalienability of Human
 Capital," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1994, 109 (4), pp. 841­879. 13

Hayashi, Fumio, "Tobin's marginal q and average q: A neoclassical interpretation," Economet-
 rica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 1982, pp. 213­224. 1, 2.3

                                               41
He, Zhiguo and Arvind Krishnamurthy, "A Model of Capital and Crises," Review of Eco-
 nomic Studies, 2012, 79(2), 735­777. 1

   and    , "Intermediary asset pricing," The American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (2), 732­770.
  2, 1

  , Bryan Kelly, and Asaf Manela, "Intermediary Asset Pricing: New Evidence From Many
  Asset Classes," Journal of Financial Economics, 2017, 126 (1), 1­35. 1, 4, 2.1

  , In Gu Khang, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, "Balance sheet adjustments during the 2008
  crisis," IMF Economic Review, 2010, 58 (1), 118­156. 4

Hennessy, Christopher A. and Toni M. Whited, "Debt Dynamics," The Journal of Finance,
 2005, 60 (3), 1129­1165. 9

Holmstrom, Bengt and Jean Tirole, "Financial intermediation, loanable funds, and the real
 sector," the Quarterly Journal of economics, 1997, 112 (3), 663­691. 13

   and , "Private and Public Supply of Liquidity," Journal of Political Economy, August 1998,
  106 (1). 13

Huizinga, Harry and Luc Laeven, "Bank valuation and accounting discretion during a financial
 crisis," Journal of Financial Economics, December 2012, 106 (3), 614­634. 3.5, A.3

Jermann, Urban and Vincenzo Quadrini, "Macroeconomic Effects of Financial Shocks,"
  American Economic Review, February 2012, 102 (1), 238­71. 1

Kisin, Roni and Asaf Manela, "The shadow cost of bank capital requirements," The Review
 of Financial Studies, 2016, 29 (7), 1780­1820. 27

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro and John Moore, "Credit Cycles," Journal of Political Economy, 1997,
 105, 211­248. 13

Kolev, Kalin, "Do Investors Perceive Marking-to-Model as Marking-to-Myth? Early Evidence
 from FAS 157 Disclosure," 2009. 58

Kraus, Alan and Robert H Litzenberger, "A state-preference model of optimal financial
 leverage," The Journal of Finance, 1973, 28 (4), 911­922. 9

Kronmal, Richard A., "Spurious Correlation and the Fallacy of the Ratio Standard Revisited,"
 Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series A (Statistics in Society), 1993, 156 (3), 379­392.
 25

Laux, Christian and Christian Leuz, "Did fair-value accounting contribute to the financial
  crisis?," The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2010, 24 (1), 93­118. 3, 1, 2.3, 3.5, A.3, 58

Leary, Mark T. and Roni Michaely, "Determinants of Dividend Smoothing: Empirical Evi-
  dence," The Review of Financial Studies, 10 2011, 24 (10), 3197­3249. 3.1

Leland, Hayne E. and David H. Pyle, "Informational Asymmetries, Financial Structure, and
  Financial Intermediation," The Journal of Finance, 1977, 32 (2), pp. 371­387. 1, 9


                                                42
   and     , "Informational Asymmetries, Financial Structure, and Financial Intermediation,"
  Journal of Finance, 1977, 32, 371­387. 1, 2.3

Lintner, John, "Distribution of incomes of corporations among dividends, retained earnings, and
  taxes," The American economic review, 1956, 46 (2), 97­113. 3.1

Martinez-Miera, David and Javier Suarez, "A macroeconomic model of endogenous systemic
 risk taking," 2011. Unpublished Manuscript. 1

Milbradt, Konstantin, "Level 3 Assets: Booking Profits and Concealing Losses," The Review
 of Financial Studies, 2012, 25 (1), 55­95. 1, 2.3

Myers, Stewart C., "Determinants of corporate borrowing," Journal of Financial Economics,
 1977, 5 (2), 147 ­ 175. 1

Myers, Stewart C, "The capital structure puzzle," The journal of finance, 1984, 39 (3), 574­592.
 9

Myers, Stewart C. and Nicholas S. Majluf, "Corporate financing and investment decisions
 when firms have information that investors do not have," Journal of Financial Economics, 1984,
 13 (2), 187 ­ 221. 1

Nickell, Stephen, "Biases in dynamic models with fixed effects," Econometrica: Journal of the
 Econometric Society, 1981, pp. 1417­1426. 28

Nu~
  no, Galo and Carlos Thomas, "Bank Leverage Cycles," American Economic Journal:
 Macroeconomics, April 2017, 9 (2), 32­72. 1

O'Hara, Maureen, "A Dynamic Theory of the Banking Firm," The Journal of Finance, 1983,
 38 (1), pp. 127­140. 1, 9

Plantin, Guillaume and Jean Tirole, "Marking to market versus taking to market," American
  Economic Review, 2018, 108 (8), 2246­76. 1

Rampini, Adriano A. and S. Viswanathan, "Financial Intermediary Capital," 2012. Working
 paper, Duke. 1

Rios-Rull, Jose Victor, Tamon Takamura, and Yaz Terajima, "Banking Dynamics, Market
 Discipline and Capital," March 2020. 1

Shachar, Or, "Exposing The Exposed: Intermediation Capacity in the Credit Default Swap
  Market," 2012. Working paper, NYU. 1

Shleifer, Andrei and Robert Vishny, "Fire Sales in Finance and Macroeconomics," The Jour-
  nal of Economic Perspectives, 2011, 25 (1), pp. 29­48. 1, 3.1, 3.5

   and Robert W. Vishny, "The Limits of Arbitrage," The Journal of Finance, 1997, 52 (1),
  pp. 35­55. 1, 2.3

Song, Chang Joon, Wayne B. Thomas, and Han Yi, "Value relevance of FAS No. 157 Fair
  Value hierarchy information and the impact of corporate governance mechanisms," Accounting
  Review, 2010, 85, 1375­1410. 58

                                              43
Tella, Sebastian Di and Pablo Kurlat, "Why are banks exposed to monetary policy?," Amer-
  ican Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, Forthcoming. 39

Tirole, Jean, "Overcoming Adverse Selection: How Public Intervention Can Restore Market
  Functioning," January 2011. American Economic Review, forthcoming. 1

Townsend, Robert, "Optimal Contracts and Competitive Markets with Costly State Verifica-
  tion," Journal of Economic Theory, 1979, 22, 265­293. 13

Wang, Olivier, "Banks, low interest rates, and monetary policy transmission," Available at SSRN
 3520134, 2018. 42

Williamson, Stephen D., "Costly monitoring, financial intermediation, and equilibrium credit
 rationing," Journal of Monetary Economics, 1986, 18 (2), 159 ­ 179. 1




                                              44
                          Figure 1: Book Equity and Market Equity for Bank Holding Companies.
                     Book Equity and Market Capitalization of BHCs                                                                  Bank of America                                    Citigroup




                                                                                                                     300
        1500




                                                                                                                                                                  300
                                                                                                                     200




                                                                                                                                                                  200
                                                                                                                     100




                                                                                                                                                                  100
           1000
 USD Billion




                                                                                                       USD Billion
                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                     J.P. Morgan                                   Wells Fargo




                                                                                                                     300




                                                                                                                                                                  300
        500




                                                                                                                     200




                                                                                                                                                                  200
                                                                                                                     100




                                                                                                                                                                  100
        0




            2000q1   2002q1   2004q1   2006q1     2008q1             2010q1   2012q1   2014q1




                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                      2000q1   2004q1    2008q1    2012q1          2000q1     2004q1    2008q1     2012q1
                               Equity                                 Equity (Public BHCs)
                               Preferred Equity                       Market Capitalization                                     Equity                Market Capitalization                Preferred Equity

Notes: These figures show data on book equity, market capitalization, and preferred equity for BHCs. Book equity
and preferred equity data come from the FR Y-9C, and market capitalization data is based on CRSP data. All
variables converted to 2012 Q1 dollars using the seasonally-adjusted GDP deflator. The left panel shows aggregate
series, excluding new entrants such as Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanely. "Equity" refers to book equity for all
BHCs in the sample and "Equity (Public BHCs)" refers to only publicly-traded BHCs that we can match to CRSP
data. We also show preferred equity for all banks and the aggregate market capitalization, i.e. shares outstanding
times the share price, of the publically traded BHCs in our sample. The right panel shows the equivalent time series
for the four largest BHCs.




                                                                Figure 2: Decomposition of Net Charge-offs
                                                                                              Net Charge-Offs
                                                                60
                                                                40
                                                  USD Billion
                                                                20
                                                                0




                                                                 2000q1   2002q1   2004q1     2006q1   2008q1              2010q1    2012q1       2014q1

                                                                                   Other                        IndividualLoans                   CandI
                                                                                   RELoans                      PLL

Notes: This figure shows aggregate net charge-offs for different categories (area chart) and aggregate loan loss
provisions (solid black line). The data source are FR Y-9C reports. Net charge-offs for loans are defined as
charge-offs minus recoveries. We decompose the net charge-offs into loans backed by real estate, commercial and
industrial (C&I) loans, loans to individuals (e.g., such as credit card loans), and all other loans (e.g. interbank
loans, agricultural loans, and loans to foreign governments).
                                                                         Figure 3: Market equity contains more cash-flow relevant information than book equity




                                                                                                                                                .4
                                                                   .2




                                                                                                                          log(1 + Return on Equity Over Next Year)
                          log(1 + Return on Equity Over Past Year)




                                                                                                                                                           .2
                                                          .1




                                                                                                                                                   0
                                        -.1        0




                                                                                                                                        -.2
                                -.2




                                                                                                                              -.4
                                                 -.3




                                                                                                                                                -.6
                                                                        -2           -1                       0       1                                              -2   -1                       0       1
                                                                                          log(Market-to-Book Ratio)                                                            log(Market-to-Book Ratio)

                                                                                            2006 Q1       2009 Q1                                                                2006 Q1       2009 Q1




                                                                                                                                                .01
                                                 .08
                          log(1 + Share of Loans Delinquent)




                                                                                                                                                    .008
                                                                                                                          log(1 + Net Charge-Off Rate)
                                                     .06
46




                                                                                                                                            .006
                                         .04




                                                                                                                          .002     .004
                              .02




                                                                                                                                                0
                                                 0




                                                                        -2           -1                       0       1                                              -2   -1                       0       1
                                                                                          log(Market-to-Book Ratio)                                                            log(Market-to-Book Ratio)

                                                                                            2006 Q1       2009 Q1                                                                2006 Q1       2009 Q1

     Notes: These figures show cross-sectional binned scatter plots of log outcomes on the log market-to-book equity ratio for BHCs, in 2006 Q1 and 2009 Q1.
     All plots control for log book equity by residualizing the variables on log book equity, and then adding back the mean of each variable to maintain centering.
     Data on market capitalization are from CRSP, and all other data are from the FR Y-9C. ROE over the past year is defined as book net income over the
     last four quarters divided by book equity four quarters ago; ROE over the next year is defined the one lead of this variable (i.e. profits over the next four
     quarters divided by current book equity). The share of loans delinquent is the ratio of loans past due 30 days or more plus loans in non-accrual, over total
     loans. The net charge-off rate is loan charge-offs over the next quarter minus loan recoveries over the next quarter, divided by total loans this quarter. In
     all plots, Irwin Financial Corporation is dropped from the sample in both time periods, because it is an extreme outlier in 2009 Q1 (a few months before its
     failure in September 2009).
                  Figure 4: Book and Market Leverage of Bank Holding Companies
                             25
                             20
                             15
                             10
                             5                                     Leverage Ratios




                              2000q1    2002q1       2004q1      2006q1     2008q1      2010q1     2012q1       2014q1

                                                            Book Leverage                 Market Leverage

                                            Bank of America                                        Citigroup
                                                                             150
                              50
                              40




                                                                             100
                              30




                                                                             50
                              20
                              10




                                                                             0




                                                 J.P. Morgan                                      Wells Fargo
                              25




                                                                             20
                              20




                                                                             15
                              15




                                                                             10
                              10




                                                                             5




                               2000q1   2004q1     2008q1      2012q1          2000q1    2004q1     2008q1      2012q1

                                                        Book Leverage                   Market Leverage

Notes: These figures show data on book and market leverage for BHCs. Book data (book equity and liabilities)
come from the FR Y-9C, and market equity data is from CRSP data. The left panel shows aggregates from BHC
balance sheets (excluding new entrants such as Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley). The right panel shows data
for the four largest BHCs. Book leverage is computed as assets/book equity, and market leverage is computed as
(liabilities + market equity)/market equity. The aggregate leverage ratios are computed as (aggregate liabilities +
aggregate book equity)/aggregate book equity.




                                                                          47
                  Figure 5: Quantiles of Market Leverage of Bank Holding Companies
                                                           Market Leverage Quantiles




                                   80
                                   40
                                   20
                                   10
                                   5




                                    2000q1     2002q1   2004q1   2006q1        2008q1   2010q1   2012q1    2014q1

Notes: This figure shows data on the quantiles of market leverage for BHCs. Book data (liabilities) comes from
the FR Y-9C, and market equity data is from CRSP data. Market leverage is computed as (liabilities + market
equity)/market equity. The median market leverage is plotted in maroon, and each tenth percentile is plotted in
blue. To improve visibility, the vertical axis uses a log scale.




                    Figure 6: Regulatory Capital Ratios for Bank Holding Companies
                Distribution of Tier 1 Capital Ratio                                                Distribution of Total Capital Ratio
 .15




                                                                                .5
                                                                                .4




                                                            Min.
 .1




           Regulatory Minimum 4%                            4.5%                                                                Regulatory Minimum 8%
                                                                                .3




                                                                   Min.
                                                                   5.5%                                                         Well-Capitalized at 10%
                                                                        Min.
                                                                        6%
                                                                                .2
 .05




                                                                                .1
 0




                                                                                0




  2000q1            2005q1                2010q1                     2015q1      2000q1                   2005q1           2010q1                   2015q1

                Under 4%            Under 5%              Under 6%                                Under 8%          Under 9%               Under 10%
                Under 7%            Under 8%                                                      Under 11%         Under 12%

Notes: These figures show data on regulatory capital ratios for BHCs from the FR Y-9C. The left panel shows
data on the distribution of the Tier-1 capital ratio, defined as (Tier-1 capital)/(Risk-weighted assets), and the right
panel shows data on the distribution of the total capital ratio defined as (Total Capital / Risk weighted assets).
The figures plot the share of banks whose regulatory capital ratio falls below a given level, computed using the full,
unweighted sample. The regulatory capital requirements are shown on the graph and described in the text.




                                                                          48
                                                                 Figure 7: Estimated Impulse Responses

                                       a)                                                                                                                           b)
             1




                                                                                                                            0
             .8
  log(Market Leverage)




                                                                                                                               -.5
                                                                                                                  log(Market Cap)
      .4       .6




                                                                                                                 -1
             .2




                                                                                                                            -1.5
             0




                         0   5           10                                           15            20                                  0                 5           10            15        20
                                         Quarter                                                                                                                      Quarter

                                 Pre-Crisis                                       Post-Crisis                                                                 Pre-Crisis        Post-Crisis


                                       c)                                                                                                                           d)
             0




                                                                                                                            0
             -.2




                                                                                                                                  -.2
                                                                                                                 log(Book Equity)
  log(Liability)
      -.4




                                                                                                                       -.4
             -.6




                                                                                                                            -.6
             -.8




                                                                                                                            -.8




                         0   5           10                                           15            20                                  0                 5           10            15        20
                                         Quarter                                                                                                                      Quarter

                                 Pre-Crisis                                       Post-Crisis                                                                 Pre-Crisis        Post-Crisis


                                                                                                           e)
                                                              .006
                                              log(1 + Common Dividend Rate)
                                                   0       .002
                                                              -.002  .004




                                                                              0                 5           10                                  15            20
                                                                                                            Quarter

                                                                                                    Pre-Crisis                              Post-Crisis

Notes: These figures show estimated impulse response functions for BHCs. The figures show the estimated percent impulse response
to a 1% negative return shock. For example, in Panel b) we show that market capitalization decreases by roughly 1% in response to a
1% negative return shock. Dashed lines denote the 95% confidence interval. Standard errors are clustered by bank. The "post-crisis"
period begins in 2007 Q4. Data on market capitalization and returns are from CRSP, and all other data are from the FR Y-9C. The
panels display the impulse responses of log market leverage (Panel a), log market capitalization (Panel b), log liabilities (Panel c), log
book equity (Panel d), and the common dividend rate (Panel e). Market leverage is defined as (Liabilities/Market Capitalization). The
                                                                                                      49
logged common dividend rate is defined as log(1 + Common Dividends/Market Capitalization).
                                                              Figure 8: Value and Policy Functions for given q 's




                                          (a) Value Function                                                                    (b) Drift of Leverage
50




                                           (c) Issuance Rate                                                                      (d) Dividend Rate

     Notes: These figures show the value and policy functions generated under the pre-crisis parametrization of the model, across the  dimension, for three particular values of q .
                                                             Figure 9: Value and Policy Functions for given 's




                                          (a) Value Function                                                                   (b) Drift of Leverage
51




                                          (c) Issuance Rate                                                                       (d) Dividend Rate

     Notes: These figures show the value and policy functions generated under the pre-crisis parametrization of the model, across the q dimension, for three particular values of .
                                             Figure 10: Invariant Distributions




                       (a) Model Stationary Distribution of Banks Across the q and  State Space


                             0.1
                                                                                                     Data
                                                                                                     Model
                            0.08


                            0.06


                            0.04


                            0.02


                               0
                                   0     2       4       6       8      10      12      14      16      18

                                               (b) Histogram for Market Leverage
Notes: Panel (a) shows a two dimensional histogram of the stationary distribution of banks across the (, q ) space. The grey area shows
the regulatory liquidation region. Panel (b) compares the distribution of market leverage generated by the model against the data.




                                                                 52
                                                  Figure 11: Model and Data Impulse Responses to a Return Shock

                                                 (a) Liabilities                                                             (b) Market Leverage
                           0
                                                                                                       1
                        -0.2
                                                                                                     0.8
                        -0.4
                                                                                                     0.6

                        -0.6                                                                         0.4

                        -0.8                                                                         0.2

                          -1                                                                           0
                               0            5              10              15              20              0             5              10              15           20
                                                          Quarter                                                                      Quarter



                                                                                      (a) Pre-crisis IRFs


                                                 (a) Liabilities                                                            (b) Market Leverage
                          0
                                                                                                       1
53




                       -0.2
                                                                                                     0.8
                       -0.4
                                                                                                     0.6

                       -0.6                                                                          0.4

                       -0.8                                                                          0.2

                         -1                                                                            0
                              0            5               10              15              20              0            5               10              15           20
                                                          Quarter                                                                      Quarter



                                                                                    (b) Post-crisis IRFs

     Notes: The figure shows the impulse response functions of market leverage and liabilities to return shocks. The blue line corresponds to the model generated IRFs whereas the black
     line is from the empirical section, with the shaded region corresponding to the confidence band for the estimated responses. The shock occurs in quarter 1.
                                             Figure 12: Counterfactual Exercise




                                          (a) Effect of Delayed Loss Recognition on q and 


                                 0

                              -0.2

                              -0.4
                  Loans (%)




                              -0.6

                              -0.8

                                -1

                              -1.2
                                     10     20     30       40       50      60       70       80       90      100

                                              (b) Impulse Response Function of Loans

Notes: The figures show the results from our counterfactual exercise. Each dot in the top figure is a pair of cross-sectional means of
 and q in the pre-crisis stationary allocation, for a given value of . The gray area represents the regulatory liquidation set. Each of
these stationary allocations is characterized by approximately the same mean book leverage of 12.4. The bottom panel shows the IRF
to a 1% return shock for aggregate loans, for three different values of .




                                                                  54
                                 Table 1: Aggregate Descriptive Statistics
                                      Real Change                   Log-Linear
                                  2008        2009           2010       2008       2009       2010


                  Market        -54.08%     -39.35%     -29.03%        -61.21%   -49.98%    -42.86%
                  Equity
                               (-$705B)     (-$513B)    (-$378B)     (-$945B)    (-$790B)   (-$694B)

                  Book          11.83%      21.70%          25.97%     -3.46%    -1.50%     -4.41%
                  Equity
                                ($94B)      ($172B)     ($206B)        (-$32B)   (-$15B)    (-$46B)

                  S&P 500       -42.08%     -28.83%     -21.20%        -25.55%   -7.01%      4.63%

Notes: The columns headed with the "Real Change" label show the percentage change from the raw variables. The
columns headed with the "Log-Linear" label show the cyclical deviations from a log-linear trend in percentage points
since 2007 Q3. Market Equity refers to shares outstanding times share price aggregated across all publicly traded
BHC. Book equity is the book equity of publicly traded BHCs. All variables deflated using the seasonally-adjusted
GDP deflator and converted to 2012 Q1 dollars. The dollar values are obtained by multiplying the cumulative
percentage point deviation by real market capitalization and real book equity at the end of 2007 Q3, respectively.
The last row shows the percentage change in the return on the S&P 500 in the first three columsn, while the last
three columns show the change relative to a linear log-linear trend.




                                          Table 2: Parametrization
 Parameter      Description                                   Target
  Independently calibrated
 rL = 1.01%     Loan yield                                    BHC data: interest income / loans
 rD = 0.51%     Bank debt yield                               BHC data: interest expense / debt
  = 7.69%       Loan maturity                                 FFIEC 031/041: average maturity of loans and securities
  = 0.926       Capital requirement                           Capital requirement of 8% to be well-capitalized
  = 0.25%       Average default shocks                        Accumulated bank losses
  = 0.4791      Arrival rate of Poisson process               Match loan charge-off rate
  = 4%          Recognition rate of books                     Peak of charge-off rate after fin. crisis
  = 0.25%       Banker's discount rate                        CRSP: Mean market leverage
 I = 3.51%      Investor's discount rate                      CRSP: Bank equity returns
  Jointly calibrated
  = 1%          Initial fraction of loan loss recognition     Initial jump of book leverage IRF
 pre = 2.30     Inverse IES pre-crisis                        Match market leverage IRF pre-crisis
 post = 1.71    Inverse IES post-crisis                       Match market leverage IRF post-crisis
  pre = 0.01    Balance sheet adj. costs pre-crisis           Match liabilities IRF pre-crisis
  post = 3.96   Balance sheet adj. costs post-crisis          Match liabilities IRF post-crisis
                                Table 3: Model and Data Moments

                                                     Pre-crisis            Post-crisis
                                                  Data     Model         Data    Model
            Log Market Returns                    0.035    0.045        -0.012    0.046
                                                 (0.149) (0.015)       (0.230) (0.017)
            Market leverage                       6.799    9.388       10.025 11.056
                                                 (0.598) (0.052)       (0.815) (0.070)
            Book Leverage                        10.619 12.409          9.870    11.967
                                                 (0.366) (0.001)       (0.502) (0.010)
            Market to Book Equity                 1.532    1.322        0.897     1.082
                                                 (0.469) (0.052)       (0.584) (0.076)
            Log Common Dividend Rate              0.006    0.033        0.005     0.028
                                                 (0.006) (0.000)       (0.006) (0.002)
            Log Net Charge-Off Rate               0.001    0.001        0.002     0.001
                                                 (0.003) (0.002)       (0.004) (0.002)

                                                 Pre-crisis    Post-crisis
                                                  18.048        22.029
                                                 (2.114)        (4.142)
                                     q             0.977         0.966
                                                 (0.006)        (0.008)
                                     c             0.065         0.055
                                                 (0.005)        (0.005)
                                                   0.024         0.024
                                                 (0.002)        (0.004)
                                     dW/W          0.012         0.029
                                                 (0.033)        (0.042)
                                     s(, q )       1.914         1.972
                                                 (0.119)        (0.218)
Notes: The columns labeled "Data Pre-crisis" refer to the period 1990 Q3 to 2007 Q3, whereas "Data Post-crisis"
refers to the period 2007 Q4 to 2015 Q4. The moments from the model are generated from a panel of 10,000
banks with the same number of quarters as in the respective periods for data. For column "Pre-crisis model",
we calculate moments using the stationary distribution of banks. We compute the stationary distribution by first
simulating enough quarters so that the mean and standard deviation of the state variables (, q ) are approximately
constant, and then keeping the last one as the initial quarter of the simulated sample. For the post-crisis model
moments, banks suffer an aggregate default shock of 2.5% in the first quarter. The first row for each variable
shows the mean. The second row shows standard deviations in parenthesis. For market leverage, book leverage and
market-to-book equity, the mean and standard deviation are computed on the logs, but when reporting the mean
we apply exponential to show the mean in levels.




                                                       56
57
For Online Publication
    Online Appendix for
   "A Q-Theory of Banks"

 Juliane Begenau    Saki Bigio

Jeremy Majerovitz Matias Vieyra




               1
A       Data Appendix
A.1      Sample Selection
We analyze bank holding companies (BHCs), drawing data from multiple sources. We focus on
top-tier bank holding companies that are headquartered in the 50 states or in Washington D.C.
In most of our analyses, we analyze data from 2000 Q1 to 2015 Q4. For the analysis of impulse
response functions, we extend the sample back to 1990 Q3 (this is the first year for which we
can identify whether a BHC is top-tier). For book variables, we use data from the FR Y-9C,
downloaded through Wharton Research Data Services (WRDS). We match this to data on market
capitalization and returns from the Center for Research in Securities Prices (CRSP) using the
PERMCO-RSSD links data set provided by the New York Fed (https://www.newyorkfed.org/
research/banking_research/datasets.html). For analyses that use solely book data, we use
data for those BHCs that we find in our sample in the FR Y-9C; for analyses that use market
data, we use only the observations which we observe in both FR Y-9C and CRSP. In one robust-
ness check, we use information on the dates of, and participants in, bank mergers and acquis-
tions; we obtain data on bank mergers from the Chicago Fed (https://www.chicagofed.org/
banking/financial-institution-reports/merger-data). In an additional robustness check,
we drop all banks that were ever stress-tested (CCAR and DFAST). We obtain information on
whether banks were ever stress tested from the Federal Reserve (The main website is https:
//www.federalreserve.gov/supervisionreg/stress-tests-capital-planning.htm, and the
specific data sets can be found at https://www.federalreserve.gov/supervisionreg/ccar.htm
and https://www.federalreserve.gov/supervisionreg/dfa-stress-tests.htm).

A.2      Evolution of main balance sheet variables
To get a sense of how the crisis affected banks, we report the evolution of key balance sheet
components in Figure 1. This figure shows total assets, liabilities, and loans--not netting out
the allowance for loan losses­for the aggregate banking sector (left panel) and the four largest
BHCs in terms of assets. The banking industry is highly concentrated: the "Big Four" largest
BHCs account for roughly 50 percent of aggregate assets. At the onset of the crisis, the growth of
bank assets, loans, and liabilities slowed down, but never dropping as dramatically as bank equity
market valuations (see below). The amount of outstanding loans, the largest component of bank
assets, stagnated during the crisis and eventually fell. By 2009 Q4, loans net of the allowance for
loan losses had fallen by $361 billion, a drop of only 6.84%.54 This number is driven only in part
by losses as banks also slowed down the issuances of new loans.

A.3      Difference between Market and Book Data
Difference between market and book data.              To get a sense about how the crisis affected
banks, we report the changes in select aggregate balance sheet components and aggregate bank
equity return data since the beginning of the Great Recession in 2007 Q3 in Table 4. We do so
in two ways. We first fit a linear trend to the logged real series and report deviations from that
trend in the first three columns.55 We estimate the trend using the data through 2007 Q3 and
  54
    The allowance for loan losses is an estimate of likely loan losses for the outstanding loans on the balance sheet.
The next subsection provides more detail on how bank accountants calculate this number.
 55
    We use the seasonally-adjusted GDP deflator to adjust for inflation, and report all values in 2012 Q1 dollars.


                                                          2
                                                                 Figure 1: Balance Sheets of BHCs
                                          BHC Balance Sheets                                                                   Bank of America                                     Citigroup




                                                                                                                 2.5




                                                                                                                                                                2.5
         12




                                                                                                                 2




                                                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                                                1.5
                                                                                                                 1.5
         10




                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                 1
    USD Trillion




                                                                                                  USD Trillion




                                                                                                                                                                .5
                                                                                                                 .5
         8




                                                                                                                                    J.P. Morgan                                Wells Fargo




                                                                                                                 3




                                                                                                                                                                1.5
         6




                                                                                                                 2




                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                 1




                                                                                                                                                                .5
         4




                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                0
             2000q1   2002q1     2004q1   2006q1        2008q1   2010q1   2012q1   2014q1                         2000q1   2004q1     2008q1      2012q1         2000q1   2004q1    2008q1     2012q1

                        Assets            Liabilities            Loans         Loans Net of ALL                            Assets                 Liabilities         Loans             Loans Net of ALL
>
Notes: These figures show data on assets, liabilities, loans, and loans net of ALL for BHCs. Data come from
the FR Y-9C. Loans net of ALL refers to loans minus the allowance for loan losses (this subtracts out "probable
and estimable" future losses on the current stock of loans). All variables converted to 2012 Q1 dollars using the
seasonally-adjusted GDP deflator. The left panel shows aggregate time series, excluding new entrants to the sample
BHC such as Goldman Sachs. The right panel shows the same data for the "Big Four", i.e., the four largest BHCs.
Note that the spike in the data of Wells Fargo is due to its acquisition of Wachovia. Likewise, JP Morgan took on
Bear Stearns and WaMu, while Bank of America took on Merrill Lynch and what was left of CountryWide.


report changes since at that trend.56 Second, we report simply the real changes since 2007 Q3 in
the last three columns. Each column computes the change until the fourth quarter of the year
indicated by the column. For aggregate bank balance sheet quantities, we focus our attention on
the aggregate series of loans and different measures of equity since these are the quantities that
are at the hear of macro-finance models. We also report the changes in bank equity return data
to provide a summary of shareholder losses and in the S&P stock market index for comparison.

Bank Accounting Practices. The discrepancy between book and market equity reflects bank
accounting practices. Banks can delay acknowledging losses on their books (e.g. Laux and Leuz
2010), because banks are not required to mark-to-market the majority of their assets. There
are many incentives to delay book losses. In practice, a key metric for measuring success of a
bank is the book return on equity (ROE).57 Given that ROE is a measure of success, manager
compensation is linked to book value performance. Moreover, shareholders and other stakeholders
may base their valuations on information from book data. Finally, banks are required to meet
capital standards based on book values.
  56
     Since market return and book ROE are flows rather than levels, we detrend by simply subtracting the pre-
crisis average. Also, since flows can be negative, we use log(1 + r) instead of log(r). A concern with log-linear
detrending is that it could be based on an unsustainable boom, yielding an overestimate of the size of the cyclical
deviation. Simply looking at raw changes in this series sidesteps these concerns, but only by not dealing with the
trend altogether. We report both estimates for completeness, but we acknowledge that each of these estimates is
imperfect. We also computed (available upon request) estimates from HP-filtered data. The HP-filtered residuals
were typically of substantially smaller magnitude then the residuals estimated with a log-linear trend. The HP-filter
seemed to be overfitting the data and treating as trend what is really just a persistent cyclical component.
  57
     For example, JP Morgan's 2016 annual report states "the Firm will continue to establish internal ROE targets
for its business segments, against which they will be measured" (on page 83 of the report).


                                                                                            3
                                Table 4: Aggregate Descriptive Statistics .
                                       Log-Linear                 Real Change
                                2008        2009       2010        2008       2009        2010


                  Market       -61.21%    -49.98%     -42.86%    -54.08%     -39.35%    -29.03%
                  Cap.
                              (-$945B)    (-$790B)   (-$694B)    (-$705B)   (-$513B)    (-$378B)

                  Book         -3.46%      -1.50%     -4.41%      11.83%     21.70%     25.97%
                  Equity
                               (-$32B)    (-$15B)     (-$46B)     ($94B)     ($172B)    ($206B)

                  Common       -28.44%    -11.69%     -10.42%    -17.35%      8.29%     16.64%
                  Equity
                              (-$275B)    (-$120B)   (-$114B)    (-$145B)    ($69B)     ($139B)

                  Loans         2.68%     -10.41%     -14.33%     2.58%      -6.84%      -7.27%
                  Net of
                               ($141B)    (-$571B)   (-$819B)    ($136B)    (-$361B)    (-$384B)
                  ALL
                               -25.55%     -7.01%      4.63%     -42.08%     -28.83%    -21.20%
                  S&P 500


                  Bank          -57.87%    -61.42%     -60.23%     -54.26%    -55.28%    -50.78%
                  Market
                               (-$755B) (-$801B) (-$785B) (-$708B) (-$721B) (-$662B)
                  Return
                  Book          -20.30%    -27.89%     -33.58%      -7.84%     -6.34%     -3.11%
                  Return
                               (-$171B) (-$236B) (-$284B) (-$66B)             (-$54B)    (-$26B)
                  on Equity
Notes: Top row shows cyclical deviations in percentage points since 2007 Q3; bottom row shows deviations converted
into raw values. Book equity refers to book equity of publicly traded BHCs. Loans net of ALL refers to loans minus
the allowance for loan losses (this subtracts out "probable and estimable" future losses on the current stock of
loans). All variables deflated using the seasonally-adjusted GDP deflator. Level variables are converted to 2012
Q1 dollars, flow variables are deflated by subtracting inflation. Bank market return deviations and book return
on equity are cumulated since the end of 2007 Q3, and dollar values are obtained by multiplying the cumulative
percentage point deviation by real market capitalization and real book equity at the end of 2007 Q3, respectively.




                                                        4
    The flexibility of accounting their accounts is studied extensively in the accounting literature
(Bushman, 2016 and Acharya and Ryan, 2016 review the literature on this issue, Francis et al.,
1996 studies the same issue for non-financial firms). In practice, banks can record securities on
the books using two methodologies: either amortized historical cost (the security is worth what
it cost the bank to buy it with appropriate amortization) or fair value accounting.58 In addition
to mis-pricing securities, another degree of freedom is the extent to which banks can acknowledge
impairments: banks have the right to delay acknowledging impairments on assets held at historical
cost, if they deem those impairments as temporary (i.e. they believe the asset will return to its
previous price). This gives banks substantial leeway, and led banks to overvalue assets on the
books during the crisis. Huizinga and Laeven (2012) find that banks used discretion to hold real-
estate related assets at values higher than their market value. (Laux and Leuz, 2010) note some
notable cases of inflated books during the crisis: Merrill Lynch sold $30.6 billion dollars of CDOs
for 22 cents on the dollar while the book value was 65 percent higher than its sale price. Similarly,
Lehman Brothers wrote down its portfolio of commercial MBS by only three percent, even when
an index of commercial MBS was falling by ten percent in the first quarter of 2008. Laux and
Leuz (2010) also document substantial underestimation of loan losses in comparison to external
estimates.
    This shows up in our own analysis as well: Figure 2 shows that provisions for loan losses and
net charge-offs only reached their peak in 2009 and 2010 respectively, and remained quite elevated
at least through 2011, well after the recession had ended. The decomposition of net charge-offs
shows that these losses were heavily driven by real estate, suggesting they were associated with
the housing crisis.59 Banks' books were only acknowledging in 2011 losses that the market had
already predicted when the crisis hit.
    Harris et al. (2013) construct an index, based on information available in the given time period,
that predicts future losses substantially better than the allowance for loan losses.60 This implies
that the allowance for loan losses is not capturing all of the available information to estimate
losses. This may in part be strategic manipulation, but there may also be a required delay in
acknowledging loan losses. Under the "incurred loss model" that was the regulatory standard
during the crisis, banks are only allowed to provision for loan losses when a loss is "estimable and
probable" (Harris et al., 2013). Thus, even if banks know that many of their loans will eventually
suffer losses, they were not supposed to update their books until the loss was imminent.
  58
      Fair value accounting can be done at three levels: Level 1 accounting uses quoted prices in active markets.
Level 2 uses prices of similar assets as a benchmark to value assets that trade infrequently. Level 3 is based on
models that do not involve market prices (e.g. a discounted cash flow model). Banks are required to use the lowest
level possible for each asset. In practice, most assets are recorded at historical cost. The majority of fair value
measurements are Level 2 (Goh et al. 2015; Laux and Leuz 2010). Recent work has shown that the stock market
values fair value assets less if they are measured using a higher level of fair value accounting. This leaves room to
mis-price assets on books. Particularly during 2008, Level 2 and Level 3 measures of assets were valued substantially
below one (Goh et al. 2015; Kolev 2009; Song et al. 2010). Laux and Leuz (2010) document sizable reclassifications
from Levels 1 and 2 to Level 3 during this period. They highlight the case of Citigroup, which moved $53 billion
into Level 3 between the fourth quarter of 2007 and the first quarter of 2008 and reclassified $60 billion in securities
as held-to-maturity which enabled Citi to use historical costs.
   59
      When a bank has a loss that is estimable and probable, it first provisions for loan losses, which shows up as PLL.
Later when the loss occurs, the asset is charged off and thus taken off the books, which shows up as charge-offs,
although occasionally the bank can recover the asset later. Net charge-offs is charge-offs minus recoveries. We show
a decomposition by category for net charge-offs but not for PLL because the FR Y-9C does not provide information
on PLL by loan category.
   60
      The ALL is the stock variable corresponding to the PLL.




                                                           5
Information content We test whether book equity captures all available information about
bank cash flows using cross-sectional regressions of market equity on book equity and several other
profitability measures. We are motivated by the efficient markets hypothesis that suggests that
market values reflect all available information about future dividends, and, by extension, about
banks future profits and net worth today: If market equity indeed contains additional information
about bank profitability not captured by their book values, then market equity will be correlated
with variables capturing profitability, even after conditioning on book equity. To help us visualize
the additional information content of market values over and above book values, consider the
following cross-sectional regression

                     log (Market Equityi ) =  +  log (Book Equityi ) + f (Xi ) + i ,
where f (X ) represents polynomials in our variables of interest, and i indexes banks.61 We then
construct the partial residual log (Market Equity) -  - f (X ) and plot this on the vertical axis
of Figure 2. We plot the regressor of interest, X , on the horizontal axis. By construction, the
polynomial f (X ) that best fits the outcome variable log (Market Equity) will also be the polynomial
that best fits the partial residual. Thus, Figure 2 allows us to plot f (X ) and assess the goodness of
its fit. We consider a quartic in log RoE over the past year (controlling for log book equity) and a
quartic in log RoE over the next year (controlling for log book equity and a quartic in log RoE over
the past year) as f (X ).62 These graphs confirm that market capitalization, controlling for book
equity, is increasing in both RoE over the past year and in RoE over the next year. Hence even
after controlling for book equity, market capitalization captures information content of net-income
from the past and upcoming year. Note that the non-linear regression specification is important.
For example, in the post-crisis period, there is a left tail of banks with very negative RoE. In this
region the marginal effect of RoE on market capitalization is much smaller.




  61
     Appendix Section A.3 shows the partial R2 for this regression for a range of variables capturing profitability
measure such as loan charge offs and ROE over various time horizons.
  62
     For improved visibility, we exclude outliers from the graph window by limiting the graph's horizontal axis to
values within ±3 standard deviations from the mean.


                                                        6
                                                                                                                   >
                                                                                             Figure 2: Information content in books
                                                                                    2006 Q1                                                                               2009 Q1




                                          1.5




                                                                                                                                    2
                          Log Market Cap. Minus Controls




                                                                                                                    Log Market Cap. Minus Controls
                                                    1




                                                                                                                                             1
                                       .5




                                                                                                                     -1          0
                            0             -.5




                                                                                                                                    -2
                                                           0             .1                       .2          .3                                     -.6   -.4            -.2                 0   .2
                                                                              Log RoE Over Past Year                                                               Log RoE Over Past Year
                                                                                    2006 Q1                                                                               2009 Q1
                                          1




                                                                                                                                    2
7




                          Log Market Cap. Minus Controls




                                                                                                                    Log Market Cap. Minus Controls
                                                                                                                                              1
                                                .5




                                                                                                                                  0
                                0




                                                                                                                      -1
                                          -.5




                                                                                                                                    -2



                                                               0   .05             .1           .15    .2     .25                                    -1          -.5                      0            .5
                                                                              Log RoE Over Next Year                                                               Log RoE Over Next Year

    Notes: These figures show results from a cross-sectional regression of log market equity on assorted variables. The top row shows results from a regression
    of log market capitalization on log book equity and a quartic in log RoE over the past year. The bottom row shows results from a regression of log market
    capitalization on log book equity, a quartic in log RoE over the past year, and a quartic in log RoE over the next year. The horizontal axis shows the
    regressor of interest, and the vertical axis shows the outcome minus the effect of the controls (for the top row, the controls are a constant and log book
    equity, for the bottom row, the controls are a constant, log book equity, and a quartic in log RoE over the past year). The left column shows results for 2006
    Q1, the right column shows results for 2009 Q1. Regressions are run on the cross-section of banks with all variables available, but the horizaontal axis of the
    graph window is restricted to ±3 standard deviations from the mean to improve visibility. Data on market capitalization and returns are from CRSP, and
    all other data are from the FR Y-9C. Log RoE is defined as log (1 + RoE). RoE over the past year is defined as book net income over the last four quarters
    divided by book equity four quarters ago; RoE over the next year is defined as the one year lead of this variable.
B      Additional Impulse Responses
B.1      Risk Adjustment
For our main impulse response results, we wish to use risk-adjusted returns, rather than raw
returns. More formally, we assume that the market returns of bank i at time t are given by
                                           f
                        rit      -        rt          = i + Xt       i        +            i,t
                    Raw Return       Risk-Free Rate        factors loadings       Idiosyncratic Component

      All returns are logged, e.g. rit refers to log (1 + Raw Bank Return). We wish to isolate variation
in the idiosyncratic shocks, i,t , and use this variation to estimate the impulse responses.
      A natural, but naive, approach would be to estimate the above model for each bank i using
OLS, and then use the estimated residuals,         ^it , as the regressors in the impulse response estimation.
The problem here is that it induces bias:           ^it is a noisy measure of the true regressor it , which
leads to bias as long as T is finite (the bias will shrink as T grows large, because           ^it will converge
to the true it ).
      Fortunately, there is a simple solution: we estimate          ^it using OLS, and then we use      ^it as an
instrument for the unadjusted return. Since our main regressions use contemporaneous returns,
twenty lags, and their interaction with a post-crisis dummy, this means we use contemporaneous
^it , twenty lags of  ^it , and their interaction with a post-crisis dummy as instruments. Instrumental
variables does not suffer from the same problem of bias under classical measurement error. In-
stead, to get identification under the assumed model for returns, we need our instrument to be
correlated with the "good variation", it , and uncorrelated with the "bad variation," i + Xt i .
This is mechanically what we are doing when we run OLS at the bank level, and if the assumed
model for returns is correct, then we have E [^           it (i + Xt i )] = i E [^ it ] + E [^
                                                                                             it Xt ] i = 0 + 0.
Thus, our instrumental variables strategy will give us a consistent estimator of the true impulse
response, under the assumption that we have the correct model of returns. Since the OLS regres-
sion estimating    ^it is conducted at the bank level, we cluster our standard errors at the bank level
(clustering at the bank level is already a good idea).

B.2      Results without factor risk adjustment
While we favor the risk-adjusted results, we also have computed "unadjusted results" for the im-
pulse responses, which we report here for completeness. The results are qualitatively and quantita-
tively similar across the methods. Compared to the risk-adjusted results, howver, the unadjusted
results, suggest a smaller response of liabilities in the pre-crisis period, and thus also suggest a
slower pre-crisis adjustment of leverage.




                                                           8
                           Figure 3: Estimated Impulse Responses for Stock Variables (No Risk Adjustment)




                                                                                      0
           0
           -.1




                                                                                         -.5
                                                                            log(Market Cap)
log(Liability)
      -.2




                                                                           -1
           -.3
           -.4




                       0         5            10            15        20              -1.5        0   5           10            15        20
                                              Quarter                                                             Quarter

                                      Pre-Crisis        Post-Crisis                                       Pre-Crisis        Post-Crisis
                                                                                      0
           1
           .8




                                                                                            -.2
log(Market Leverage)




                                                                           log(Book Equity)
             .6




                                                                                 -.4
    .4




                                                                                      -.6
           .2




                                                                                      -.8
           0




                       0         5            10            15        20                          0   5           10            15        20
                                              Quarter                                                             Quarter

                                      Pre-Crisis        Post-Crisis                                       Pre-Crisis        Post-Crisis

Notes: These figures show estimated impulse response functions for BHCs. The figures show the estimated im-
pulse response to a one unit negative returns shock. Dashed lines denote the 95% confidence interval. Standard
errors are clustered by bank. The "post-crisis" period begins in 2007 Q4. Data on market capitalization and
returns are from CRSP, and all other data are from the FR Y-9C. The panels display the impulse responses of
log liabilities, log market capitalization, log market leverage, and log book equity. Market leverage is defined
as log(Liabilities/Market Capitalization), so that it represents the difference between the response of log liabili-
ties and log market capitalization (results using log(Liabilities + Market Capitalization)/Market Capitalization) are
extremely similar).




                                                                           9
             Figure 4: Idiosyncratic Shock Series of Big Four Bank Holding Companies
                                                  Bank of America                                      Citigroup




                                                                                   .4
                                    .4




                                                                                   .2
                                    .2




                                                                                   0
                                    0




                                                                                   -.2
                                    -.2




                                                                                   -.4
                        Residuals


                                                       J.P. Morgan                                    Wells Fargo
                                    .4




                                                                                   .4
                                    .2




                                                                                   .2
                                    0




                                                                                   0
                                    -.2




                                                                                   -.2
                                    -.4




                                                                                   -.4
                                     1990q1   1996q1    2002q1   2008q1   2014q1    1990q1   1996q1    2002q1   2008q1   2014q1

Notes: This figure plots the idiosyncratic shocks (for the Big Four BHCs) used to estimate the impulse response
functions. First, we isolate the idiosyncratic component of returns using the factor model, and then we residualize
this on time fixed effects.


B.3      Robustness and Validity of Identification Strategy
In this section, we conduct various tests to check the validity of our identification strategy and
robustness of our results.

A narrative approach to corroborate the idiosyncratic shocks To provide corroberating
evidence of the validity of our identification strategy, we first show that the estimated return
shocks do indeed look like idiosyncratic shocks for the four largest banks (Bank of America, J.P.
Morgan Chase, Wells Fargo, Citigroup). To construct the idiosyncratic shocks, we regress each
bank's market return on the Fama-French three-factor returns and regress the residual further on
time fixed effects. The residuals from this regression represent our idiosyncratic shocks.63 Figure
4 presents our estimates of the idiosyncratic shocks. They indeed look like white noise and do not
seem to be substantially autocorrelated. Note that the time series for Citigroup starts a little later
because Citigroup did not exist until 1998 when Traveler's merged with Citicorp.
   We also provide narrative support for the idiosyncratic nature of our estimated shocks using
an extensive search of newspaper articles for large idiosyncratic shock value estimates.




  63
    We are controlling for the time fixed effects, because they are included in the regression we actually run to get
the impulse response function.


                                                                             10
                                  Table 5: Narrative Support for Idiosyncratic Shocks
     Bank              Year-Qtr   idiosyncratic                                         Bank specific events
     Name                         shock
                       2000q4         -0.200      Sunbeam (which BofA lended to) posted $86M loss. BofA said net charge-offs in Q4 will
                                                  double. BofA issues warning on $1B uncollectible debt, may miss the December quarter profit
                                                  forecast by as much as 27%.
     Bank of America
                       2003q4         -0.218      BofA agrees to pay $47 to buy FIeetBoston Financial "hefty premium" & "could dilute earn-
                                                  ings."
                       2008q3         0.288       BofA to buy Merrill for $50B (Sept 15)
                       2009q2         0.452       Stress test: BofA needs to address $34B capital shortfall, better than expectation.
                       2011q4         -0.275      Merrill Lynch has agreed to pay $315 million to end a mortgage-securities lawsuit (Dec 7)
                       2012q4         0.248       BofA considered better buy after increase in house prices that (given its portfolio composition)
                                                  particularly benefited BofA.
                       1999q1         0.319       Citigroup Profit Fell 53% in 4th period, but still topped analysts' expectations
                       1999q3         0.205       Citigroup posts an unexpected increase of 9.3% in net income for second quarter (July 20)
                       1999q4         0.250       Citigroup's citibank unit is marketing credit card for the internet to millions
                       2000q1         0.226       Citi Intelligent Technology Receives Investment; Dividends increase from $1.05 to $1.20
         Citigroup     2003q4         -0.215      Citi to repay certain funds $16 mln plus interest; Citigroup Asset Management faces federal
                                                  probe.
                       2009q1         -0.351      Citigroup had $2B in direct gross exposure to LyondellBasell Industries, who filed for
                                                  bankruptcy protection last week. Fitch cuts Citi preferred to junk
                       2009q3          0.199      Citi reports profit after gain from Smith Barney. Citigroup's mortgage mitigation rises 29% in
                                                  second quarter.
11




                       2009q4         -0.267      Citi fined in tax crackdown. Abu Dhabi's sovereign wealth fund is demanding that Citigroup
                                                  scraps a deal that would see the fund make a heavy loss on a $7.5 billion investment in the
                                                  bank.
                       2010q2          0.285      Citi reported quarterly earnings of $4.4B exceeding expectations
                       1997q2         -0.182      J.P. Morgan particularly large exposure to 1997 Asian Financial Crisis.
                                                  https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/1999/wp99138.pdf
                       2000q1          0.169      J.P. Morgan told investors on Monday that January and February had topped performance
                                                  levels seen in the fourth quarter. Dividends increase from $0.2733 to $0.3200 on March 21.
     J.P. Morgan Chase 2000q3         0.357       Chase buying J.P. Morgan.
                       2001q2         -0.185      J.P. Morgan Chase disclosed this week that their venture capital portfolios had incurred sig-
                                                  nificant losses.
                       2002q3         -0.322      JPMorgan Partners Reports $165M Operating Loss for Q2. J.P. Morgan sees third-quarter
                                                  shortfall.
                       2004q4         -0.198      JPMorgan Chase profit falls 13%.
                       2008q3         0.234       J.P. Morgan profit falls 53%, but tops Wall Street target.
                       2009q1         0.249       J.P. Morgan net falls sharply, but tops Wall Street view. J.P. Morgan to sell Bear Wagner to
                                                  Barclays Capital: WSJ
                       2012q2         -0.207      J.P. Morgan: London Whales $2 Billion Losses. Two Shareholder Suits Filed Against J.P.
                                                  Morgan
                       2001q2         -0.161      Wells Fargo disclosed that their venture capital portfolios had incurred significant losses. Wells
                                                  Fargo to take $1.1 billion charge
        Wells Fargo
                       2008q3          0.338      Wells Fargo's net dropped 21% as it set aside $3 billion for loan losses, better than expected.
                                                  Earnings declined but beat estimates.
                       2009q1         -0.315      Wells Fargo posted a surprise $2.55B Q1 loss, later revised to $2.77B. Wells Fargo added a
                                                  pretax $328.4M impairment of perpetual preferred securities to its fourth-quarter loss.
                       2009q2          0.405      Wells Fargo sees record Q1 profit, projections easily exceed expectations (expects earnings of
                                                  $3 billion).
    Table 5 shows that large absolute idiosyncratic shock values are consistent with good or bad
bank specific events, such as "Wells Fargo sees record Q1 profit, projections easily exceed ex-
pectations," or "Citi fined in tax crackdown." The table shows that large positive or negative
idiosyncratic shocks can be corroborated with specific events that appear bank specific, which
supports the validity of our identification strategy.

Placebo Tests To test the validity of our identification strategy, we conduct placebo tests where
we include ten leads of returns (in addition to the contemporary value and twenty lags as before).
If the returns really are unanticipated shocks, then the leading values should not affect current
behavior. This is similar to testing for pre-trends. We are testing whether the banks that will
experience higher returns in the future are already acting differently today. Overall, the placebo
test are encouraging, and suggest that our results are not driven by prior differences in the behavior
of banks which experience return shocks.

Identification robustness We provide a few additional pieces of evidence that corroborate the
validity and robustness of our identification strategy.
    First, we verify that our results are robust to excluding the crisis years 2008 and 2009 from our
sample. The idea is to rule out a lot of stories related to specific events during the crisis (e.g. the
realization that the government might not guarantee that a bank wouldn't fail, or that this was
somehow about exposure to Lehman). The results are below (for our main outcomes: Liabilities,
Market Cap, and Market Leverage). It makes no noticeable difference to the results.
    Second, we check whether bank mergers drive the results. To this end, we drop the quarter of
the merger as well as the quarter before and after the merger. The results for our main outcomes:
liabilities, market equity, and market leverage are in Figure 7. Again, it makes no noticeable
difference to the results.
    Similarly, we check whether the results are driven by the stress tests performed by banks: these
stress tests were implemented after the onset of the crisis, and encouraged or mandated that banks
raise additional capital. To show that the stress tests do not drive the results, we drop all banks
that ever participated in a stress test (e.g. Bank of America participated in the stress tests, and
so we drop Bank of America from our sample in all periods). The results for our main outcomes
are in Figure 8. Again, it makes no noticeable difference to the results.
    Another potential concern is that the return shocks could be picking up shocks to future in-
vestment opportunities, rather than default shocks. To test this concern, we check the response of
the liquid assets ratio: if negative return shocks indeed predict lower future investment opportuni-
ties rather than current cash flows, we would expect banks to respond to these shocks by moving
their portfolio into liquid assets. The results, shown in Figure 9, show no statistically significant
response of liquid assets pre-crisis, and a small temporary response post crisis that is reversed
within a few quarters. We take this as evidence against the hypothesis that return shocks reflect
shocks to investment opportunities.
    Am alternative, broader version of the liquidity ratio test calculates the liquidity ratio as
the ratio of (Cash + Federal Funds Sold + Securities Purchased Under Agreement to Resell +
Securities)/Total Assets. We display the impulse response function for this version of the liquidity
ratio in Figure 10. The impulse response function has no significant response pre-crisis, and a
significant but quantitatively small response post-crisis.
    To put the size of the post-crisis response in perspective, the graph is saying that if there is
a 10% negative shock to market returns, then the liquid asset ratio would rise by 0.02 over the


                                                  12
                       Figure 5: Estimated Impulse Responses for Stock Variables (Risk-Adjusted, with Placebo)
           0




                                                                                        0
           -.2




                                                                                log(Market Cap)
                                                                                           -.5
log(Liability)
    -.4




                                                                               -1
           -.6
           -.8




                       -10           0                     10            20             -1.5        -10   0                     10            20
                                                 Quarter                                                              Quarter

                                         Pre-Crisis        Post-Crisis                                        Pre-Crisis        Post-Crisis
           1




                                                                                        0
log(Market Leverage)




                                                                                              -.2
                .5




                                                                               log(Book Equity)
                                                                                    -.4
  0




                                                                                        -.6
                                                                                        -.8
           -.5




                       -10           0                     10            20                         -10   0                     10            20
                                                 Quarter                                                              Quarter

                                         Pre-Crisis        Post-Crisis                                        Pre-Crisis        Post-Crisis

Notes: These figures show estimated impulse response functions for BHCs. The figures show the estimated im-
pulse response to a one unit negative returns shock. Dashed lines denote the 95% confidence interval. Standard
errors are clustered by bank. The "post-crisis" period begins in 2007 Q4. Data on market capitalization and
returns are from CRSP, and all other data are from the FR Y-9C. The panels display the impulse responses of
log liabilities, log market capitalization, log market leverage, and log book equity. Market leverage is defined
as log(Liabilities/Market Capitalization), so that it represents the difference between the response of log liabili-
ties and log market capitalization (results using log(Liabilities + Market Capitalization)/Market Capitalization) are
extremely similar).




                                                                              13
                         Figure 6: Estimated Impulse Responses: Dropping 2007 and 2008
       0




                                                                                                    0
       -.2




                                                                                                         -.5
                                                                                            log(Market Cap)
log(Liability)
    -.4




                                                                                           -1
       -.6




                                                                                                    -1.5
       -.8




                 0   5              10                              15              20                         0                 5           10            15        20
                                    Quarter                                                                                                  Quarter

                            Pre-Crisis                          Post-Crisis                                                          Pre-Crisis        Post-Crisis
                                                1
                                                .8
                                     log(Market Leverage)
                                         .4     .2
                                                0 .6




                                                            0                 5           10                           15              20
                                                                                          Quarter

                                                                                  Pre-Crisis                       Post-Crisis

Notes: These figures show estimated impulse response functions for BHCs, dropping observations from the years
2007 and 2008. The figures show the estimated impulse response to a one unit negative returns shock. Dashed
lines denote the 95% confidence interval. Standard errors are clustered by bank. The "post-crisis" period begins
in 2007 Q4. Data on market capitalization and returns are from CRSP, and all other data are from the FR Y-9C.
The panels display the impulse responses of log liabilities, log market capitalization, log market leverage, and log
book equity. Market leverage is defined as log(Liabilities/Market Capitalization), so that it represents the difference
between the response of log liabilities and log market capitalization.




                                                                                         14
                         Figure 7: Estimated Impulse Responses: Excluding Mergers
       0




                                                                                                 0
       -.2




                                                                                                      -.5
                                                                                         log(Market Cap)
log(Liability)
    -.4




                                                                                        -1
       -.6




                                                                                                 -1.5
       -.8




                 0   5           10                              15              20                         0                 5           10            15        20
                                 Quarter                                                                                                  Quarter

                         Pre-Crisis                          Post-Crisis                                                          Pre-Crisis        Post-Crisis
                                             1
                                             .8
                                  log(Market Leverage)
                                      .4     .2
                                             0 .6




                                                         0                 5           10                           15              20
                                                                                       Quarter

                                                                               Pre-Crisis                       Post-Crisis

Notes: These figures show estimated impulse response functions for BHCs, dropping observations from quarters
in which the bank is recorded as taking part in a merger, as well as dropping the quarter before and the quarter
after. The figures show the estimated impulse response to a one unit negative returns shock. Dashed lines denote
the 95% confidence interval. Standard errors are clustered by bank. The "post-crisis" period begins in 2007 Q4.
Data on market capitalization and returns are from CRSP, and all other data are from the FR Y-9C. The panels
display the impulse responses of log liabilities, log market capitalization, log market leverage, and log book equity.
Market leverage is defined as log(Liabilities/Market Capitalization), so that it represents the difference between the
response of log liabilities and log market capitalization.




                                                                                      15
                         Figure 8: Estimated Impulse Responses: Excluding Mergers
       0




                                                                                                 0
       -.2




                                                                                                      -.5
                                                                                         log(Market Cap)
log(Liability)
    -.4




                                                                                        -1
       -.6




                                                                                                 -1.5
       -.8




                 0   5           10                              15              20                         0                 5           10            15        20
                                 Quarter                                                                                                  Quarter

                         Pre-Crisis                          Post-Crisis                                                          Pre-Crisis        Post-Crisis
                                             1
                                             .8
                                  log(Market Leverage)
                                      .4     .2
                                             0 .6




                                                         0                 5           10                           15              20
                                                                                       Quarter

                                                                               Pre-Crisis                       Post-Crisis

Notes: These figures show estimated impulse response functions for BHCs, dropping observations from quarters
in which the bank is recorded as taking part in a merger, as well as dropping the quarter before and the quarter
after. The figures show the estimated impulse response to a one unit negative returns shock. Dashed lines denote
the 95% confidence interval. Standard errors are clustered by bank. The "post-crisis" period begins in 2007 Q4.
Data on market capitalization and returns are from CRSP, and all other data are from the FR Y-9C. The panels
display the impulse responses of log liabilities, log market capitalization, log market leverage, and log book equity.
Market leverage is defined as log(Liabilities/Market Capitalization), so that it represents the difference between the
response of log liabilities and log market capitalization.




                                                                                      16
                        Figure 9: Estimated Impulse Responses of the Liquidity Ratio




                                                 .02
                                  log(1 + Liquid Assets Ratio)
                                  -.01        0  -.02   .01




                                                                 0   5           10            15        20
                                                                                 Quarter

                                                                         Pre-Crisis        Post-Crisis

Notes: This figure shows the estimated impulse response function for BHCs to a 1% negative return shock. Dashed lines denote
the 95% confidence interval. Standard errors are clustered by bank. The "post-crisis" period begins in 2007 Q4. Data on mar-
ket capitalization and returns are from CRSP, and all other data are from the FR Y-9C. The liquid assets ratio is defined as
log((Cash + Treasury Bills) /Total Assets). Within the regression sample, the average liquid assets ratio is 0.057.




         Figure 10: Estimated Impulse Responses of Liquidity Ratios (Alternative Formula)
                                                 .04
                                  log(1 + Liquid Assets Ratio)
                                  -.02         0 -.04    .02




                                                                 0   5           10            15        20
                                                                                 Quarter

                                                                         Pre-Crisis        Post-Crisis

Notes: This figure shows estimated impulse response functions for BHCs. The figure shows the estimated im-
pulse response to a one unit negative returns shock. Dashed lines denote the 95% confidence interval. Stan-
dard errors are clustered by bank. The "post-crisis" period begins in 2007 Q4. Data on market capitalization
and returns are from CRSP, and all other data are from the FR Y-9C. The liquid assets ratio is defined as
log((Cash + Fed Funds Sold + Securities Purchased Under Agreement to Resell + Securities) /Total Assets).




                                                                               17
course of two years. This is off of a base of 0.25-0.30, depending on whether we are taking the
mean of log(1+ratio) or of the raw liquid assets ratio.

B.4     Heterogeneity
We explore heterogeneity in impulse response functions by dividing banks into two groups based
on a variable, and estimating impulse responses separately for each group. We divide banks by size
(total assets), by trading assets ratio (trading assets as a share of total assets), by the risk-weighted
asset ratio (risk-weighted assets as a share of total assets), and by the mortgage ratio (real estate
loans as a share of total assets). We use the value of the variable in 2000 Q1 to sort banks into
two groups: above-median and below-median. We report the results in this section. Broadly, we
do not find strong evidence of differential responses, but we lack statistical power to rule out some
meaningful differences.
    Since bank size is among the most important differences across different banks, we begin by
discussing the results for heterogeneity by size. The results are shown in Figures 11 and 12.
Visually, these impulse responses look remarkably similar to each other. However, the standard
errors are sufficiently large that we cannot rule out meaningful differences in the impulse responses.
    We summarize the results of these impulse responses, as well as of the other potential groupings
(by trading assets ratio, risk-weighted assets ratio, and mortgage ratio) in Tables 6, 7, 8, and 9
below. For each grouping, we report the cumulative impulse response for the high and low groups
after 10 quarters and after 20 quarters, and we also report the p-value of a test of equality between
the impulse responses of the two groups. In a table of 64 tests, only one of the tests rejects the
null at the 5% level. As before, we take this to suggest that there is not strong evidence in favor of
sizable heterogeneity, but we caution that the standard errors are too large to rule out meaningful
heterogeneity.




                                                   18
                                               Figure 11: Impulse Responses for Small Banks




                                                                                  0
            0
            -.2




                                                                                       -.5
                                                                          log(Market Cap)
log(Liability)
-.6      -.4




                                                                         -1
            -.8




                                                                                  -1.5
            -1




                          0   5           10             15        20                        0   5           10            15        20
                                          Quarter                                                            Quarter

                                  Pre-Crisis         Post-Crisis                                     Pre-Crisis        Post-Crisis
                                                                                  .5
            1        .8




                                                                                  0
log(Market Leverage)




                                                                         log(Book Equity)
            .6




                                                                               -.5
    .4




                                                                                  -1
            .2




                                                                                  -1.5
            0




                          0   5           10             15        20                        0   5           10            15        20
                                          Quarter                                                            Quarter

                                  Pre-Crisis         Post-Crisis                                     Pre-Crisis        Post-Crisis

Notes: These figures show estimated impulse response functions for BHCs. The figures show the estimated im-
pulse response to a one unit negative returns shock. Dashed lines denote the 95% confidence interval. Standard
errors are clustered by bank. The "post-crisis" period begins in 2007 Q4. Data on market capitalization and
returns are from CRSP, and all other data are from the FR Y-9C. The panels display the impulse responses of
log liabilities, log market capitalization, log market leverage, and log book equity. Market leverage is defined
as log(Liabilities/Market Capitalization), so that it represents the difference between the response of log liabili-
ties and log market capitalization (results using log(Liabilities + Market Capitalization)/Market Capitalization) are
extremely similar).




                                                                        19
                                               Figure 12: Impulse Responses for Large Banks




                                                                                    0
            0
            -.2




                                                                                       -.5
                                                                          log(Market Cap)
log(Liability)
   -.4




                                                                         -1
            -.6




                                                                                    -1.5
            -.8




                          0   5           10             15        20                           0   5           10            15        20
                                          Quarter                                                               Quarter

                                  Pre-Crisis         Post-Crisis                                        Pre-Crisis        Post-Crisis
                                                                                    0
            1        .8




                                                                                          -.2
log(Market Leverage)




                                                                         log(Book Equity)
             .6




                                                                               -.4
    .4




                                                                                    -.6
            .2




                                                                                    -.8
            0




                          0   5           10             15        20                           0   5           10            15        20
                                          Quarter                                                               Quarter

                                  Pre-Crisis         Post-Crisis                                        Pre-Crisis        Post-Crisis

Notes: These figures show estimated impulse response functions for BHCs. The figures show the estimated im-
pulse response to a one unit negative returns shock. Dashed lines denote the 95% confidence interval. Standard
errors are clustered by bank. The "post-crisis" period begins in 2007 Q4. Data on market capitalization and
returns are from CRSP, and all other data are from the FR Y-9C. The panels display the impulse responses of
log liabilities, log market capitalization, log market leverage, and log book equity. Market leverage is defined
as log(Liabilities/Market Capitalization), so that it represents the difference between the response of log liabili-
ties and log market capitalization (results using log(Liabilities + Market Capitalization)/Market Capitalization) are
extremely similar).




                                                                        20
                 Table 6: Heterogeneity in Impulse Responses: Small vs. Large Banks
                              Response After 10 Quarters        Response After 20 Quarters
                               Small    Large     p-value on Equality     Small     Large     p-value on Equality


                 Pre-         -1.13     -1.09            0.75             -1.22    -1.14             0.61
   Market        Crisis
   Equity                     (0.08)   (0.07)                            (0.12)    (0.11)

                 Post-        -0.71     -0.76            0.71             -0.58    -0.61             0.84
                 Crisis       (0.14)   (0.06)                            (0.14)    (0.07)

                 Pre-         -0.42     -0.33            0.39             -0.65    -0.54             0.52
                 Crisis
   Liabilities                (0.07)   (0.07)                            (0.13)    (0.10)

                 Post-        -0.13     -0.15            0.49             -0.23    -0.25             0.67
                 Crisis       (0.02)   (0.02)                            (0.05)    (0.03)
                 Pre-          0.71     0.76             0.59             0.57      0.60             0.87
   Market        Crisis       (0.08)   (0.05)                            (0.11)    (0.09)
   Leverage
                 Post-         0.58     0.61             0.81             0.35      0.35             0.95
                 Crisis       (0.13)   (0.06)                            (0.11)    (0.06)
                 Pre-         -0.25     -0.31            0.68             -0.29    -0.49             0.44
   Book          Crisis       (0.12)   (0.08)                            (0.23)    (0.13)
   Equity
                 Post-        -0.78     -0.44            0.04             -0.73    -0.50             0.32
                 Crisis       (0.15)   (0.09)                            (0.20)    (0.12)

Notes: The table compares impulse responses of small vs. large BHCs. BHCs are categorized into the small vs.
large group based on their total assets in 2000 Q1, relative to the median for all banks in the IRF sample. The
first column shows the cumulative impulse response after 10 quarters of each variable, pre-crisis and post-crisis, to
a one unit negative return shock, for small banks. The second column shows the same results, but for large banks.
Standard errors, clustered at the bank level, are in parentheses. The third column shows the p-value of a test of
equality between the impulse response for small banks vs. large banks. The fourth through sixth columns mirror
the first three columns, but examining the cumulative impulse response after 20 quarters.




                                                         21
         Table 7: Heterogeneity in Impulse Responses: Low vs. High Trading Asset Ratio
                            Response After 10 Quarters        Response After 20 Quarters
                               Low       High     p-value on Equality      Low      High      p-value on Equality


                 Pre-         -1.10     -1.20            0.60             -1.15    -1.32             0.54
   Market        Crisis
   Equity                     (0.05)   (0.19)                            (0.07)    (0.28)

                 Post-        -0.76     -0.57            0.11             -0.60    -0.47             0.33
                 Crisis       (0.09)   (0.08)                            (0.10)    (0.09)

                 Pre-         -0.36     -0.36            0.99             -0.56    -0.63             0.78
                 Crisis
   Liabilities                (0.05)   (0.14)                            (0.08)    (0.22)

                 Post-        -0.14     -0.15            0.73             -0.24    -0.25             0.91
                 Crisis       (0.02)   (0.04)                            (0.03)    (0.05)
                 Pre-          0.74     0.84             0.35             0.59      0.70             0.50
   Market        Crisis       (0.05)   (0.10)                            (0.07)    (0.14)
   Leverage
                 Post-         0.63     0.42             0.08             0.37      0.22             0.25
                 Crisis       (0.08)   (0.09)                            (0.08)    (0.09)
                 Pre-         -0.25     -0.42            0.35             -0.28    -0.75             0.17
   Book          Crisis       (0.07)   (0.17)                            (0.13)    (0.32)
   Equity
                 Post-        -0.62     -0.45            0.39             -0.66    -0.54             0.64
                 Crisis       (0.10)   (0.16)                            (0.13)    (0.20)

Notes: The table compares impulse responses of low vs. high trading asset ratio BHCs. BHCs are categorized into
the low vs. high group based on their trading assets as a share of total assets in 2000 Q1, relative to the median
for all banks in the IRF sample. The first column shows the cumulative impulse response after 10 quarters of each
variable, pre-crisis and post-crisis, to a one unit negative return shock, for low banks. The second column shows the
same results, but for high banks. Standard errors, clustered at the bank level, are in parentheses. The third column
shows the p-value of a test of equality between the impulse response for low vs. high banks. The fourth through
sixth columns mirror the first three columns, but examining the cumulative impulse response after 20 quarters.




                                                         22
     Table 8: Heterogeneity in Impulse Responses: Low vs. High Risk-Weighted Asset Ratio
                            Response After 10 Quarters       Response After 20 Quarters
                                Low      High      p-value on Equality     Low       High     p-value on Equality


                 Pre-         -1.09     -1.15             0.59            -1.10     -1.22             0.43
   Market        Crisis
   Equity                     (0.07)    (0.08)                            (0.11)    (0.12)

                 Post-        -0.72     -0.79             0.64            -0.52     -0.66             0.44
                 Crisis       (0.12)    (0.09)                            (0.14)    (0.11)

                 Pre-         -0.29     -0.41             0.21            -0.47     -0.66             0.20
                 Crisis
   Liabilities                (0.06)    (0.07)                            (0.10)    (0.11)

                 Post-        -0.13     -0.17             0.17            -0.25     -0.25             0.97
                 Crisis       (0.03)    (0.02)                            (0.05)    (0.03)
                 Pre-          0.80      0.73             0.47             0.63      0.56             0.59
   Market        Crisis       (0.07)    (0.06)                            (0.09)    (0.10)
   Leverage
                 Post-         0.59      0.62             0.82             0.27      0.41             0.31
                 Crisis       (0.11)    (0.09)                            (0.11)    (0.09)
                 Pre-         -0.19     -0.35             0.23            -0.24     -0.45             0.40
   Book          Crisis       (0.10)    (0.09)                            (0.16)    (0.18)
   Equity
                 Post-        -0.49     -0.74             0.17            -0.51     -0.81             0.23
                 Crisis       (0.09)    (0.16)                            (0.11)    (0.23)

Notes: The table compares impulse responses of low vs. high risk-weighted asset ratio BHCs. BHCs are categorized
into the low vs. high group based on their risk-weighted assets as a share of total assets in 2000 Q1, relative to the
median for all banks in the IRF sample. The first column shows the cumulative impulse response after 10 quarters
of each variable, pre-crisis and post-crisis, to a one unit negative return shock, for low banks. The second column
shows the same results, but for high banks. Standard errors, clustered at the bank level, are in parentheses. The
third column shows the p-value of a test of equality between the impulse response for low vs. high banks. The
fourth through sixth columns mirror the first three columns, but examining the cumulative impulse response after
20 quarters.




                                                         23
            Table 9: Heterogeneity in Impulse Responses: Low vs. High Mortgage Ratio
                             Response After 10 Quarters        Response After 20 Quarters
                               Low       High     p-value on Equality      Low      High      p-value on Equality


                 Pre-         -1.04     -1.21            0.17             -1.07    -1.27             0.26
   Market        Crisis
   Equity                     (0.05)   (0.11)                            (0.07)    (0.17)

                 Post-        -0.75     -0.75            0.98             -0.61    -0.56             0.79
                 Crisis       (0.13)   (0.08)                            (0.17)    (0.09)

                 Pre-         -0.28     -0.46            0.11             -0.45    -0.73             0.09
                 Crisis
   Liabilities                (0.05)   (0.10)                            (0.08)    (0.15)

                 Post-        -0.17     -0.11            0.09             -0.28    -0.19             0.13
                 Crisis       (0.02)   (0.02)                            (0.05)    (0.03)
                 Pre-          0.76     0.75             0.92             0.62      0.54             0.55
   Market        Crisis       (0.06)   (0.07)                            (0.08)    (0.11)
   Leverage
                 Post-         0.59     0.64             0.72             0.34      0.37             0.81
                 Crisis       (0.11)   (0.09)                            (0.13)    (0.07)
                 Pre-         -0.20     -0.36            0.32             -0.27    -0.42             0.63
   Book          Crisis       (0.07)   (0.15)                            (0.09)    (0.30)
   Equity
                 Post-        -0.66     -0.56            0.57             -0.70    -0.59             0.65
                 Crisis       (0.10)   (0.14)                            (0.13)    (0.19)

Notes: The table compares impulse responses of low vs. high mortgage ratio BHCs. BHCs are categorized into the
low vs. high group based on their real estate loans as a share of total assets in 2000 Q1, relative to the median
for all banks in the IRF sample. The first column shows the cumulative impulse response after 10 quarters of each
variable, pre-crisis and post-crisis, to a one unit negative return shock, for low banks. The second column shows the
same results, but for high banks. Standard errors, clustered at the bank level, are in parentheses. The third column
shows the p-value of a test of equality between the impulse response for low vs. high banks. The fourth through
sixth columns mirror the first three columns, but examining the cumulative impulse response after 20 quarters.




                                                         24
C       Model Appendix: Derivations and Proofs
C.1     Derivation of Laws of motion
Summary Table. The summary table of the drift and jump objects as functions of the ratios
{, q } is the following:


                    Table 10: Drift and Jump Variables in terms of {, q }
        Formula                                             Interpretation
    W
 µ      rL ( + 1) - rD  + ( -  (, 1)) ( + 1) - c            Levered returns
 µL      ( + 1)                                             Drift of loans
    ¯           1
 µL      -      q
                    -1   ( + 1)                             Drift of book loans
 µD      rD  - rL +  ( + 1) + ( (, 1) +  ) ( + 1) + c       Drift of deposits
 µq     ( + ) (1 - q )q                                     Drift of q
 µ        - µW ( + 1)                                       Drift of leverage
 µW
  c     -1                                                  Dividend effect on wealth growth
 µW
        (1 -  (, 1)) ( + 1)                                 Issuance effect on wealth growth
 µc     ( + 1)                                              Dividend effect on leverage growth
 µ      (1 - (1 -  (, 1)) ( + 1))( + 1)                     Issuance effect on leverage growth
 µq
        (1 - q ) q                                          Issuance effect on q growth
 JW     - ( + 1)                                            Jump in wealth
 JL     - ( + 1)                                            Jump in loans
  ¯
 JL     -  1 q
               ( + 1)                                       Jump in book loans
 JD     0                                                   Jump in deposits
          (- q )
 Jq     - (1- q )
                  q                                         Jump in q
         (+1)
 J      1-(+1)
                                                            Jump in leverage

   The rest of the appendix, derives the terms of this table and the proofs of the theoretical
results.

Notation and Definitions. We begin by presenting some definitions and deriving the laws of
motion of the state variables. We use µx and J x to refer to the drift and jump components of the
path of a variable x scaled by wealth W , respectively.
   Define the net investment rate of the bank as:

                                             I/L - 

and express the dividend-to-equity ratio as:

                                               c  C/W.
                                                                                       ¯ D from
Note that the following identities allow us to recover the original state variables L, L,
the triplet {, q, W }:




                                                 25
                                       L = ( + 1) W                                           (19)
                                       D = W                                                  (20)
                                       ¯ = q -1 ( + 1) W.
                                       L                                                      (21)

We present some observations that aid the proof of the proposition.

Observation 1: homogeneity of  in W . We prove results for a more general class of adjust-
ment costs,
                                                 
                                           I
                             (I, L) = I +     -  L.
                                          2 L
Recall that in the body of the paper  = 2.
   We can factor out L and employing the definition of  to obtain:

                                                       
                                   (I, L) =     ++      || L
                                                      2
                                           =  (, 1) L + L.

Thus, we can express the funding cost relative to equity as:

                                 (I, L) /W = ( (, 1) +  ) ( + 1) ,                            (22)
which is a function independent of the bank's size and depends on leverage and the investment
rate.

Observation 2: homogeneity of regulatory constraint in W . We want to express the reg-
ulatory capital requirement in terms of the end-of-period choices (, q ). The regulatory constraint
is
                                             D   L, ¯                                          (23)
as we noted in the main body of the text. By dividing both sides by bank net worth, we obtain:

                                           D  ¯ L
                                              L
                                             
                                           W  LW
   Using the definitions of  and q :
                                            1
                                             ( + 1)
                                            q
and clearing out , we obtain:
                                                     1
                                                 q      .                                     (24)
                                                 
                                                     -1
Note that the constraint is independent of W and only depends on (, q ) . The solvency constraint
is expressed in terms of leverage:

                                        ¯  (1 - )/.
                                                                                              (25)



                                                26
Hence, we summarize the set of states where the bank is not liquidated by:

                                                     1 ¯
                                        = min    q      , .                                  (26)
                                                 
                                                     -1

Observation 3: Derivations of Laws of Motion. With probability  over interval , the
bank receives deterministic default shock  < 1. Let:
                                           0   with prob 1 - dt
                                dN =
                                           1   with prob dt

denote a default event process. Recall that dN is a Poisson process.
   Now consider a time interval of length . The law of motion for fundamental loans satisfies:

                          Lt+ = (1 -  ) Lt + It  - Lt (Nt+ - Nt ) ,

with the interpretation that the first term is the non-maturing fraction of loans, the second are
loan issuances, and the third are losses in a time interval. Taking   0, we obtain the following
law of motion:
                                     dL = (I - L) dt - LdN.
We express this law of motion in terms of net worth, replacing (19), to obtain:

                              dL =  ( + 1) W dt -  ( + 1) W dN.                              (27)

To ease the notation, we define the growth rate of fundamental loans and the jump relative to net
worth:
                              µL   ( + 1) and J L  - ( + 1) .
   Similarly, for deposits we have that:

                  Dt+ = 1 + rD  Dt - rL  +   Lt +  (It , Lt )  + Ct 

with the interpretation that the first term is the increase in deposits that results from paying
interest with deposits; the second term is the reduction in deposits by the interest and principal
payments on outstanding loans; the third term is the increase in deposits as a result of loan
issuances; and the final term is dividend payments, all paid with deposits. Taking   0, we
obtain the following law of motion:

                          dD = rD D - rL +  L +  (I, L) + C dt.

We express this law of motion in terms of wealth, by using (20), to obtain:

                 dD = rD  - rL +  ( + 1) + ( (, 1) +  ) ( + 1) + c W dt.                     (28)

We define the growth rate of deposits relative to net worth:

                    µD  rD  - rL +  ( + 1) + ( (, 1) +  ) ( + 1) + c.




                                                27
   Finally, the law of motion for book loans satisfies:
                 ¯ t+ = (1 -  ) Lt + It  -  L
                 L                          ¯ t - Lt -  Lt (Nt+ - Nt ) ,

with the interpretation that the first term represents how book loans fall as the principal of
fundamental loans gets repaid; the second term increases book loans by newly issued loans; the
third term decreases book loans at the speed of loan loss recognition  times the gap in the book
versus fundamental loans; and the final term is the fraction of losses recognized in books upon
receiving a default shock. Taking   0, we obtain the following law of motion:

                              ¯ = (-L + I ) dt -  L
                             dL                   ¯ - L dt -  LdN.

We express this law of motion, by using (21), in terms of wealth to obtain:

                      ¯ = -             1                       1
                     dL                   -1     ( + 1) W dt -   ( + 1) W dN.                              (29)
                                        q                       q

We define the growth rate of book loans and the jump relative to net worth accordingly:

                       ¯                1                     ¯    1
                     µL   -               -1     ( + 1) and J L  -  ( + 1) .
                                        q                          q

Observation 3: growth independence. Next, we present the evolution of net worth, which
evolves according to:

              - dD
        dW = dL                                                                                    

              =  rL +  ( + 1) - rD  + ( - ( (, 1) +  )) ( + 1) -                        c           W dt
                                                    capital loss from adjustment   dividend rate
                           levered returns
              = (- ( + 1)) W dN.                                                                           (30)
                     loss rate

where the second line uses the laws of motion in (27) and (28), and employed observation 1. The
interpretation of this expression is natural: the terms multiplying rates represent the net interest
margin on the bank, which are the banks levered return; the second term are the capital gains
that are accounted immediately as the bank creates an asset that can be worth more or less than
a liability; the third term is the banks' dividend rate; and the final term is the loss rate, which
scales with leverage. To aid the calculations, define the drift of the growth rate of bank equity as:

                      µW  rL ( + 1) - rD  + ( -  (, 1)) ( + 1) - c W

and denote the jump component of wealth as:

                                       J W  - ( + 1) W = J L W.

We also note that:
                                               µW = µL - µD .




                                                    28
Observation 4: law of motion for leverage. Next, we derive the law of motion for leverage
 given any choice of  and c. Employing the formula for the differential of a ratio we get:

                                                      D W         1
                                 µ =        µD W -      µ W                                    (31)
                                                      W           W
                                      = µD - µW
                                      = µL - ( + 1) µW .

Upon a default shock, the discontinuous jump in leverage is given by:

                                  D          D                 1
                     J =                   -   =                      - 1 .
                           (W -  ( + 1) W ) W             1 -  ( + 1)

Therefore, combining the drift and jump portions of the law of motion, we obtain:

                                                           ( + 1)
                           d =  - µW ( + 1) dt +                    dN.                        (32)
                                                        1 -  ( + 1)

The interpretation of this law of motion is that leverage increases with the issuance rate, falls as
loans mature and falls as the bank makes earns income on its current portfolio, µW . We thus have:

                                      µ =  - µW ( + 1) .

Naturally, leverage jumps with defaults, and more so the more levered the bank is.

Observation 5: law of motion for q. Next, we produce the law of motion for leverage  given
any choice of  and c. We first describe the continuous portion of the law of motion dq c . Employing
the formula for the ratio:
                                              dLc dL  ¯c
                                      dq c =      - ¯ qdt.
                                               L     L
The first term is
                                                dLc
                                                    =
                                                 L
and the second term is
                                       1
                          ¯c
                         dL    -       q
                                           -1    ( + 1) W
                          ¯  =        1                     = q -  (1 - q ) .
                          L           q
                                          ( + 1) W

Consequently:
                                     dq c = ( + ) (1 - q ) qdt.                                (33)
Upon a default shock, the discontinuous jump in leverage is given by:

                           L - L        (1 - ) L         ( -  q )
                      Jq = ¯      -q =           ¯ -q =-           q.
                           L -  L      (1 -  q ) L       (1 -  q )




                                                 29
Therefore, combining the continuous and discrete portions of the law of motion, we obtain:

                                                                     -  q
                              dq = ( + ) (1 - q ) qdt -                          qdt.        (34)
                                                                    1 -  q

Finally, note the relationship:
                                                              ¯       q
                                    dq c = µq = µL - µL q                  dt.
                                                                    ( + 1)

Duffie-Epstein. The value function of the Duffie-Epstein satisfies:
                                                        
                                        Vt = Et            f (Cs , Vs ) ds,
                                                    t

where the f is given by:
                                                                          1-
                                 C 1- - {1 + (1 -  ) V } 1-
                   f (C, V )                         1-
                              1-    {1 + (1 -  ) V } 1- -1
                                                             C 1-
                             =       {1 + (1 -  ) V }                  1- - 1 .
                                  1-                  {1 + (1 -  ) V } 1-

A useful calculation is the derivative with respect to dividends:

                                                                  C -
                                   fc (C, V ) =                           1-     .
                                                   {1 + (1 -  ) V } 1- -1

We have some limits of interest. First, the limit as risk-aversion vanishes:

                                                            C 1-
                           lim f (C, V ) =      (1 + V )            -1 .
                            0                1-          (1 + V )1-

and
                                     lim fc (C, V ) = C - (1 + V ) .
                                      0

   Second, the limit as the IES goes to 1:

                    C 1-                    C 1-
          lim               - 1 = lim               - 1 - V = log C - V.
          1 1 -  (1 + V )1-       0 1 -  (1 + V )1-


and
                                                                              (1 + V )
                            lim = fc (C, V ) = C - (1 + V ) =                          .
                            1                                                    C




                                                        30
C.2    Proof of Proposition 1
In this Appendix we prove the following detailed version of Proposition 1:
                                                  ¯ D = (1 + v (, q )) W - 1, where v is the
Proposition 2 [Bank's Problem] Given {, q }, V L, L,
solution to the following HJB equation:

                0 = max f (c, v ) +        v µ + vq µq             + (1 + v ) µW . . .                         (35)
                    {c,}
                                      change in financial ratios       equity growth
                                                  q                W
                 +      1 + v  + J ,q + J                1+J            - (1 + v ) in (, q ) /
                                        default jump in wealth


and v = vo for {, q }  . Policy functions can be recovered through the following relationships:
      ¯ D = c (, q ) · W and I L, L,
C L, L,                            ¯ D = ( (, q ) +  ) · L. The bank's market value satisfies
     ¯ D  s (, q ) · W , where s solves:
S L, L,

           I s = c (, q ) + s µ + sq µq + sµW +  s  + J  , q + J q                              1 + JW - s ,   (36)

and s = 0 for {, q }  . Finally, Tobin's Q is given by:
                                                                                       -1
                            Q (, q ) = s (, q ) ×            q -1 - 1  + 1                  .                  (37)


Formulation. We next prove Proposition 2. The primitive bank value HJB equation is given
by:
                                                           ¯
                    0 = max f C, V L, L,¯ D + E dV L, L, D                          (38)
                        {C,I }                          dt
subject to the laws of motion (27), (28), (29), and the boundary V = Vo when (23) and (25) are
not satisfied. In the objective, the differential form is:
                 ¯ D
         E dV L, L,                                                              ¯
                                   ¯ D µL W + V L
                           = VL L, L,                ¯ D µL W + VD L, L,
                                                ¯ L, L,               ¯ D µD W
              dt
                                                  ¯ D - V L, L,
                           +  V (1 - ) L, (1 -  ) L,         ¯ D                                   .

Conjecture. We conjecture a solution to the value function and verify that it satisfies the HJB
equation. The conjecture is:

                                ¯ D =         [1 + (1 -  ) v (, q )] W 1- - 1
                           V L, L,                                            ,                                (39)
                                                           1-
                                                                              ¯ D = c (, q ) W
for a suitable candidate v (, q ). Under this conjecture, we verify that C L, L,
and I = ( (, q ) +  ) ( + 1) W.

Factorization.       We perform some useful calculations on the guess (39). In particular, we
factorize equity from every term in the HJB equation. Under the conjecture, we have that:

                             (1 + (1 -  ) V ) = [1 + (1 -  ) v ] W 1- .


                                                        31
Therefore,

                                            [1 + (1 -  ) v (, q )] W 1- - 1
             f (C, V ) = f    c (, q ) W,
                                                         1-
                                                         c (, q )1- W 1-
                      =       [1 + (1 -  ) v ] W 1-                          1- - 1
                           1-                       ([1 + (1 -  ) v ] W 1- ) 1-
                                                         c (, q )1-
                      =       [1 + (1 -  ) v ] W 1-                    1- - 1
                        1-                          ([1 + (1 -  ) v ]) 1-
                      = f (c (, q ) , v ) W 1- .                                                  (40)

The change in the value function with respect to loans is:
                                                                                    1      
                                                           vq (1-q )q +v (+1)       -1
                                  D
                 1 + (1 -  ) v L-D , L
                                       L
                                       ¯  (L - D)1- (v       (+1)-(1+v ))(+1)
                                                                                         - 1
      VL =                                                                                   /L
                                                1-

                    D      1-       1
             = -v       2W     + vq ¯ W 1- + [1 + (1 -  ) v ] W -
                 (L - D)            L
                 W                  1
             = -v 2 W 1- + vq 1            W 1- + [1 + (1 -  ) v ] W -
                 W            q
                                ( +   1) W
                               q
             =   -v  + vq           + [1 + (1 -  ) v ] W - .                                      (41)
                             ( + 1)

The change in the value function with respect to deposits is:

                                1 + (1 -  ) v     D
                                                    ,L
                                                     ¯
                                                 L-D L
                                                              (L - D)1- - 1
                  VD =                                                         /D
                                                   1-
                           1 1-             D
                       = v    W    + v           W 1- - [1 + (1 -  ) v ] W -
                           W            (L - D)2
                            1            W
                       = v 2 W 1- + v 2 W 1- - [1 + (1 -  ) v ] W -
                           W             W
                       = (v (1 + ) - [1 + (1 -  ) v ]) W - .                                      (42)
                                                                           ¯ is given by:
Finally, the derivative of the value function with respect with respect to L

                                  1 + (1 -  ) v     D
                                                      ,L
                                                       ¯
                                                   L-D L
                                                               (L - D)1- - 1
                    VL
                     ¯ =                                                         ¯
                                                                               / L
                                                     1-
                                L
                          = -vq ¯ 2 W 1-
                                L
                                    ( + 1) W             1-
                          = -vq                    2W
                                  1
                                  q
                                    ( + 1) W
                                    q2
                          = -vq          W - .                                                    (43)
                                  ( + 1)


                                                    32
Finally, the jump in the value function after a default even is:
                                                        ¯ D - V L, L,
                              J V = V (1 - ) L, (1 -  ) L,         ¯ D

which according to our guess can be written as:
                                                                        1-
    V            1 + (1 -  ) v  + J  , q + J q        1 + JW W               -1       [1 + (1 -  ) v (, q )] W 1- - 1
J         =                                                                       -
                                        1-                                                         1-
                 1 + (1 -  ) v  + J  , q + J q                     1-    [1 + (1 -  ) v (, q )]
          =                                           1 + JW            -                       W 1-
                             1-                                                  1-
                                                                                                      
                                             1-
                 1 + (1 -  ) v   1-(+1)
                                        ,   1- q
                                                      q                 1-     [1 + (1 -  ) v (, q )]  1-
          =                                                   1 + JW        -                          W  .          (44)
                                 1-                                                    1-


Verification. We verify that the conjecture satisfies its HJB equation. With the factorizations
above, equations (40-44), we have that (38) can be written as:

        0 = max f (c, v ) W 1- . . .
               {c,}

                                                          -
                                                                                   L 
                                                                   (1 + )    0
                                                   
                                                                                   µ
                                                                              q2
              + v vq (1 + (1 -  ) v )          ×       q
                                                      (+1)
                                                                      0   - (+1) × µD  W 1- . . .
                                                                                  
                                                                                     ¯
                                                          1          -1      0     µL
                                                      µV
                                                                                                         
                                                   1-
                      1 + (1 -  ) v    1-(+1)
                                              ,   1- q                       1-       [1 + (1 -  ) v (, q )]  1-
              +                                                    1 + JW         -                          W   .
                                      1-                                                      1-

                                                               J v

where we used the fact that any choice of C and I , can be expressed as a choice of c (, q ) W as
there is a one to one map from the {, q, W } space to the original space--by change of coordinates.
Then, we can factor wealth from this HJB equation to express it as:

                                       0 = W 1- max f (c, v ) + µV + J V ,
                                                   {c,}


and since the maximization is independent of net worth, this verifies the linearity of the controls.
To verify the conjecture, we need to express the drifts and jumps, µV , J V exclusively in terms
of {, q } . To do so, observe that:




                                                              33
                                     -      (1 + )    0             µL
                                                                       
                                      q                 2
                      µV     =       (+1)
                                               0   - (q+1)
                                                           ×        µD 
                                                                     ¯
                                      1       -1      0             µL
                                     -      (1 + )    0                µL
                                                                            
                                      q                 2
                             =       (+1)
                                               0   - q ×
                                                      (+1)
                                                                    µL - µW  . . .
                                                                        ¯
                                      1      -1          0             µL
                                -µL + (1 + ) µL - µW
                                                                 
                                     q        q     ¯
                             =     (+1)
                                        µL - (+1) qµL            
                                    µL - µL - µW
                                 
                                µ
                             =  µq  .
                                µW

Thus, we have that,
                              µV (, q ) = v µ + vq µq + (1 + (1 -  ) v ) µW ,
where all the terms are functions of the state variables {, q } .
  Consequently, the HJB solution to the HJB equation:

                   0 = max f (c, v ) + v µ + vq µq + (1 + (1 -  ) v ) µW + J V ,                  (45)
                           {c,}


subject to the solvency conditions (24) and (25 and the liquidiation value vo , and the laws of
motion (32-34). Since the choice is independent of wealth, and only depends on  and q , this
              ¯ is only a function of {, q }, and is not indexed by W . Thus, we verify the conjecture
verifies that v
that the formula (39) satisfies the HJB equation (35), for v , a solution to .
    Applying the result to the special case with  = 0, yields:

       0 = max f (c, v ) + v µ + vq µq + (1 + v ) µW
               {c,}

                                                   1-
               +      1+v                     ,              q   (1 -  ( + 1)) - (1 + v (, q ))
                                  1 -  ( + 1)     1 -  q

subject to the boundary conditions given by (24) and (25)--taking the value vo , and the laws of
motion (32), (34).




                                                    34
Limits of Interest. We now let   0 to obtain:

                           - (1 + )          0                     µL
                                                                      
                            q                  2
                   0 =  (+1)         0    - (q+1)
                                                   ×               µD 
                                                                    ¯
                            1       -1       0                     µL
                           - (1 + )          0                        µL
                                                                           
                            q                  2
                     =  (+1)         0    - (q+1)
                                                   ×               µL - µW  . . .
                                                                       ¯
                            1       -1       0                        µL
                          -µ + (1 + ) µ - µW
                               L             L
                                                    
                                 q        q      ¯
                     =         (+1)
                                    µL - (+1) qµL   
                                  L     L    W
                                µ - µ -µ
                          
                          µ
                     =    µq  .
                          µW

Hence, we obtain:

                                     c1-
       0 = max           (1 + v )         1- 
                                              - 1 + v µ + vq µq + (1 + v ) µW
               {c,}   1-          (1 + v )
                                                  1-
              +        1+v                ,                q    (1 -  ( + 1)) - (1 + v (, q )) .
                              1 -  ( + 1)        1 -  q

Now consider the limite where   1. We recover:

      v = max  log c + v µ + vq µq + (1 + v ) µW
               {c,}

                                                   1-
               +        1+v                ,                q    (1 -  ( + 1)) - (1 + v (, q )) .
                               1 -  ( + 1)        1 -  q

C.3     Policy Functions
We derive the first-order conditions of this problem.

Optimal Dividend. The first-order condition for dividends is given by:

                               fc (c, v ) + v µ                      W
                                               c + (1 + (1 -  ) v ) µc = 0,

and arranging terms, we obtain:

                                fc (c, v ) + v ( + 1) = (1 + (1 -  ) v ) .                          (46)

In the special case of risk neutrality:

                                       c-
                                                 + v ( + 1) = (1 + v ) ,
                                     (1 + v )-




                                                     35
which we can solve to obtain:

                                                (1 + (1 -  ) v )
                          c = 1/                                           .                    (47)
                                     (((1 + (1 -  ) v ) - v ( + 1)))1/

Take the risk-neutral limit,   0 and we obtain:

                                                    (1 + v )
                                c = 1/                                 .
                                           (((1 + v ) - v ( + 1)))1/

In the special case of v = 0 we obtain:

                                          c = 1/ (1 + v )1-1/ .

In the special case of   1, we have that:
                                                     
                                          c=                   .                                (48)
                                                1 - v (+1)
                                                      (1+v )


The solution resembles closely the solution to a portfolio problem where the dividend rate is exactly
the discount rate . However, in this problem, because leverage is a slow moving object, there's
a correction term given by, v (   +1)
                                 (1+¯
                                    v)
                                       , which measures the additional advantage of impacting on
leverage through the dividend decision. If leverage is too high, such that it reaches beyond the
point of zero, then dividend rate is distorted downwards.
    The elasticity of dividends with respect to leverage in this special case is given by:
                                                                 
                                                    (v )2 (+1)
                                     v (   +1)
                                          (1+v )
                                                 - (1+v ) (1+v )
                           dc =                    (+1)
                                                                  cd
                                            1 - v (1+v)
                                                                          
                                        v                  v
                                         v
                                            (   + 1)  -  (1+v )
                                                                (  + 1) v
                              =                                            cd
                                              (1 + v ) - v ( + 1)


Optimal Issuance. Next, we discuss the first-order condition in issuances, which yields:

                                v  µ       q                    W
                                     + vq µ + (1 + (1 -  ) v ) µ = 0.

Using the expressions in Table 10, we obtain:

  vq (1 - q ) q + v (1 - (1 -  (, 1)) ( + 1)) ( + 1) + (1 + (1 -  ) v ) (1 -  (, 1)) ( + 1) = 0,

and collecting terms yields:

        vq (1 - q ) q + v ( + 1) + ((1 + (1 -  ) v ) - v ( + 1)) (1 -  (, 1)) ( + 1) = 0.       (49)

Using the first-order condition yields:

                                               vq (1 - q ) q + v ( + 1)
                      (1 -  (, 1)) =                                           .
                                          (v ( + 1) - (1 + (1 -  ) v )) ( + 1)

                                                   36
The right hand side equals:
                                                  
                            (1 -  (, 1)) = sign ()  (sign () ())-1
                                                  2
and thus:
                                                                                        1
                                            vq (1 - q ) q + v ( + 1)                    -1
              (sign (()) ) = sign ()                                                          .
                                     2
                                        (v ( + 1) - (1 + (1 -  ) v )) ( + 1)
Thus, we have that issuances are given by
                                                1
                          vq (1-q )q +v (+1)    -1                 vq (1-q )q +v (+1)
               
               
                      (v (+1)-(1+(1- )v ))(+1)
                                                        if   
                                                               (v (+1)-(1+(1- )v ))(+1)
                                                                                            >0
                    2                                        2

           =
                                                   1
                -
                             vq (1-q )q +v (+1)   -1               vq (1-q )q +v (+1)
                       (v (+1)-(1+(1- )v ))(+1)
                                                        if   
                                                               (v (+1)-(1+(1- )v ))(+1)
                                                                                            < 0.
                      2                                      2


In the limit as   0, we obtain:
                                             1
                         vq (1-q )q +v (+1)  -1                 vq (1-q )q +v (+1)
                   
                   
                    
                        (v (+1)-(1+v ))(+1)
                                                        if   
                                                               (v (+1)-(1+v ))(+1)
                                                                                     >0
                      2                                      2

                 =
                                                1
                    -  vq (1-q)q+v (+1)
                                               -1               vq (1-q )q +v (+1)
                         (v (+1)-(1+v ))(+1)
                                                        if   
                                                               (v (+1)-(1+v ))(+1)
                                                                                     < 0.
                           2                                 2


In the special case considered in the paper,  = 2:

                                           1 -  (, 1) = .

Thus,
                                   1       vq (1 - q ) q + v ( + 1)
                               =     ·                                    .
                                         (v ( + 1) - (1 + v )) ( + 1)




                                                  37
C.4     Proofs for  = 0 and  = 1 limit
Before we proceed to derive the main result, we first derive a some preliminary observations.

No adjustment costs. Without adjustment costs on , the bank can reset leverage at will. It
can do so through an issuance intensity  that controls the drift of  and through the endogenous
jump J ¯ . In particular, the bank can choose a discrete jump in loans, J  ¯L . Thus, the process for
loans is given by:
                           dL = ( -  ) ( + 1) W dt + J L W dN + J ¯L W dN~

where dN ~ is the event of a controlled jump. Likewise, the evolution of deposits satisfies:

                                                                   ¯L W dN
                       dD = c - µW ( -  ) ( + 1) W dt + J L W dN + J     ~.

                                                          ¯L which yields:
Next, we can define the controlled jump in leverage given J

                                   D+J ¯L W
                        ¯ =                              ¯L     ¯L
                        J                   ¯L W -  =  + J -  = J .
                                 ¯L W - D - J
                               L+J

Shadow Boundary. Let  be the value of leverage such that a loan default shock takes leverage
to the regulatory limit:
                               (1 - )         (1 - ) 
                          =              =               ,
                                1 +         1 - (1 - ) 
As in the text, we label this leverage, the shadow liquidation boundary.

Main Result. In this Appendix we prove the following result:

Proposition 3 [Bank's Problem] Let  = 1 and  = 0. Then, leverage  is constant. For suitable
parameter conditions,  = . In that case, the equity multiplier is the constant that solves

  0     =      max f (c, v )    +   (1 + v ) rL + rL - rD  - c      +    (1 + v )   1 + JW - 1 .
                {c,}


Then, for dN = 0 the dividend rate is the constant, c that solves

                                        c = 1/ (1 + v )1-1/ ,                                   (50)

the issuance rate is  such that µ = 0.
    Furthremore, dN ~ = dN and for dN = 1,  is reflected back to  (J    ¯ = -J  ). Finally, the
multiplier v is the constant that solves (35) given the constant values c and . The necessary
parameter condition for this dynamics are:

                                        rL - rD
                                                 [v0 , 1 + v ] .
                                           


Derivation of the Main Result. For this proof we work directly with the risk-neutral case, as
we showed already the effect of risk-aversion in the earlier proof. Consider the case where  = 0
such that  (, 1) =  and  = 1. In this case, we have that each issued loans increases deposits one


                                                  38
by one. Hence, loan issuances do not impact wealth. The evolution of net worth evolves according
to:

                         - dD
                   dW = dL                                           

                      = rL + rL - rD  -                       c       W dt -  ( + 1) W dN                   (51)
                                                     dividend rate                loss rate
                                 levered returns

where the second line uses the laws of motion in (27) and (28), and using observation 1. Since
there are no adjustment costs, leverage can be adjusted to any level immediately. It is done so
with a combination of an issuance intensity  and an endogenous discrete jump in issuances that
                             ¯ , as we show next.
produces a jump in leverage, J
   The jump in wealth upon a default shock is:

                                           J W  - ( + 1) ,

and the drift of wealth is given by levered returns minus dividends:
                                                                   

                             µW  rL + rL - rD  -                        c         .
                                                                  dividend rate
                                             levered returns

Recall that the regulatory constraint (5):

                                                                      
                                   1 =  (1 + ) /                        .
                                                                     1-
In this case,  is chosen every period and  is defined to be consistent with the drift in that choice.
Since q = 1, the relevant constraint is the regulatory constraint, and no longer the market-based
constraint. Then, the HJB equation in (45) becomes:

                          0 = max f (c, v ) + v µ + (1 + v ) µW v + J V .                                   (52)
                               {c,}


Different from (45), we conjecture that in this case, v
                                                      ¯ is a scalar rather than a function of --or q
which in this case is constant. Under this guess, the jump term upon a default event is:

                                   1-                         1                                   1
         J V = (1 + v )   1 + JW        I  + J <          1      + vo I  + J  >               1      -1 ,
                                                          
                                                              -1                              
                                                                                                  -1
where as before,
                                                        
                                          J =                  .
                                                   1 -  ( + 1)
Substituting for the drift µW , v = 0, and the jump in wealth J W in (52) we obtain:




                                                     39
  0 = max f (c, v ) + (1 + v ) rL + rL - rD  - c
      {c,}

                                                                  1                       1
                       +  (1 + v )    1 + JW       + J <      1      + vo I  + J  >   1      -1 .
                                                              
                                                                  -1                  
                                                                                          -1

Let's first solve for consumption. In this case, the first-order condition for consumption is:

                                            c-
                                                     = (1 + v ) .
                                               ¯)-
                                          (1 + v

We rearrange terms to obtain:
                                       c = 1/ (1 + v )1-1/ .                                     (53)
Next, we obtain the solution for leverage. Then, the leverage choice maximizes

  max (1 + v ) rL - rD 
       
  [0, 1-]

                                                           v0                   
      +  (1 + v ) (1 -  ( + 1)) I                <    +         I            >    .
                                     1 -  ( + 1)   1-   (1 + v¯) 1 -  ( + 1)   1-

This is a linear program. The solution thus generically fall in a corner:
                                  
                                  0
                                          if rL - rD <  [1 + v      ¯]
                                      1        L     D
                               1 -1 if r - r > U ( )                                             (54)
                                     
                                          otherwise.

Considering the interesting case where  = , substituting (50) we have that v
                                                                           ¯ solves:
                                                1-
                                                            
                                1/         1-1/
                          (1 + v        ¯)
              0 =                                  - (1 + v
                                                          ¯)
                                                            
                     1-
                                           1-
                                   (1 + v
                                        ¯)

                                                                ¯)1-1/ .
                        ¯) rL + rL - rD  + 1 + J W () - 1/ (1 + v
                 + (1 + v                                                                        (55)

This equation verifies that indeed the value function is independent of the level of leverage. Then,
since leverage is a constant,  solves µ = 0 and thus:

                                                          ¯)1-1/ .
                           = µW = rL + rL - rD  - 1/ (1 + v                                      (56)
         ¯ = -J  () whenever dN = 1.
Finally, J

Log-Limit. Consider now the limit   1. Therefore, this case produces the usual formula:

                                                 c = .




                                                  40
Thus, the value per unit of wealth is:

                                  rL + rL - rD  -  +  (1 -  ( + 1))
                     v
                     ¯ = log  +                                     .
                                                 




                                             41
C.5     Proofs for  = 0 and  = 1 limit
We begin with a preliminary set of observations.

Endogenous Jump in q . As in the previous case, in this version, banks can control leverage
immediately through a combination of an issuance intensity  and a jump in leverage. The novelty
in that with delayed accounting, the jump in loans produces a controlled jump in q . We can define
the jump in q given J¯L as

                         ¯L                    ¯L                                        ¯
                 ¯ = L + J W - q = ( + 1) + J
         ¯q q, , J                                                             ( + 1) + J
         J           ¯+J
                     L   ¯L W     q -1 ( + 1) + J¯L - q = q                   ( + 1) + q J¯ - 1 .

Thus, we can think of the banker as controlling a jump in leverage, that produces a corresponding
        ¯q .
jump in J

Liquidation and Shadow Boundary. With abuse of notation, we now define the following
function that characterizes the liquidation boundary   by the function:

                                                         ¯
                                      (q )  min           , ,
                                                       q-

and a corresponding "shadow boundary" as given by the following function:

                                                                    ¯          ( + 1)
                   (q )   (q + J q ) - J  = min         q -q       ,    -                .
                                                       1- q
                                                               -             1 -  ( + 1)

The graph of the shadow boundary is the set of points were {q, } such that given a default event,
the bank ends at the boundary of the liquidation region. Finally, note that:

                                                                       ¯ .
                                 (q + J q ) = min        q -q         ,
                                                        1- q
                                                                  -

From Liquidation to Shadow Boundary. We want to solve for a the position where the bank
                                                                                             ¯L
ends, if it jumps from the liquidation to the shadow boundary. We solve for the jump size as J
that solves:

                                        ¯q   (q ) + J
                                      q+J           ¯L .

Then, considering an initial position {q, } in the shadow boundary, the terminal jump is given
by:
                      q + Jq + J    ¯q q + J q , J
                                                 ¯L =  (q + J q ) - J  + J
                                                                         ¯L .

The critical value of q m below which market liquidation occurs is:
                                                   ¯
                                                 = .
                                           qm - 
Hence, the critical point is
                                                    1+¯
                                          qm =       ¯ .
                                                     
                                                  42
Thus, the slope of the liquidation boundary is:
                                           
                                           0
                                                                if q < q m
                                  q (q ) =
                                           - 
                                           
                                                                if q  q m .
                                               (q - )2

Likewise, the slope of the shadow boundary:
                              
                                                                                1-
                                0                                        if   1/q - q
                                                                                        < qm + 
                              
                     q (q ) =
                              - 1-           2 ·
                                                         1
                                                                ·   1
                                                                         otherwise.
                              
                                  ( 1/q-  -)        (1/q - )2       q


This observation, that the slope of the shadow boundary is negative is key for the proof.

Characteristic Curves. Consider any pair {q, } . Then, consider two jumps, J¯ and -J  ¯ such
that leverage remains constant. After the first jump,  jumps to  =  + J  . Next, observe that
after these jumps, q remains the same. After the first jump:

                                                 ( + 1) + J¯
                                   ¯q     ¯
                               q + J q, , J = q
                                                ( + 1) + q J¯  q .

Then, after the second jump, we obtain that:

                                     ( + 1) - J ¯
           ¯q q ,  , -J
        q +J          ¯        = q
                                    ( + 1) - q J ¯
                                      ( + 1) + J¯                                         q ( + 1) + q J¯
                                                                     ¯ + 1 -                              ¯
                               = q
                                     ( + 1) + q J¯ ·                +J                                ¯
                                                                                           ( + 1) + q J 
                                                                                                          J
                               = q.

Consequently, for any {q, } we define a characteristic curve as the set of points
                                         ¯q q, , J
                                       q+J       ¯ ,  + J
                                                        ¯

for any J ¯  [-, ] . A characteristic curve is a set of points for  and q that are connected
through a controlled jump in leverage. Thus, we can think of a characteristic curve as a function
q c (; o ) such given a parameter qo maps a value of leverage to a value of q --with one particular
point given by (; qo ).
     Consider now an infinitesimal increase in leverage, d, then, we obtain the following limit
                                      q (+1)+q J¯                            ¯
                                                                     q (1-q )J
                     Jq                             -q                                  µq             µq
             dq                                                                           q (1 - q )
                                       (+1)+q J¯                    (+1)+q J   ¯                         
                 lim ¯ = lim                ¯              =             ¯         =                 =    .
             d J ¯ 0 J  J¯ 0                J                            J              µ  (  + 1)     µ 
                                                                                                         

This is the slope of the characteristic curve at q and . The slope is positive and strictly so for
any q  [0, 1]. Since the curves of the characteristics are positive, but the slope of the shadow
boundaries are negative, each characteristic crosses one point of the shadow boundary, for any qo .
Thus, for each q 0  [0, 1] in the shadow boundary, we can associate one characteristic curve. This


                                                      43
definition is important for the main result.

Main Result. We prove the following result:
Proposition 4 [Bank's Problem] Let  = 1 and  = 0. Then, for any q , given suitable parameter
conditions, leverage is set to the shadow boundary  =  (q ). Then, the equity multiplier v is a
function of q that solves:


   0 = max f (c, v ) + vq µq + (1 + v ) µW +                        ¯q
                                                     1 + v q + Jq + J         1 + J W - (1 + v (q ))   ,
          {c}


subject to:
                                                            µ
                                                q ( q ) =
                                                            µq
For dN = 0 the (constant) dividend rate, c , is given by:

                                                     (1 + v (q ))
                                   c = 1/                                 ,                            (57)
                                                 1 + v (q ) - vq (1+)
                                                                 q (q )


and the issuance rate  (q ) is such that for given {c (q ) ,  (q )}

                                                            µ
                                                q ( q ) =      .                                       (58)
                                                            µq
Thus,
                                                    1             1
                               (q ) = µW (q )              -              .
                                                1 - R (q )   1 - R (q )-1
where
                                                       q (1 - q )
                                   R (q ) = q (q )                <0
                                                      (1 +  (q ))
Hence, for dN = 0, the state {, q } moves continuously along the shadow boundary. Furthermore
 ~ = dN . When dN = 1, q jumps by J q + J
dN                                         ¯q q, J
                                                 ¯ where

                                                     ( + 1) + J¯
                                ¯q q, J
                                      ¯  q
                                J
                                                    ( + 1) + q J¯ - 1 .
                   ¯ where J
and  jumps by J  + J       ¯ solves:

                                 ¯q q + J q , J
                        q + Jq + J            ¯                                  ¯ .
                                                            =  (q + J q ) - J  + J

The necessary parameter condition for this dynamics are:

                               rL - rD
                                        [U ( ) , 1 + v (q )] for any q.
                                  


Derivation of the Main Result. To derive the main result, we proceed through a sequence
of observations. The proof follows similar steps as the proof with immediate accounting but now

                                                     44
considering the changes in q . We lever on the method of characteristics for the proof. Let the value
function be given by some v (, q ), as derived earlier, for the general case with convex adjustment
costs:
                        0 = max f (c, v ) + v µ + vq µq + (1 + v ) µW + J v                      (59)
                               {c,}

where the jump in the value after the shock is given by:

      JV    =    1 + v  + J  , q + J q (1 -  ( + 1)) - (1 + v (, q )) I  + J    (q + J q )
                                                                   1
                + (vo - (1 + v (, q ))) I               >      1
                                            1 -  ( + 1)        
                                                                   -1

subject to the boundary conditions given by (24) and (25), the laws of motion (32), (34) and the
definitions of the exogenous jumps J q and J  .

Conjecture: Constant Value Along Characteristics. Next we guess and verify that v (, q )
is constant along the characteristic curve where (q, ) belongs too. That is:
                                          ¯ , q + J
                          v (, q ) = v  + J       ¯q q, , J
                                                          ¯                     ¯ .
                                                                        for any J

Under this conjecture, it the value will equal v (, q ) = v ( (qo ) , qo ) where qo is the parameter of
the characteristic curve of {q, }. Under this guess, taking total differentials with respect to , we
obtain that:
                                  dq           q (1 - q )           µq 
                          v - vq     = v + vq             = v + vq        = 0.
                                  d              +1                 µ
This expression is the PDE representation of the condition that the value function is linear along
the characteristic function. Thus, we obtain a relationship between the derivatives of the original
value function:
                                                     µq
                                                      
                                          v = -vq       .                                      (60)
                                                     µ

Verification: Constant Value Along Characteristics. Consider the optimal choice of .
Under our guess, we have that the value does not change along the characteristic curve of {q, }.
Hence, leverage can be chosen, without considering the change in the marginal value of equity
v
¯ (, q ) in (59). Thus, leverage solves

    max (1 + v ) rL - rD 
       
  [0, 1-]


                                                                                                     1
            +  (1 -  ( + 1)) I  + J    q + J q q, , J                   + vo I               >   1      .
                                                                                 1 -  ( + 1)     
                                                                                                     -1

This again is clearly a linear program.     The solution is:
                                
                                0
                                            if rL - rD <  (1 + v (q, ))
                               (q )         if rL - rD > vo                                            (61)
                                
                                   (q )     otherwise.
                                



                                                    45
In the paper, we consider only the interesting cases where leverage is not zero nor at the liquidation
boundary. Rather, cases where leverage is set to the shadow boundary. Then, clearly when dN = 1,
after any shock,  must return to the shadow boundary,
                                              ¯
                                 ¯q q + J q , J
                        q + Jq + J                                           ¯ .
                                                        =  (q + J q ) - J  + J

In this case, we verify that leverage remains in the shadow boundary. Thus, for any {, q } outside
of the shadow boundary, the state variables jump to a point in the shadow boundary. Hence, under
this guess, we obtain that v¯ is constant along a characteristic curve and equal to the value at the
shadow boundary,
    Whenever there is no shock, it must be the case that

                                           µq q (q ) = µ ,                                       (62)

which guarantees that leverage and q remain at the shadow boundary.

Auxiliary Value Function. For any q , we can define a function q to its value at the point in
the shadow boundary corresponding to q :

                                        v
                                        ~ (q ) = v ( (q ) , q ) .

Therefore, if we differentiate this expression with respect to q we obtain:

                                        v
                                        ~q (q ) = (v q + vq ) .                                  (63)

Multiplying both sides by µq ,and using that (62) must hold along the optimal path, we obtain
that:
                             v~q (q ) µq = (v q + vq ) µq = v µ + vq µq .
Then, substituting v for v                                                               ¯ , J
                         ~ in (59), using the above result ,and the optimal policies for J   ¯q we
obtain an auxiliary HJB representation:


              0 = max f (c, v    ~q (q ) µq + (1 + v
                            ~) + v                 ~) rL + rL - rD  (q ) - c - 
                      {c}

                     + 1 + v   ¯q q,  (q ) , J
                           ~ q+J             ¯ ( (q )) + J q           (1 -  ( + 1)) .

subject to:
                                           µq q (q ) = µ .
Substituting the constraint:


                                  µ
               0 = max f (c, v
                             ~) + v
                                  ~q+ (1 + v ~) rL + rL - rD  (q ) - c - 
                       {c}        q
                      + 1 + v   ¯q q,  (q ) , J
                            ~ q+J             ¯ ( (q )) + J q (1 -  ( + 1)) .




                                                   46
Optimal dividend. We take the first-order condition with respect to dividends and obtain:

                                                                  µc
                                      fc (c, v
                                             ~) =       ~-v
                                                      1+v ~q            .
                                                                  q

and therefore:
                                                      (1 + v
                                                           ~ (q ))
                                 c = 1/                                 -1/
                                                                              .
                                                                 µc  
                                                ~ (q ) - v
                                              1+v        ~q (q )  q



Solution to the value function. In this case, using the expression for c , we obtain that v (q )
solves the equation
                                                         
                                      (1 + v
                                           ~ (q ))
           0 = f 1/                                              ,v
                                                                  ~ (q )
                                                                        
                                                           -1/
                            1+v        ~q (q ) 1+(
                              ~ (q ) + v         q
                                                   q)

                                                                                                   
                                                                        (1 + v
                                                                             ~ (q ))
                        ~) rL + rL - rD  (q ) - 1/
                 + (1 + v                                                                         - c
                                                                                                     
                                                                                            -1/
                                                                                       µ
                                                                 1+v
                                                                   ~ (q ) + v
                                                                            ~q (q )    q
                                                                                        c



                 +  1+v   ¯q () + J q
                      ~ q+J                         (1 -  ( + 1)) .

With this value, we obtain:

                                                      (1 + v
                                                           ~ (q ))
                                 c (q ) =                                   -1/
                                            1+v        ~q (q ) 1+(
                                              ~ (q ) + v         q
                                                                   q)



and a drift of wealth of:

                                                               ~ (q ))1-1/
                        µW (q ) = rL + rL - rD  (q ) - 1/ (1 + v

Finally, we obtain  (q ) from the condition:

                                                  (q ) - µW (q ) ( + 1)
                                   q (q ) =                             .
                                                  ( (q ) + ) (1 - q ) q

We can obtain an interpretation for this formula using an expression for the ratio of the slope
of the shadow boundary and the direction of change of the vector {q, } along an infinitesimal
issuance :
                                             q ( q )
                                     R (q ) =  q < 0.
                                             µ /µ
With the aid of this expression, the rule for issuances is given by:
                                                     1             1
                                (q ) = µW (q )              -              .
                                                 1 - R (q )   1 - R (q )-1

Since the ratio of slopes R (q ) is negative, then issuances are increasing in the return on equity.
This is because as equity increases, leverage falls so issuances can be maintained high to keep

                                                      47
leverage at the shadow boundary. In turn, the second terms states that the faster the accounting
of past losses, the issuances have to be cutback by more.

C.6     Approximate jump in Q after an aggregate shock
Approximation to the law of motion for aggregate q.              To obtain an approximation to
the aggregate behavior of q and analyze the impact of an aggregate shock, we approximate the
law of motion of aggregate loans and book loans around an unconditional mean for  and q . The
approximation is exact for a representative bank. We denote by    ¯, ¯
                                                                      and c¯ are the population
averages of  and q , consider that every bank has approximately the same issuance rate  and the
same leverage . Then, the law of motion of the aggregate volume of loans, L will be given by:
                                                 dL
                                                     -
                                                    =¯
                                                  L
where  =  are the the unconditional expectation of bank defaults per instant of time. Then,
let q denote the aggregate version of q .
    The law of motion for book loans, the law of motion would be approximately:

             ¯c   -
                  ¯          1
                                 -1       ¯ + 1 W -  
                                                     ¯+1 W
            dL               q
             ¯  =                     1    ¯+1 W                          q -  (1 - q ) -  q .
                                                                         =¯
             L                        q
                                           
By differential of ratios:
                                     ¯c
                                 dL dL
                      dq =         - ¯         q  ( + ) (1 - q ) q -  (1 -  q ) q .
                                 L   L

In a stationary equilibrium, E [dq ], hence:

                                      ( + ) (1 - q )   (1 -  q )

and thus:
                                      ( +  - )  ( +  -  ) q .
As a result:
                                                     ( +  - )
                                      E [q ]  q =             < 1.
                                                    ( +  -  )
Now consider an aggregate shock . We obtain an aggregate jump:

                                                       (1 -  q )
                                             Jq = -              q.
                                                      (1 -  q )

The jump in
                                                      ( + 1)
                                             J =              .
                                                   1 - ( + 1)
   Now consider the aggregate Tobin's Q, call it Q. We have that:
                                                               
                                          Q = s (q , )               .
                                                         q (1 + ) - 


                                                         48
Therefore, the jump in Q is given by:

                                                + J                              
         dQ = s q + J q ,  + J           q                     
                                                                - s (q , )
                                   (q + J ) (1 +  + J ) -  + J             q (1 + ) - 

C.7     Calibration of 
We derive the fraction of losses that are recognized in the books after T quarters for a default shock
of size . To this end, consider a sequence of default shocks such that dN0 = 1 and dNt>0 = 0.
Normalize L0 = 1 and set L  ¯ 0 = 1/q0 . Then,

                                        Lt = 1 -        t>0
                                   ¯ t = - L
                                  dL       ¯ t - Lt dt        t>0
     ¯ 0 = 1/q0 -  . Fundamental loans drop from the initial value 1 to the after-default value
with L
1 -  immediately. Book loans, on the other hand, only fall by   on impact, and recognize the
remaining fraction (1 -  ) at a rate governed by  and the gap in book and fundamental loans.
We can guess and verify that:

                            ¯ t = (1 - ) +     1
                            L                     - 1 + (1 -  )  e-t
                                               q0

    Define the fraction of the loss generated by this single default shock that is recognized by time
t as the fall in book loans over the size of the loss:
                                                        ¯t
                                                 1/q0 - L
                                           ft 
                                                     
   Substituting in the formula for L  ¯ t and the parameters in the calibration, and starting from
q0 = 0.977, as in the pre-crisis mean value of q , and using a default shock of  = 2.5% like the
aggregate shock we use in the estimation of {, } for the post-crisis period, yields that after 10
quarters the fraction of losses recognized is 64.68%.

C.8     Replication of Fact 2
To demonstrate that the model delivers Fact 2, we take a straightforward approach and replicate
Figure 3, using simulated data from the model. We construct variables in exactly the same way
as in the original figure; we do not construct a panel relating the loan delinquency rate to the
market-to-book ratio because we do not have the concept of "delinquent" loans in the model. We
construct the quarters such that 2007 Q3 is the last pre-crisis quarter, and thus 2007 Q4 is the
start of the post-crisis period.
    Figure 13 shows the results. Astute readers will note that the magnitudes are somewhat
different from the original figure. However, the model-generated figure matches the qualitative
results of the original. Thus the model delivers the Fact: Tobin's Q predicts future cash flows in
the cross-section, and market values capture information that book values do not.




                                                  49
Figure 13: Model Replication: Market equity contains more cash-flow relevant information than
book equity)
                      .25




                                                                                                                                                                 .2
                                                                                                                           log(1 + Return on Equity Over Next Year)
log(1 + Return on Equity Over Past Year)
                               .2




                                                                                                                                              .15
        .1         .15




                                                                                                                           .1
                      .05




                                           -.1   0       .1            .2                                  .3         .4                                              -.1       0            .1            .2        .3   .4
                                                     log(Market-to-Book Ratio)                                                                                                           log(Market-to-Book Ratio)

                                                       2006 Q1                               2009 Q1                                                                                       2006 Q1       2009 Q1
                                                                             .002
                                                              log(1 + Net Charge-Off Rate)
                                                                 .001          .0015
                                                                             .0005




                                                                                             -.1       0            .1            .2                                                .3         .4
                                                                                                                log(Market-to-Book Ratio)

                                                                                                                  2006 Q1                                             2009 Q1

Notes: These figures show cross-sectional binned scatter plots of log outcomes on the log market-to-book equity
ratio, in 2006 Q1 and 2009 Q1. All plots control for log book equity by residualizing the variables on log book
equity, and then adding back the mean of each variable to maintain centering. Data are generated from 10,000
simulated banks using the model at estimated parameters. ROE over the past year is defined as book net income
over the last four quarters divided by book equity four quarters ago; ROE over the next year is defined the one
lead of this variable (i.e. profits over the next four quarters divided by current book equity). The net charge-off
rate is loan charge-offs over the next quarter minus loan recoveries over the next quarter, divided by total loans
this quarter.




                                                                                                                       50
D      Model Appendix: Numerical Solution
We solve the model using the finite-differences method with an upwind scheme for the choice of
forward or backward differences. Specifically, we compute the numerical derivatives of the value
function v (, q ) using finite differences and use the first order conditions to solve for policies (c, ),
and iterate on the HJB equation. A detailed description of this algorithm for a general class of
models known as mean-field games can be found in Achdou et al. (2020).
    Our model, which belongs to this class, is simpler to solve because we keep prices constant,
but presents an added complication in that the size of the jump depends on the endogenous
state variables. In particular, starting from a point (, q ), upon receiving a Poisson shock the
                                                           (1- q )
bank jumps to  + J  , q + J q =  + 1-(         +1)
                                              (+1)
                                                   , q - (1  - q )
                                                                   q . To avoid having to interpolate the
value function, we take advantage of the fact that the size of the default shock  is constant when
constructing the grid.
    We build a non-uniform grid iteratively: starting from an initial grid point (0 , q0 ), with
0  0 and q0 = 1, we pick the following points in the grid using the recursion (n , qn ) =
 n-1 + J n-1 , qn-1 + J qn-1 . This way, upon receiving the default shock the bank always jumps
to a point that belongs to the grid. We depart from this grid construction scheme in two regions:

   1. when  is large, the size of the jump is also large, so the grid may become too coarse.
      We add points to the grid wherever we have n - n-1 above certain threshold, by setting
      0 = (n + n-1 )/2 and adding points to the grid following the previous recursion;

   2. when  is close to but below / (1 -  ), or when q <  1 + h /h for some high value h ,
      the stationary distribution features close to zero mass, and the value function features less
      curvature. In these two regions of the state space we use a uniform grid and interpolate
        + J  , q + J q using the closest point.

To compute the stationary distribution, we simulate the model for enough periods such that the
mean and standard deviation of  and q are approximately constant. Finally, to aggregate variables
to a quarterly frequency, we set time steps dt = 1/90 and for every 90 time steps we use the last
value for stocks and the mean for flows.




                                                   51
