                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            CORPORATE TAXATION AND THE DISTRIBUTION OF INCOME

                                       James R. Hines Jr.

                                      Working Paper 27939
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27939


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2020




I thank Zachary Halberstam for outstanding research assistance, and Alan Auerbach, Steve Bond,
Mihir Desai, Michael Devereux, Kathryn Dominguez, Laurence Kotlikoff, Gabriella Massenz,
Hirofumi Okoshi, and seminar participants at the University of Michigan, NBER, University of
Oxford, University of British Columbia, University of Montreal, and the National Tax
Association, MannheimTaxation, and International Institute of Public Finance annual conferences
for helpful comments on earlier drafts. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by James R. Hines Jr. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Corporate Taxation and the Distribution of Income
James R. Hines Jr.
NBER Working Paper No. 27939
October 2020
JEL No. D31,H22,H25

                                         ABSTRACT

Higher corporate taxes reduce corporate business operations, replacing them with operations by
noncorporate businesses that are risky and have undiversified ownership. This shift contributes
to income dispersion, with effects so large that higher corporate taxes can increase income
inequality even when the corporate tax burden falls entirely on capital owned disproportionately
by the rich. Estimates suggest that the riskiness of U.S. noncorporate business increases by
12.3% the aggregate income of the top one percent, and that income dispersion created by a
higher U.S. corporate tax rate offsets more than half of the distributional effects of reducing
average returns to capital.


James R. Hines Jr.
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
343 Lorch Hall
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
jrhines@umich.edu
1.     Introduction

       The incidence of the corporate income tax is an important and complex subject, and a
timely one too, with recent reforms such as the 2017 U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act making
significant changes to corporate taxation. Interest in the incidence of the corporate income tax
dovetails with ongoing concerns over income distributions in high-income economies, since the
taxation of corporate income may serve as a backdoor method of achieving tax progressivity.
High-income individuals tend to own corporate shares, along with other forms of capital, so
imposing greater tax burdens on corporations might implicitly tax wealthy owners of
corporations. As is now well understood, however, this possibility depends critically on certain
general equilibrium aspects of the incidence of the corporate tax. While it is perhaps intuitive
that the burden of corporate taxation would fall on capital owners, there are realistic settings in
which greater corporate taxation depresses business demand for labor and thereby reduces
market wages; and these effects can be so strong that labor bears all, or potentially even more
than all, of the corporate tax burden.

       This paper considers the effect of corporate taxation on the distribution of after-tax
income, which requires a somewhat different perspective than the usual tax incidence
calculation. Tax incidence evaluates the extent to which differently situated groups, typically
defined on a pre-tax-reform basis, bear the burdens of tax changes. To the extent that taxation
also affects the riskiness of economic activity, it will change patterns of realized returns, thereby
changing the resulting distribution of income. In order to understand the effect of taxation on the
distribution of income, it is therefore necessary to supplement standard tax incidence analysis
with consideration of the effect of taxation on income dispersion.

       Since the publication of Harberger (1962) it has been clear that one of the important
forces determining the incidence of the corporate tax is the effect of the tax in encouraging
noncorporate business activity. 1 Higher corporate taxes discourage corporate activity, and
therefore indirectly stimulate greater activity by unincorporated businesses. Harberger and
subsequent analysts consider the effect of this reallocation of economic resources on expected




                                                                                                1
returns to labor and capital; and this reallocation can ­ if the noncorporate sector is particularly
capital-intensive ­ impose considerable burdens on labor. But there is a second sense in which
this reallocation affects the distribution of income: rising levels of noncorporate business activity
have the potential to increase levels of idiosyncratic risk in the economy, thereby leading to
greater disparities in economic outcomes.

        There is growing evidence that, from the standpoint of individual investors, noncorporate
business investments are very risky, and that as a result, individual incomes at the top of the
distribution include sizeable components that represent returns to successful noncorporate
businesses (e.g., Cooper et al., 2016; Smith et al., 2019). The riskiness of noncorporate business
investment reflects both the characteristics of the business activities that tend to be undertaken by
unincorporated firms and the nature of their ownership. U.S. investors in unincorporated
business ventures generally incur much greater idiosyncratic risk than do investors in publicly
traded corporations. Proprietorships have single owners. Partnerships, including LLCs, must
specify their owners in partnership agreements, making it difficult to have diversified ownership
and costly and cumbersome to change ownership shares at all. S corporations must have 100 or
fewer shareholders, all must be U.S. citizens or permanent residents, and all must hold stock with
equal rights. In practice, high income individuals commonly receive partnership and S
corporation income from firms of which they are the sole owners. C corporations, whose income
is subject to the corporate tax, suffer from none of these restrictions, and as a result, can much
more easily have diversified ownership. Due to their undiversified ownership, the returns
received by owners of unincorporated businesses can be very risky, quite apart from the
undoubtedly larger business risks that these smaller businesses tend to face.

        The consequences of the risky profile of noncorporate investment are predictable: some
noncorporate business owners are very successful, whereas others lose significant portions of
their investments. Investors in unincorporated businesses can face return distributions similar to
those available by playing lotteries; and with more lotteries, the economy's income distribution
widens.


1
 For ease of exposition firms not subject to the corporate tax are denoted "noncorporate," even though in the United
States this category includes S corporations, which while corporations are not generally subject to a separate
corporate-level layer of tax.


                                                                                                            2
       Higher levels of corporate taxation change the composition of economic activity both by
encouraging entrepreneurs to establish their firms as unincorporated businesses, and ­ more
importantly ­ by reducing the size and growth of corporations, thereby causing noncorporate
businesses to expand. This reallocation of economic activity represents substitution away from
relatively safer economic forms and styles of business organization into those that offer high
returns to some and low returns to others. As a consequence, there will be greater numbers of
entrepreneurs who are highly successful and join the ranks of the rich, just as there will be
greater numbers of unsuccessful business people. The result is to make the distribution of
income less equal ­ and evidence from the United States for 2014-2017 suggests that this process
may reverse half or more of the distributional effect of the corporate tax that arises from reducing
average capital returns.

       Section 2 of the paper reviews the incidence of the corporate tax and its implications for
income distribution. Section 3 considers an example in which the burden of the corporate tax is
borne entirely by high-income capital owners, yet a higher corporate tax is associated with a less
equal income distribution due to the dispersion of returns attributable to greater noncorporate
investment. Section 4 generalizes the analysis of section 3 by considering the effect of corporate
taxes on income distribution in a stylized model of the U.S. economy, identifying the extent to
which encouragement of relatively risky business activity may dampen or possibly even reverse
the effect of corporate taxes on the concentration of higher incomes. Section 5 reviews empirical
evidence of the nature of business activity and business risks in the United States, using tax
return data to gauge the likely magnitude of the distributional effects of encouraging greater
noncorporate business activity. Section 6 is the conclusion.




2.     Corporate Tax Burdens

       Standard methods of analyzing the effect of corporate taxes on income distribution
consider the extent to which tax burdens fall on different income groups in the population. It is
perhaps natural to expect the burden of the corporate tax to be borne largely by high-income
owners of corporate shares, but one of the contributions of Harberger (1962) was to point out




                                                                                                3
that such an outcome would be generally inconsistent with capital market equilibrium, 2 which
requires corporate and noncorporate investments to offer investors equivalent expected after-tax
returns. In the Harberger (1962) model, higher corporate taxes increase the cost of corporate
capital and therefore encourage corporations to substitute labor for capital, thereby depressing
demand for capital generally ­ not merely corporate capital ­ and reducing its after-tax return in
a closed economy. This implication is part of the basis of the current U.S. Treasury approach to
distributing the burden of corporate taxes (Cronin et al., 2013), which is to attribute 82 percent of
the burden to all capital income in the economy, and 18 percent to labor income; the
Congressional Budget Office attributes 75 percent of the corporate tax burden to capital income,
25 percent to labor income (Congressional Budget Office, 2012).

        Even in the closed economy framework of the Harberger (1962) model, however,
induced intersectoral reallocations of resources can reduce or possibly eliminate any burden of
the tax on capital owners. Corporate taxation increases the cost of producing corporate output,
thereby raising output prices, depressing demand, and shifting output from the corporate sector
of the economy to the noncorporate sector. This reallocation affects factor demands to the extent
that factor input ratios differ between the corporate and noncorporate sectors of the economy. If
the corporate sector of the economy has a lower capital/labor ratio than the noncorporate sector,
then the introduction of a corporate tax shifts resources into the noncorporate sector and thereby
increases the demand for capital. If this effect is large enough, then it has the potential to exceed
in magnitude the countervailing impact of factor substitution, in which case higher rates of
corporate tax are associated with greater after-tax returns to capital ­ including capital invested
in corporations. It would then follow that labor bears all, or even more than all, of the burden of
the corporate tax in the form of lower real wages. 3

        Open economy considerations further complicate the simple intuition that capital owners
bear the full burden of the corporate tax. As noted by Diamond and Mirrlees (1971), and applied
to open economies by Gordon (1986), Kotlikoff and Summers (1987) and Gordon and Hines
(2002), any source-based capital income tax falls entirely on fixed local factors ­ typically labor


2
 Though Auerbach (2006) notes that, in the presence of significant adjustment costs, capital markets will not
equilibrate immediately, so values of corporate shares should decline in response to surprise announcements of
higher corporate taxes.


                                                                                                            4
­ in a setting with perfect capital mobility and product substitution. It follows from the
assumption of perfect capital mobility that after-tax rates of return to capital cannot differ
between countries, so higher corporate tax rates must discourage investment and thereby drive up
pretax rates of return to the point that after-tax returns remain equal. Since after-tax rates of
return to local capital do not change with corporate tax changes, it must be the case that local
labor and any other local factor whose location is fixed, the archetypal example being land, bear
the full burden of corporate taxes. Additionally, corporate taxes in large open economies may
have spillover effects. With fixed world supplies of capital, higher tax rates in one country
discourage local investment and drive investment to other countries, where it reduces rates of
return to capital and increases wages.

        Harberger (1995, 2006, 2008) and Randolph (2006) explore the sensitivity of conclusions
drawn from models of perfect capital mobility and fixed world capital supplies. They calibrate
models that incorporate what they argue are realistic estimates of relative capital intensities,
capital mobility, and product substitutability, finding that labor is apt to bear a significant
fraction of the burden of the corporate tax. In the simple models used in these papers, any
imperfect substitutability between foreign and domestic traded goods effectively operates as a
form of imperfect capital mobility. As the trade and capital accounts must balance, imperfect
substitutability between traded goods implies that extensive net borrowing is expensive as it
entails importing large volumes of foreign goods for which there is diminishing marginal
substitution. Gravelle and Smetters (2006) use a computable general equilibrium model to allow
for subtler variants of imperfect product competition, concluding that corporate capital owners
may bear the lion's share of the corporate tax burden despite the availability of capital inflows
and outflows. 4

        Empirical studies of corporate tax incidence, including Felix and Hines (2009),
Arulampalam et al. (2012), Altshuler and Liu (2013), Hasset and Mathur (2015), Suárez Serrato
and Zidar (2016), and Fuest, Peichl, and Siegloch (2018), commonly consider the extent to
which higher corporate taxes influence wages, thereby indirectly assessing the incidence of the

3
  McLure (1975), Kotlikoff and Summers (1987), and Auerbach (2018) offer reviews and further elaborations of the
Harberger model.
4
  For more on the importance of product substitutability, see Davidson and Martin (1985) and Gravelle and
Kotlikoff (1989, 1993).


                                                                                                         5
corporate tax. Felix and Hines (2009) analyze the effects of higher state corporate taxes on wage
premiums earned by unionized workers, concluding that workers in fully unionized firms capture
54 percent of the benefits of low tax rates. Arulampalam et al. (2012) compare wages paid by
firms with differing tax obligations, concluding that about half of the corporate tax is passed on
to labor. Liu and Altshuler (2013) compare wages paid by firms in U.S. industries subject to
differing levels of taxation, and after adjusting for differing industry concentrations, report that
wages absorb 60-80 percent of the corporate tax burden. Hassett and Mathur (2015) find that
economies with higher corporate tax rates tend to have lower wages, though Clausing (2013) and
Gravelle (2013) call attention to contrary evidence and note that the implied effects of corporate
taxes may be implausibly large. Suárez Serrato and Zidar (2016) estimate a model of the effect
of U.S. state corporate taxes with imperfect labor and firm mobility, reporting coefficients that
imply that firm owners bear 40 percent of the corporate tax burden, workers bear one-third, and
landowners the rest. Fuest, Peichl and Siegloch (2018) estimate the effect of subnational
German corporate taxes, finding that workers bear roughly half of the tax burden. And
Nallareddy, Rouen and Suárez Seratto (2019) find that state corporate tax cuts are associated
with greater state after-tax income dispersion.

           It appears from this evidence that workers may bear substantial portions of corporate tax
burdens in the form of lower real wages, with capital owners also bearing significant burdens.
There remain open questions about the distribution of these tax burdens among richer and poorer
workers and capital owners, particularly when economic activities have uncertain returns. A
small literature extends standard corporate tax incidence models to incorporate economic
uncertainty, 5 but its focus remains on the effect of corporate taxes on expected returns to labor
and capital. In settings with economic uncertainty, expected returns are ex ante concepts,
whereas the income distribution is an ex post realization. Consequently, in order to understand
the effect of corporate taxes on the income distribution it is necessary to consider its effects on
the distribution of realized outcomes.




3.         Possibility of Second-Order Stochastic Dominance


5
    See, for example, Batra (1975), Ratti and Shome (1977), and Baron and Forsythe (1981).


                                                                                               6
        This section explores an avenue by which business riskiness interacts with the tax system
to influence the distribution of income. The model considers a simple setting in which corporate
taxation does not change expected pre-tax investment returns, so the burden of corporate income
taxation falls entirely on capital owners. There are just two types of people, rich and poor, with
factor endowments of the rich relatively capital-intensive. In the absence of uncertainty, higher
corporate income taxes that generate revenue used to reduce labor income taxes would reduce
income inequality by imposing greater tax burdens on high-income individuals whose incomes
are largely returns to capital, and reduced tax burdens on low-income individuals whose incomes
derive mostly from labor. But if higher corporate taxes also encourage expansion of risky
unincorporated businesses, then higher corporate taxes may increase income inequality.

        The two types of people are denoted A and B, with A poor and B rich, and equal numbers
of each. Both types are endowed with fixed supplies of capital and labor, with individuals of
type A relatively more heavily endowed with labor, and individuals of type B more heavily
endowed with capital. Capital and labor can move freely between the corporate and
noncorporate sectors, but cannot cross national borders, 6 so the economy's total capital stock and
total labor supply are fixed. Corporate income is taxed at rate  , whereas labor income and
unincorporated business income are taxed at rate t. Capital and labor markets are perfectly
competitive, and individuals and firms risk-neutral, in that they evaluate after-tax investment
returns based on their expected values. Labor and capital are equally productive in the corporate
and noncorporate sectors, and corporate and noncorporate firms produce identical outputs,
earning the same expected pretax rate of return to capital, denoted r.

        Appendix A analyzes the effects of corporate taxation on expected after-tax returns in
this simple model. Holding the government's budget constraint fixed, higher corporate tax rates
finance a reduction in labor income taxes, the net effect of which is to increase the expected
                                                    ^
                                             ^ A to y
after-tax incomes of type A individuals from y        A , and to reduce the expected after-tax


                        ^ B to y
incomes of type Bs from y      ^B . Viewed strictly from the standpoint of expected incomes,

the corporate tax increase reduces income inequality.


6
 The closed economy assumption in this model enables capital owners to bear the full burden of the corporate tax.
More realistic open economy specifications, including the model of section 4, imply that domestic capital owners
bear less of the corporate tax burden.


                                                                                                           7
         In addition to changing expected incomes, corporate taxes affect business organization by
discouraging corporate investments and thereby implicitly encouraging noncorporate
investments. Assume that an individual i choosing to engage in an unincorporated business puts
his or her potential income at risk, taking a fair gamble in which with probability 0.5 the
investment is successful, increasing after-tax income by a factor c, and with probability 0.5 the
investment is unsuccessful, reducing after-tax income by the same factor c. People evaluate their
noncorporate options based on expected returns plus a psychic return of K i i if investor i

chooses a noncorporate investment, in which K i is i's capital endowment, and  i their preference

parameter. The parameter  i can be positive or negative, reflecting the joys and frustrations of
working for oneself and participating in a risky small business. As a result, the net expected
financial plus psychic return from engaging in a noncorporate business is

(1)                                             Ki  r ( - t ) + i .

Those for whom r ( - t ) + i > 0 will choose noncorporate businesses.


         Assuming that types A and B share the same distribution of  i s, there will be equal
numbers of type A noncorporate investors and type B noncorporate investors. If prior to a tax
change  i  r ( t -  ) for every  i value in the population, then there will be no noncorporate

business. A higher corporate tax depresses after-tax corporate returns, encouraging individuals
with the highest  i parameters to start noncorporate businesses. In order to simplify the
resulting analysis, it is useful to consider the case in which  < t prior to the tax change, and the
change makes these two tax rates equal. 7

         Figure 1 plots the effect of a higher corporate tax rate on the distribution of income. The
                                                                                  ^ B to y
higher corporate tax rate reduces the expected incomes of type B individuals from y      ^B , but

a fraction p of these individuals will be induced to participate in noncorporate businesses. Of
these type B noncorporate investors, half will be successful, with resulting after-tax incomes


7
  The purpose of assuming that  = t after the tax change is that the tax-induced decline in the share of corporate
investment then does not affect total tax collections. The example readily generalizes to cases in which   t .


                                                                                                              8
^B
y  (1 + c ) , and half will be unsuccessful, with resulting after-tax incomes y
                                                                              ^B (1 - c ) .

Consequently, the tax reform changes the income distribution so that a fraction p 4 of the

                          ^B
population has incomes of y  (1 + c ) . This represents a greater concentration of income at the

            ^B
very top if y  (1 + c ) > y
                          ^ B , or equivalently


                                                       ^B - y
                                                       y      
                                                             ^B
(2)                                               c>            .
                                                         y 
                                                          ^B

        One consequence of a higher corporate tax rate is to increase income dispersion among
top income earners, which has the effect of increasing the concentration of realized income at the
very top. Condition (2) identifies circumstances in which tax-induced greater dispersion is of
sufficient magnitude that, from the standpoint of the top p 4 of income earners, it more than
offsets the effect of the tax change in reducing expected incomes. If condition (2) holds, then the
corporate tax change increases the incomes of the top p 4 of income earners, even though the
burden of the corporate tax is fully borne by owners of capital. It is noteworthy that (2) does not
depend on the value of p, so top tail income dispersion increases for any amount of tax-induced
noncorporate investment.

        Higher corporate tax rates for which (2) holds, and which therefore increase the
concentration of top incomes, may also make the entire income distribution less equal in the
sense of second-order stochastic dominance, as the new Lorenz curve can lie weakly below the
pre-tax-increase Lorenz curve. The greater income dispersion induced by a higher corporate tax
rate raises this possibility, but another necessary (and, together with (2), sufficient) condition for
second-order stochastic dominance is that the tax change not increase the aggregate incomes of
                                                                    ^
those whose realized after-tax incomes fall below the median. Since y A > y A and noncorporate
                                                                          ^
investments are fair gambles, it cannot be the case that a higher corporate tax rate reduces
aggregate below-median income if all those with incomes below the median are of type A.
Hence a necessary condition for a tax-induced reduction in aggregate below-median income is
that unsuccessful type B noncorporate investors have lower realized incomes than successful
type A noncorporate investors. This is the scenario depicted in Figure 1.




                                                                                                9
        The tax change does not increase average below-median incomes if

                                               p
(3)                           (1 - p ) y
                                       ^ A +
                                                 ^
                                                 y A (1 - c ) + y B (1 - c ) 
                                                                ^             y
                                                                              ^A .
                                               2

The left side of (3) reflects that the lower half of the after-tax income distribution consists of type
A individuals who avoid noncorporate investments, and type A and B individuals who have
unsuccessful noncorporate business ventures. The right side of (3) is simply the average below-
median income before the tax change. Condition (3) implies

                                                p
                                                    A (1 + c ) - y B (1 - c ) 
(4)                                 ^
                                    y A - yA 
                                          ^       ^
                                                  y              ^            .
                                                2

      ^
Since y A > y A , the right side of (4) must be positive in order for (4) to be satisfied. This requires
            ^

       A (1 + c ) > y B (1 - c ) , which is simply the condition that unsuccessful type B noncorporate
     ^
that y              ^

investors have lower incomes than successful type A noncorporate investors. And since budget
                     ^B - y
balance implies that y    ^B =y
                              ^ A - y A , (4) also requires that
                                    ^


                                                                 p
(5a)                        ^B
                            y  (1 + c ) - y
                                          ^B  y
                                              ^B c (1 - p ) +      (1 + c )( y
                                                                             ^B  ^
                                                                                -y A)
                                                                 2

                                                                 p
                                  A (1 - c )  y A c (1 - p ) +     (1 - c )( y     A ).
(5b)                       y    ^
                           ^A - y             ^                              ^B  ^
                                                                                -y
                                                                 2

Since the terms on the right sides of (5a) and (5b) are both positive, it follows that (4) implies
     ^B
that y  (1 + c ) > y       ^
                   ^ B and y A (1 - c ) < y A , so a higher corporate tax widens both the right and left
                                          ^

tails of the income distribution.

        If condition (4) is satisfied, then higher corporate taxes fail to raise below-median
incomes. Since higher corporate taxes also induce greater income dispersion, the resulting
income distribution is dominated in a second-order stochastic sense by the original income
distribution. Condition (4) indicates that this will materialize only for sufficiently high values of
p and c. If the corporate tax has little effect on levels of noncorporate activity, or noncorporate




                                                                                                    10
business is insufficiently risky, then the effect of the corporate tax on expected returns dominates
its impact on aggregate below-median income.

        Figure 2 displays Lorenz curves describing income distributions when (4) holds with
equality. The solid dark schedule depicts the income distribution prior to the corporate tax
increase, and the dashed schedule the income distribution after the tax increase. The lightly
shaded schedule depicts what the income distribution would have been if the corporate tax had
increased but had not induced some investors to start unincorporated businesses. The lightly
shaded Lorenz curve lies everywhere above the original Lorenz curve, reflecting that a higher tax
burden on capital income received primarily by the rich levels the income distribution. The
dashed Lorenz curve, however, lies weakly below the original Lorenz curve, reflecting that the
income dispersion effect of a higher corporate tax rate can have an even stronger effect on the
concentration of top incomes.




4.      Corporate Taxation and the Concentration of High Incomes

        The analysis in section 3 identifies the possibility that higher corporate tax rates may
widen income inequality despite producing tax burdens that fall primarily on the rich. The
stylized nature of the example in section 3 leaves open the question of the extent to which tax-
induced income dispersion influences the distributional effects of corporate tax changes in an
economy such as the United States. This and the subsequent section consider this question,
focusing on the effect of corporate taxation on the concentration of national income at the top of
the distribution.

        In specifying the determinants of the income distribution, it simplifies matters to assume
that individuals in the population differ in a scalar characteristic  reflecting factor endowments
and other features relevant to income production in a largely open economy. The values of 
are continuously distributed with a cumulative density given by F ( ) , and accompanying

marginal density dF ( ) . The after-tax income of someone who chooses not to engage in

noncorporate business activity is a function simply of  and of the corporate tax rate. For




                                                                                              11
notational ease this after-tax income is denoted y ( ) , interpreted as being evaluated at the

current corporate tax rate, and consists of both capital and labor returns. Furthermore, units are
chosen so that y ( ) =  at the initial corporate tax rate.


        Noncorporate business activity is a probabilistic gamble: an individual of type  whose
capital and labor resources would otherwise provide an income y ( ) , and who participates in an

unincorporated business that succeeds, receives an income of (1 + k ) y ( ) ; the same individual,

if the noncorporate investment is unsuccessful, receives an income of (1 - m ) y ( ) , with k > 0

and m > 0 . Noncorporate investors are successful with a common probability  , and are

therefore unsuccessful with probability (1 -  ) ; furthermore, noncorporate business is assumed

to be a fair gamble, so

(6)                                        k m (1 -  ) .
                                           =


The restriction that an investor cannot lose more than he or she has implies that m  1 , which
together with (6) implies


(7)                                         k
                                                (1 -  ) .
                                                     

Risk-neutral individuals choose to participate in noncorporate business activity on the basis of
idiosyncratic preference parameters, as in the model of section 3. Among those with sufficient
resources that they might someday have very high incomes, these preference parameters have
identical distributions at each value of  , so the fraction investing in noncorporate businesses,
still denoted p, is the same for all.

4.1.    Aggregate high income.

        Focusing attention just on the aggregate amount of income ( ) earned by those with

incomes exceeding a high level y , it follows that




                                                                                                 12
                                                                          3
(8)           (1 - p )  y ( ) dF ( ) + p  y ( ) dF ( ) + p  y ( )(1 + k ) dF ( ) ,
              =
                            2                     3                       1



with y (=
        1 ) y (1 + k ) , y ( 2 ) = y , and y (=
                                              3 ) y (1 - m ) . The first term on the right side of

(8) is the aggregate income of the portion (1 - p ) of the population has no noncorporate business

dealings and therefore has incomes given by y ( ) . The second term is the aggregate income of

those with y ( ) values exceeding y (1 - m ) and who invest in noncorporate businesses. The

third term captures that among those whose incomes would otherwise have fallen between
y (1 + k ) and y (1 - m ) , and who make noncorporate investments, only a fraction  are

successful and therefore wind up with after-tax incomes exceeding y .

        In order to evaluate (8) it is necessary to use a cumulative density function. There is
extensive evidence that the distribution of higher incomes in the United States closely resembles
a Pareto distribution, 8 which, if applied to incomes earned by those without noncorporate
investments, would imply that

                                                           
(9)                                           dF ( ) =         d ,
                                                          1+

with  a parameter that is generally a function of the income distribution, and  > 1 the Pareto
parameter. Since income data include earnings from noncorporate investments, it is possible for
the distribution of  to differ from the distribution of observed incomes ­ though as it happens,
if (9) characterizes the distribution of  , then the final income distribution inclusive of
noncorporate returns will also have a Pareto distribution with the same  parameter.9 Taking
(9) to apply in the range [1 ,  ] , and imposing both (6) and that y ( ) =  , it follows that (8) and

(9) together imply 10

(10)                                           = y (1 + p ) ,

8
  See, for example, Atkinson, Piketty, and Saez (2011), Jones (2015), Aoki and Nirei (2017), and Jones and Kim
(2018).
9
  This is evident from equation (17). Separately, Toda (2014), Jones (2015), and Nirei and Aoki (2016) offer
reasons to expect most processes that generate high incomes to have Pareto distributions resembling (9).
10
   Appendix B.1 offers detailed derivations of equations (10), (17), and (22).


                                                                                                          13
in which  y is the aggregate value of y ( ) in the population with   y ,

                                                             
(11)                              y   y ( )            d =        y 1- ,
                                        2         1+
                                                         ( - 1)

and


                                 (1 + k )  + (1 -  - k ) (1 -  )
                                                                  1-
(12)                                                                   -1.


          The  term in (10) captures the extent to which income dispersion due to noncorporate
business activity contributes to the concentration of higher incomes. It is evident from (10) that
if either p = 0 or  =0 , then  =  y . Furthermore, from (12), if either k = 0 or  = 0 , then

 =0 . In the absence of noncorporate business activity, the income distribution is determined
simply by the distribution of  . The value of  matters too; from (12), if  = 1 then  =0 .
But since  > 1 , and as shown in Appendix B.2,  is increasing in  , it follows that  > 0 , and
therefore  >  y , for all values of k > 0 ,  > 0 , and p > 0 , which are conditions that ensure

that there is meaningful and risky noncorporate business activity. Furthermore,  is increasing
and convex in each of k and  , as shown in Appendix B.3.

          Equation (10) implies that greater levels of noncorporate business activity increase
aggregate higher incomes, a feature that this model shares with the model analyzed in section 3.
Greater noncorporate business returns produced by higher values of k and  increase aggregate
high income for the same reason. The resulting income dispersion has greater effects on income
concentration at higher values of  that reflect the narrowing of the income distribution at high
levels.

          Table 1 presents values of  for different values of k and  constrained by the implied
relationship between gains and losses expressed in (7), and with  = 1.67 , which Jones (2015)
notes is a commonly estimated value among empirical studies of the U.S. economy. For a given
level of p, higher values of k are associated with greater concentrations of high incomes, as are
higher values of  . If k = 1.0 and  = 0.40 , so that a noncorporate investor has a 40 percent
chance of doubling his or her income, then the table entry 0.37 implies that the aggregate income


                                                                                                 14
of the population with incomes above y is  y (1 + 0.37 p ) . If in this circumstance thirty percent

of the population undertakes noncorporate business activity, then aggregate high income is 11
percent greater than it would have been in the absence of noncorporate investment. A
representative parameter combination for riskier investments in the U.S. economy might be
k = 2.4 and  = 0.25 , with noncorporate business investors having one-quarter chances of
increasing their incomes by 240 percent, in which case the aggregate income of the population
with incomes above y would be  y (1 + 0.98 p ) . There are no systematic economy-wide

estimates of the likelihood of success and distribution of returns to noncorporate investment,
making it difficult to know a priori whether low-  or high-  values are more realistic.

         Equation (10) can be used to evaluate the effect of changes in the corporate tax rate on
aggregate high incomes. Differentiating (10) with respect to the corporate tax rate, denoted  ,
and taking changes in  not to affect k and  , yields


                                 d d  y              dp
(13)                             =      (1 + p ) +  y  .
                                 d  d                d

       dy
The         term on the right side of (13) is the change in higher incomes as conventionally
       d
measured. It has two components: a higher corporate tax rate changes the incomes of those with
 s above the y threshold, and it changes the threshold itself, and therefore the incomes of those
at or above it. Assuming for simplicity that a higher corporate tax rate reduces all higher
                                                                              dy
incomes proportionately, so that dy ( ) d = - , the first component of                  is - y . The
                                                                                  d
                        y d 2
second component is           , for which the assumed proportionate income reduction implies
                        2 d

                                                                         y        - y ( 2 ) 
that d 2 d =  y . From the definition of  y in (11), it follows that          =                = - y -  ,
                                                                          2            21+
       y d 2
so           = - y 1-  , and
       2 d




                                                                                                  15
                                        dy
(14)                                           =- y -  y 1-  =- y .
                                         d

Together, (13) and (14) imply that

                                                                 
                                 d  dp                    1      
(15)                            =                             -   .
                                 d  d                   1        
                                                          + p
                                                                 

         As captured in (15), the net effect of higher corporate taxes on aggregate incomes
received by high-income individuals depends on a comparison of two effects, the first of which
arises from greater noncorporate business activity, and the second of which is the change in
expected after-tax factor returns. In the representative cases of lower- and higher-risk
noncorporate investments that produce  =0.37 and  =0.98 , and with assumed values of
p = 0.3 and dp d = 0.3 , (15) implies that a one percent higher corporate tax rate increases
aggregate high incomes by 0.10-0.23 percent. If, in a standard incidence calculation with no
investment return uncertainty, a one percent higher corporate income tax rate would reduce the
incomes of those in the top one percent by 0.13 percent, 11 then given that  = 1.67 , this standard
aspect of higher corporate taxes would reduce aggregate top one percent incomes by 0.22
percent. Consequently, in these examples, the income dispersion effect partially or even entirely
offsets the distributional effect of after-tax price changes.

4.2.     Concentration of high incomes.



11
   The U.S. Treasury assigns 82 percent of the corporate tax burden to capital owners, which together with other
aspects of its methodology implies that individuals in the top one percent of the income distribution bear 43 percent
of the corporate tax burden (Cronin et al., 2013). In a long-run framework, the Treasury methodology is
inconsistent with prevailing open economy models that imply a much lower tax burden on U.S. capital owners; and
even in the short run, the Treasury methodology may be inconsistent with the reality that much of the business
income earned by top one percent taxpayers represents returns to labor in unincorporated businesses. Furthermore,
the Treasury method is inconsistent with existing empirical estimates of corporate tax incidence. As a result, a more
reasonable figure might be one-half its magnitude, so that 22 percent of the corporate tax burden is borne by top one
percent taxpayers. In 2016, the top one percent of the U.S. income distribution had $1,465b of income after federal
taxes (IRS Statistics of Income, available at https://www.irs.gov/statistics/soi-tax-stats-individual-statistical-tables-
by-tax-rate-and-income-percentile), so if a one percent higher corporate tax rate corresponds to an additional annual
burden of $8.7b [Congressional Budget Office (2016, p. 178) reports a five-year budget impact of $43.5b], the
$1.91b attributable to the top one percent would represent 0.13 percent of its after-tax income.


                                                                                                                 16
       The components of equation (13) capture the effects of corporate tax changes on the
aggregate income earned by those whose incomes are y or greater. This is not exactly the same
as the effect of corporate tax changes on the concentration of income earned by, say, the top one
percent of the income distribution, since corporate tax changes also affect the number of people
whose incomes exceed y . In order to evaluate the effect of the corporate tax on the
concentration of income it is necessary to adjust for these changing populations.

       The population of individuals with incomes exceeding y is

                                                                   3
(16)                      (1 - p )  dF ( ) + p  dF ( ) + p  dF ( ) .
                         n=
                                      2              3             1



Evaluating the terms in (16) yields


(17)                                      n=
                                               (1 + p )    y - .
                                                  

Since (1 + p ) does not vary with y , the population distribution described by (17) is a Pareto

distribution with the same parameter  that characterizes the distribution of  in (9). Applying

(10) and (11), equation (17) implies that n =
                                                ( - 1)  , so
                                                  y

                                          dn ( - 1) d
(18)                                        =         .
                                          d    y d

       Letting  denote total income earned by a fixed percentage of the income distribution
corresponding to incomes of at least y prior to the tax change, it follows that

                                          d  d    dn
(19)                                       =   -y    .
                                          d  d    d

                                      d  1 d
Equations (18) and (19) imply that      =    , so applying (15) yields
                                      d  d




                                                                                           17
                                                            
                         d  dp  1                           
(20)                    =                                -   .
                         d  d  1                            
                                +                      p
                                                            

       Equation (20) indicates that the effect of a higher corporate tax rate on aggregate income
of the top given percentage of the income distribution is the familiar net effect of two competing
forces: greater noncorporate business activity and changing after-tax factor returns. In order to
understand the extent to which these factors may offset each other, it is useful to consider the
effects of tax-induced income dispersion over ranges of possible parameter values. Table 2
                                                                                       dp    1
displays values of the first term in the braces on the right side of equation (20) ­                 ­
                                                                                       d    1     
                                                                                             +   p
                                                                                                  
for p = 0.2 and p = 0.3 , along with selected moderate values of k and  , in every case based

on an assumed level of dp d = 0.30 . The Table 2 entries are increasing in  , k , and  , and
display convexity in  and k; furthermore, they are slightly higher at p = 0.2 than at p = 0.3 .
Taking  = 1.67 and p = 0.30 to be baseline levels, the entries in Table 2 vary between 0.009
and 0.108, though these depend critically on population values of  and k , about which little is
known. As noted earlier, the relevant value of  for equation (20) is arguably in the
neighborhood of 0.13, so the Table 2 entries are smaller, generally somewhat less than half as
large. This suggests that the income dispersion effects of higher corporate tax rates may offset
half or less of the standard factor return effects in influencing the concentration of high incomes.

       High shares of entrepreneurial income among top earners can produce substantial income
dispersion effects of higher tax rates. Using  NC to denote aggregate income earned by high-
income individuals engaging in noncorporate business activities, it follows that

                                                       3
(21)                  NC p  y ( ) dF ( ) + p 
                     =                                     (1 + k ) y ( ) dF ( ) .
                                  3                    1



The first integral in (21) is entrepreneurial income earned by those whose incomes will exceed y
whether or not their noncorporate business ventures succeed, and the second is income earned by




                                                                                              18
successful noncorporate business entrepreneurs who would not have had incomes of y or more
if their businesses had been unsuccessful. Equation (21) implies that

(22)                                     NC = p y (1 +  ) ,

which together with (10) implies

                                          NC p (1 +  )
(23)                                        =          .
                                              1 + p

Applying (23), (20) becomes

                                                NC           
                                                - p          
                        d   dp                            -   .
(24)                   =                                     
                        d  d                  p (1 - p )     
                                                             

Calculations in section 5 indicate that in 2014-2017, the U.S.  NC  ratio for the top one
percent of the income distribution was at least 0.35. In order to apply (24) it is also necessary to
know the value of p, the fraction of the population choosing to engage in noncorporate business
activity, which the data do not directly reveal. Unless p is sufficiently large, higher corporate tax
rates will increase the concentration of top incomes. For example, if p = 0.2 , then for
                                dp                         d
 NC  = 0.35 ,  = 0.13 , and        = 0.3 , it follows that   = 0.038 , which is positive,
                                d                          d
implying that higher corporate tax rates increase the concentration of top incomes.




5.     Characteristics of Noncorporate Business Activity

       The analysis in section 4 relies on a stylized model of business characteristics that may
nonetheless capture important elements of business practice. This section considers evidence
from the United States of the factors that influence noncorporate business activity and the extent
to which top income earners receive returns from unincorporated businesses.




                                                                                              19
5.1     Evidence.

        There is extensive evidence that labor and capital returns to unincorporated business
activities in the United States are considerably riskier than other economic alternatives. For
example, Davis et al. (2007) document the significantly greater volatility and dispersion of
growth rates of privately held firms than those of publicly held firms. In their analysis of tax
return data, DeBacker, Panousi, and Ramnath (2020) find that the idiosyncratic volatility of
business returns (in the form of partnership, proprietorship, and S corporation income) is 3-4
times greater than the volatility of wage and salary income for similar individuals. This echoes
earlier findings of Hamilton (2000), who reports that self-employed workers have lower mean
earnings and much more dispersed outcomes than those who work for others. The risks faced by
small business owners are partly the product of heavy external debt financing of their firms and
the personal borrowing that owners do to obtain capital that they invest in their companies (Robb
and Robinson, 2014; Cole and Sokolyk, 2018). Moskowitz and Vissing-Jorgensen (2002) report
that investors in firms that are not publicly traded tend to concentrate very large fractions
(averaging 70 percent) of their investment capital in single firms with returns that are highly
uncertain and on average no greater than those available from publicly traded alternatives. This
evidence and others of modest average returns and significant economic risk prompt observers to
infer that nonpecuniary factors such as the benefits of working for one's self, and the social
status accorded to business owners, are important determinants of entrepreneurial and other risky
noncorporate business activity. 12

        Tax policy also appears to influence levels of noncorporate business activity. Auerbach
and Slemrod (1997) note that greater numbers and incomes of S corporations in the United States
after 1986 coincided with more favorable tax treatment relative to corporations in the Tax
Reform Act of 1986. 13 Using annual U.S. time series data for 1960-1986, MacKie-Mason and
Gordon (1997) find that a one percent higher corporate tax rate is associated with a 0.28 percent
greater income share of noncorporate business. Goolsbee (1998) reports average tax effects that
are less than half as large in a historical time series analysis of annual U.S. data from 1900-1939,

12
   See, for example, Hamilton (2000), Moskowitz and Vissing-Jorgenson (2002), Roussanov (2010), and Hurst and
Pugsley (2011).
13
   Cooper et al. (2016) documents the secular rise in noncorporate business income generally since 1986, and its
concentration in the top one percent of the income distribution.


                                                                                                         20
though notes that these tax effects are considerably larger for firms with positive taxable income.
Prisinzano and Pearce (2018) update and refine the MacKie-Mason and Gordon analysis using
U.S. data for 1960-2012, finding somewhat larger tax effect magnitudes: a one percent higher
corporate tax rate is associated with a 0.34 percent greater share of income going to noncorporate
business. Chen, Qi, and Schlagenhauf (2018) calibrate a model of organizational choice to U.S.
data, finding that a one percent higher corporate tax rate increases the noncorporate share of
firms by 1.2 percent and noncorporate employment by 1.3 percent. Goolsbee (2004) analyzes
the organizational forms of retail trade firms across U.S. states in 1992, also reporting large tax
effects: a one percent higher corporate tax rate is associated with a 1.5 percent greater
employment share, and one percent greater payroll and sales shares, in noncorporate firms. And
Barro and Wheaton (2020) use different methods to analyze annual U.S. data for 1968-2013,
reporting coefficients that imply that a one percent higher corporate tax rate is associated with a
roughly 0.3 percent greater noncorporate share of business assets. Devereux and Lui (2016)
similarly report large effects of taxation on rates of incorporation in the United Kingdom, and
evidence from elsewhere in Europe (de Mooij and Nicodème, 2008; Lejour and Massenz, 2020)
points to even larger effects of corporate tax changes on the noncorporate share of business
activity.

         The high returns associated with successful large undiversified noncorporate business
investments make some entrepreneurs very wealthy, and as a result, top U.S. incomes consist
disproportionately of returns from unincorporated business activities. Smith et al. (2019) find
that 69 percent of those in the top one percent of the U.S. income distribution receive income
from noncorporate businesses. Of course, some of this income simply represents casual
investment, but the study reports that 39 percent of the incomes of the top one percent of U.S.
taxpayers consist of returns from noncorporate firms in which they are active participants; this
fraction rises to 44 percent of the incomes of the top 0.1 percent. 14 Smith et al. (2019) also
report that U.S. noncorporate firms typically have one to three owners for whom the business
generates large shares of their total incomes. 15 Quadrini (2000) likewise finds business owners

14
   Bryan (2017) presents consistent evidence for U.S. taxpayers with incomes above $200,000 in 2014. Bricker et
al. (2016) and Guvenen and Kaplan (2017) offer cautionary notes about interpreting tax and survey data on the
incomes of top earners.
15
   The IRS similarly reports that, in 2017, 2.2 million of the economy's 3.9 million partnerships had either one or
two owners (DeCarlo and Shumofsky, 2019). IRS data also indicate that, in 2016, there were 4.6 million S


                                                                                                             21
and managers to be overrepresented in top U.S. income and wealth groups. Another hint of the
impact of entrepreneurial business activity on the distribution of income appears in Aghion et al.
(2019), which reports that local areas of the United States with high rates of innovation and
patenting have greater income inequality and greater income-based social mobility.

5.2      Empirical implications.

         The model of section 4 can be applied to U.S. tax return data to infer the likely size of
income dispersion effects of corporate tax changes. The IRS reports numbers of tax returns with
positive partnership and S corporation income among the top one percent of income earners (as
measured by adjusted gross income), along with the aggregate amounts of their positive
partnership and S corporation income. 16 The same source also reports numbers of top one
percent tax returns with negative partnership and S corporation income, and the aggregate
amount of their losses. One challenge in using these data lies in distinguishing top earners who
are casual investors in partnerships and S corporations from entrepreneurs who commit more of
their economic livelihoods to them.

         A property of the Pareto distribution, such as described in (9), is that, for any value of ,

the average value of  for the population with    is  ( - 1) . Defining y
                                                                       y  , it                         ( )
follows that in the absence of noncorporate business activity, the average income of the
                                             ( - 1) . The model posits that successful
                                   will be  y
population with incomes exceeding y

noncorporate entrepreneurs with top incomes constitute a fraction p of the population that, in

the absence of noncorporate activity, would have had incomes of at least y (1 + k ) . Without

noncorporate business activity, the average income of this population would be

y (1 + k )( - 1)  , and since successful noncorporate entrepreneurs augment their incomes by




corporations with $581 billion of net income, of which 3.0 million with $240 billion of net income had single
owners, and another 1.2 million with $130 billion of net income had just two owners
(https://www.irs.gov/statistics/soi-tax-stats-s-corporation-statistics).
16
   This information is currently available only for 2014-2017, and can be found at https://www.irs.gov/statistics/soi-
tax-stats-individual-statistical-tables-by-tax-rate-and-income-percentile.


                                                                                                              22
a factor of (1 + k ) , it follows that the average income of successful noncorporate entpreneurs is

 y ( - 1) , the same as those with top incomes who do not engage in noncorporate activity. 17

           U.S. tax return data indicate that, in 2014, 673,000 taxpayers in the top one percent of the
income distribution received positive partnership and S corporation income, which summed to
$463 billion. Smith et al. (2019) report that owner salaries, which are not included in the
published partnership and S corporation return statistics, constituted an additional 22 percent of
small business returns in 2014. Applying this ratio to partnership and S corporations produces a
total owner income of $565 billion. Certainly some of the 673,000 income recipients were
casual investors with trivial stakes not well described by the model. Taking the partnership and
S corporation incomes of casual investors to be unimportant, and noting that the cutoff income
y for the top one percent of the U.S. income distribution in 2014 was $466,000, the model
implies that there were 485,000 substantial partnership and S corporation investors among the
top one percent that year. 18

           U.S. tax return data also indicate that 189,000 taxpayers in the top one percent of the
2014 income distribution had partnership and S corporation losses, which summed to $39 billion.
This information does not reveal how many of the 189,000 were casual investors with trivial
stakes, but the model can be extended to afford such a calculation. Suppose that casual
partnership and S corporation investors have the same likelihood of making and losing money as
do substantial investors, albeit in much smaller amounts. Selection on outcomes implies that the
top one percent of the income distribution consists disproportionately of those with substantial
business gains and those with trivial business losses. As a result, it is possible to use the 72
percent implied ratio of active to total investors with gains to infer the number of investors with
substantial noncorporate business losses as a function of model parameters. 19 For 2014, this


17
     Appendix C.1 provides proofs of these properties.
     $565, 000 ( - 1) 
                       [$0.466 ] =  485, 000 , with  = 1.67 .
18

19
  Appendix C.2 provides details of this calculation, which simultaneously reconciles data on partnership and S
corporation gains and losses. The system has three unknowns (p, k, and  ) and three independent equations that
identify them, though the structure of the problem is such that it is possible to solve for k and      independently of p,
and to do so simply by searching over a scalar function of k and    .     With k and      identified there is then a closed
form solution for p as a function of k,   ,   and observable variables.



                                                                                                                    23
works out to be 4,000, meaning that of the 189,000 taxpayers with partnership and S corporation
losses who nonetheless had top one percent incomes, 185,000 were casual investors and 4,000
substantial noncorporate entrepreneurs. 20

         The model implies that unsuccessful noncorporate entrepreneurs with top incomes
represent a fraction p (1 -  ) of the part of the population that in the absence of noncorporate

activity would have had incomes of at least y (1 - m ) . Without noncorporate business activity

the average income of this population would be  y (1 - m )( - 1)  , and since unsuccessful
noncorporate entrepreneurs reduce their potential incomes by a factor of m , it follows that the
average income of substantial but unsuccessful noncorporate entpreneurs is  y ( - 1) , the

same as successful entrepreneurs and those with top incomes who do not have noncorporate
businesses. Applying this average income to the number of active investors with partnership and
S corporation losses, it follows that those in the top one percent with substantial partnership and
S corporation losses have aggregate net income of $4.7 billion. Since they report $39 billion of
aggregate investment losses, it follows that m = 0.89 . 21

         The model also implies that the ratio of entrepreneurial gains to entrepreneurial losses
among top taxpayers is a function of k and  , so it is possible to use the reported gains and
losses, along with the implied value of m, to infer the values of these parameters. As described
in Appendix C, these relationships produce a nonlinear system with two roots, one of which has
higher potential returns to noncorporate activity with associated lower probability of success. In
the years for which there are available data, these alternative roots correspond to very different
outcomes: one in which entrepreneurs have roughly 50 percent probabilities of success but
significant gains if successful, and another in which entrepreneurs have much higher
probabilities of success but very small gains if successful. Only the first of these two
corresponds to the business situations envisioned by the model, and to other evidence of the
riskiness of noncorporate business ventures, so the analysis focuses on their implications.


20
  The model parameters fitted to 2014 data imply that, in the population as a whole, 53 percent of partnership and S
corporation owners are casual investors with trivial stakes, but that among those with ex post incomes in the top one
percent, 28 percent of owners with gains and 98 percent of owners with losses have trivial stakes. Data for 2015-
2017 produce similar estimates; Appendix C.2 describes the basis of these calculations.


                                                                                                             24
         Table 3 presents parameter values fit to U.S. tax return data on top one percent earners in
2014-2017, along with implications for the effect of corporate taxation on the concentration of
these top incomes. For 2014, the implied value of k is 0.88, meaning that entrepreneurial success
increased incomes by 88 percent; and the implied 0.50 value of  means that noncorporate
business ventures succeed half the time. The data imply that p = 0.27 , so 27 percent of those
with potentially high incomes undertake noncorporate business ventures (though due to selection
the realized fraction of top one percent income earners who are noncorporate entrepreneurs will
be considerably higher than 27 percent). The implied value of  is 0.456, from which it follows
that (1 + p ) =1.123 , so income dispersion due to the riskiness of noncorporate business activity

increases the concentration of top incomes by 12.3%. And as reported in the rightmost column,
income dispersion associated with greater noncorporate business activity attributable to a one
percent higher corporate tax rate will increase top one percent incomes by 0.073 percent. Data
for 2015-2017 yield similar parameter values and implications for the effects of corporate
taxation on income concentration.

         This data fitting exercise suggests that the greater income dispersion accompanying
higher corporate tax rates may significantly dampen or even reverse the net effect of higher rates
on the concentration of income in the top one percent. The 0.073 percent figure for 2014 is
slightly more than half of the magnitude of the -0.13 adjusted U.S. Treasury estimate for the
effect of a one percent higher corporate tax rate on top income concentration, though neither
figure is precise, and both are products of strong assumptions. Notably, this data fitting exercise
does not consider noncorporate entrepreneurial income from farms and sole proprietorships,
which have features that differ from partnerships and S corporations. While partnership and S
corporation income greatly exceeds that produced by farms and sole proprietorships, obtaining a
complete picture of the effect of corporate taxes on income dispersion requires consideration of
all of these sources of income. 22 Furthermore, reported partnership and S corporation losses for
tax purposes do not include the opportunity costs of entrepreneurship that displaces other activity



21
   This follows from 4.7 m (1 - m ) = 39 .
22
   In 2017, top one percent U.S. taxpayers had $550.5 billion of partnership and S corporation gains, and $58.8
billion of sole proprietorship and farm gains. As discussed in Appendix C.4, the model of section 4 fits the data for
sole proprietorship and farm income only for 2016. Appendix D describes a much stronger fit for the 2014-2017


                                                                                                              25
that would have generated high incomes. 23 As a result, it is difficult to know just how large the
income dispersion effects of higher corporate tax rates are apt to be for the U.S. economy ­
though it is clear that their impact on the concentration of top incomes may be sizeable compared
to standard estimates of the distributional effects of corporate taxes.

5.3.     Extensions.

         The model in section 4 has features that generally correspond to the economic
experiences of top income earners in the United States, but that nonetheless contain stylized
elements, such as that noncorporate business ventures break even in expectation. Individual risk
aversion would require expected noncorporate business returns to be more favorable than
captured by equation (6) in order to compensate entrepreneurs for the greater risks that they
face. 24 Alternatively, preference for income earned in an entrepreneurial fashion would imply
that equilibrium noncorporate business returns are smaller than expressed in equation (6), as
investors are willing to accept lower expected returns in exchange for the greater economic
autonomy and perhaps even the greater risks associated with noncorporate entrepreneurship.

         Appendix D identifies how the model of section 4 changes when investors are not risk
neutral, and displays the results of fitting the tax return data to the model under alternative
assumptions about the direction and extent of deviations from risk neutrality. Notably, a model
in which entrepreneurs are willing to accept somewhat below-market expected returns from their
sole proprietorship and farm ventures fits the data for sole proprietorship and farm income much
better than does a model in which these entrepreneurs are assumed to be risk neutral. Required
investment returns also can be consequential for partnership and S corporation investors ­ the
data are consistent with models of risk-averse, risk-neutral, and risk-loving behavior, with the
smallest estimated tax effects on income dispersion arising in cases with risk aversion.



sole proprietorship and farm data in a model with the feature that entrepreneurs are willing to accept somewhat
lower returns in exchange for earning those returns with their own proprietorships or farms.
23
   The model concerns economic losses from unsuccessful noncorporate ventures, which includes opportunity costs,
whereas the tax data report losses for tax purposes, which is a different concept. Owners of loss-making
noncorporate business ventures have limited ability to claim losses for tax purposes, though in practice, as Lim,
Patel, and Saunders-Scott (2018) report, most S corporation losses can be claimed by their owners.
24
   Risk aversion introduces the possibility that higher tax rates may stimulate greater demand for taxed assets, as
explored by Domar and Musgrave (1944), Gordon (1985), and others. Evidence that higher corporate tax rates are
associated with significantly greater noncorporate business activity relative to corporate activity suggests that these


                                                                                                               26
         The model of section 4 assumes that all individuals have the same probability of
engaging in noncorporate business activity, and that when they do they face a common
combination of k and  . These strong assumptions simplify the model, but can be generalized to
incorporate various forms of heterogeneity, as developed in Appendix E. Realistic forms of
heterogeneity, such as differences in k due to individuals committing different fractions of their
time and capital to entrepreneurial efforts, are likely to increase the implied effect of
noncorporate business activity on income dispersion. If there is random heterogeneity, with
values of p, k and  distributed identically at each value of  , then the analysis of section 4 is
changed only by replacing p and  with their mean values. Notably in such cases, the convexity
of  in each of k and  implies that, for given population means, investor heterogeneity in k or
 increases the average value of  . To the extent that values of p, k and  increase with  ,
tax-induced income dispersion will have greater effects on the concentration of higher incomes.
Appendix E reports parameters of models fit to data for the top 5, 2, and 0.1 percent of top U.S.
incomes, with values of p that appear to increase systematically with  .

         The model assumes that entrepreneurs do not avoid other income risks by undertaking
noncorporate business activities; Appendix F generalizes this specification to incorporate the
possibility that some income risks bear only on those who are not entrepreneurs. Appendix F
shows that in such cases the model of section 4 captures relevant tax effects if the risk associated
with noncorporate business activity is replaced by the difference between the risks of earning
noncorporate business returns and other sources of income. Consequently, the fitted values of 
reported in Table 3 can be interpreted as this difference.

         Applying equation (20) to infer the effect of higher corporate taxes requires that the
difference between the risk characteristics of additional noncorporate activities and the marginal
corporate activities that they replace be the same as the average risk difference between
noncorporate and corporate businesses. 25 If a higher corporate tax rate simply encourages
entrepreneurs to organize their firms as partnerships or S corporations rather than C corporations,


general equilibrium portfolio effects are smaller in magnitude than other effects of higher corporate tax rates in
depressing expected after-tax returns and thereby reducing corporate activity.
25
   The Harberger (1962) model has the analogous feature of assuming that the difference between the capital
intensities of additional noncorporate activities and the marginal corporate activities that they replace are the same
as the average difference between the capital intensities of noncorporate and corporate businesses.


                                                                                                                27
the primary risk difference would lie in ownership limitations, which for many small firms might
not be very consequential. 26 The main effect of high corporate tax rates, however, is to depress
general levels of corporate business activity, reducing factor demands and creating market
opportunities for noncorporate businesses, which expand as a result. This second channel is
likely much more consequential for noncorporate business activity than is the first, as most of the
corporate tax bears on very large businesses that do not readily switch between corporate and
noncorporate status.27 It is reasonable to expect general reductions in corporate activity
accompanied by expansions of noncorporate activity to affect income dispersion in a manner
indicated by average differences between the riskiness of corporate and noncorporate business,
though in practice the results might be larger or smaller than those based on equation (20) and
reported in Table 3.




6.       Conclusion

         Corporations are entities that pool risks and returns. In spreading risks among multiple
owners, the corporate form of business organization reduces the dispersion of economic
outcomes, and thereby produces more equal distributions of realized incomes than would be the
case if the same business risks were instead borne by single owners. If all businesses in the
United States were required to be publicly traded corporations with widely diversified
ownership, then the U.S. income distribution would be considerably more equal than it is today.
Higher rates of corporate taxation move the economy in the direction of having fewer and
smaller corporations and therefore less of the risk sharing that corporations provide. This effect
of the corporate tax undermines its ability to reduce income disparities.

         The finding that higher corporate tax rates may not much reduce income inequality, or
possibly even increase it, bears only indirectly on tax incidence calculations as conventionally



26
   Since initial organizational choices of small firms that wind up very successful can have significant effects on the
costliness of subsequently expanding ownership, in expectation replacing even small C corporations with
partnerships and S corporations increases aggregate idiosyncratic risk.
27
   In 2013, there were 5.9 million active U.S. C corporations, of which the 3,266 with assets exceeding $2.5 billion
had combined taxable incomes of $957 billion, representing 76% of total U.S. corporate taxable income, and total
assets of $71.7 trillion, representing 85% of total U.S. corporate assets. Adding the 7,312 corporations with assets


                                                                                                               28
performed. The standard incidence calculation considers the effects of taxation on different
groups distinguished by their situations prior to tax changes. For this purpose, the effects of
small tax changes can be analyzed assuming that behavior is unaffected, whereas behavioral
responses matter for income distribution even if they do not for individual welfare. Different
individuals induced by the tax system to start noncorporate businesses, applying similar capital
and labor resources, and with similar business prospects, may have very different ex post
outcomes. The standard incidence calculation treats them identically, whereas understanding the
effect of taxation on the distribution of income requires acknowledging their differences.

        Would it be appropriate for those who produce estimates of the distribution of tax
burdens to adjust their calculations to account for the effects of corporate taxation on the risk
patterns of returns? That depends on the objectives of distributional analysis. If its purpose is to
judge the potential consequences of tax reforms for income groups defined prior to reforms, then
it is not necessary to account for the uncertainty of ex post investment returns. If, however, the
purpose of distributional analysis is to evaluate the effect of tax reform on the economy's income
distribution, then it is essential to trace the effects of tax changes on activities that create
economic disparities.

        The nature of business organization, and the resulting risks that business owners face,
significantly affects the distribution of income in the economy. In changing forms of business
organization, corporate taxes thereby change levels of idiosyncratic risk in the economy, which
in turn affect the distribution of income. It follows that other policies that influence forms of
business organization, such as legal and regulatory rules that govern the formation of different
types of businesses, and the taxation of profits earned by unincorporated firms, likewise affect
the distribution of income. Furthermore, tax and other policies that influence risk-taking, such as
the extent to which the tax system permits deductions for losses, also influence the income
distribution. Economic activities with uncertain returns, including some undertaken long ago,
significantly affect economic inequality ­ so in understanding the distributional effects of
corporate taxation and other government policies, it is important to incorporate the extent to
which these policies encourage or discourage risky ventures.


between $500 million and $2.5 billion brings these totals to 87% of total U.S. corporate income and 91% of total
U.S. corporate assets (https://www.irs.gov/statistics/soi-tax-stats-table-5-returns-of-active-corporations).


                                                                                                            29
References

Aghion, Philippe, Ufuk Akcigit, Antonin Bergeaud, Richard Blundell, and David Hemous,
      Innovation and top income inequality, Review of Economic Studies, January 2019, 86 (1),
      1-45.
Aoki, Shuhei and Makoto Nirei, Zipf's law, Pareto's law, and the evolution of top incomes in the
       United States, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, July 2017, 9 (3), 36-71.
Arulampalam, Wiji, Michael P. Devereux, and Giorgia Maffini, "The direct incidence of
      corporate income tax on wages," European Economic Review, August 2012, 56 (6),
      1038-1054.
Atkinson, Anthony B., Thomas Piketty, and Emmanuel Saez, Top incomes in the long run of
       history, Journal of Economic Literature, March 2011, 49 (1), 3-71.
Auerbach, Alan J., Who bears the corporate tax? A review of what we know, in James M.
      Poterba, ed., Tax Policy and the Economy, vol. 20 (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2006),
      1-40.
Auerbach, Alan J., Measuring the effects of corporate tax cuts, Journal of Economic
      Perspectives, Fall 2018, 32 (4), 97-120.

Auerbach, Alan J. and Joel Slemrod, The economic effects of the Tax Reform Act of 1986,
      Journal of Economic Literature, June 1997, 35 (2), 589-632.
Baron, David P. and Robert Forsythe, Uncertainty and the theory of tax incidence in a stock
       market economy, International Economic Review, October 1981, 22 (3), 567-576.
Barro, Robert J. and Brian Wheaton, Taxes, incorporation, and productivity, in Robert E. Moffitt
       ed., Tax Policy and the Economy, volume 34 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
       2020), 91-111.
Batra, Raveendra N., A general equilibrium model of the incidence of corporation income tax
       under uncertainty, Journal of Public Economics, November 1975, 4 (4), 343-360.

Bricker, Jesse, Alice Henriques, Jacob Krimmel, and John Sabelhaus, Measuring income and
       wealth at the top using administrative and survey data, Brookings Papers on Economic
       Activity, Spring 2016, 47 (1), 261-312.
Bryan, Justin, High-income tax returns for tax year 2014, Statistics of Income Bulletin, Summer
       2017, 37 (1), 2-55.

Chen, Daphne, Shi Qi, and Don Schlagenhauf, Corporate income tax, legal form of organization,
       and employment, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, October 2018, 10 (4),
       270-304.

Clausing, Kimberly, Who pays the corporate tax in a global economy? National Tax Journal,
       March 2013, 66 (1), 151-184.



                                                                                          30
Cole, Rebel A. and Tatyana Sokolyk, Debt financing, survival, and growth of start-up firms,
       Journal of Corporate Finance, June 2018, 50 (C), 609-625.

Congressional Budget Office, The distribution of household income and federal taxes, 2008 and
      2009 (Washington, DC: Congressional Budget Office, July 2012).
Congressional Budget Office, Options for reducing the deficit: 2017 to 2026 (Washington, DC:
      Congressional Budget Office, December 2016).
Cooper, Michael, John McClelland, James Pearce, Richard Prisinzano, Joseph Sullivan, Danny
      Yagan, Owen Zidar, and Eric Zwick, Business in the United States: Who owns it, and
      how much tax do they pay? in Jeffrey R. Brown ed., Tax Policy and the Economy,
      volume 30 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2016), 91-128.

Cronin, Julie Ann, Emily Y. Lin, Laura Power, and Michael Cooper, Distributing the corporate
       income tax: Revised U.S. Treasury methodology, National Tax Journal, March 2013, 66
       (1), 239-262.
Davidson, Carl and Lawrence W. Martin, General equilibrium tax incidence under imperfect
      competition: A quantity-setting supergame analysis, Journal of Political Economy,
      December 1985, 93 (6), 1212-1223.
Davis, Steven J., John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin and Javier Miranda, Volatility and dispersion in
       business growth rates: Publicly traded versus privately held firms, NBER
       Macroeconomics Annual 2006 (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2007), 107-179.
DeBacker, Jason, Vasia Panousi, and Shanthi Ramnath, A risky venture: Dynamics within the
      non-corporate private business sector, working paper, University of South Carolina, April
      2020.
DeCarlo, Ron and Nina Shumofsky, Partnership returns, tax year 2017, SOI Bulletin, Fall 2019,
      39 (2), 84-121.
de Mooij, Ruud A. and Gaëtan Nicodème, Corporate tax policy and incorporation in the EU,
      International Tax and Public Finance, August 2008, 15 (4), 478-498.

Devereux, Michael and Li Lui, Stimulating investment through incorporation, Oxford University
      Centre for Business Taxation Working Paper No. 16/07, May 2016.
Diamond, Peter A. and James Mirrlees, Optimal taxation and public production, I: Production
      efficiency; II: Tax rules, American Economic Review, March and June 1971, 61 (1, 2), 8-
      27, 261-278.

Domar, Evsey D. and Richard A. Musgrave, Proportional income taxation and risk taking,
      Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1944, 58 (3), 382-422.
Felix, R. Alison and James R. Hines Jr., Corporate taxes and union wages in the United States,
        NBER Working Paper No. 15263, August 2009.




                                                                                          31
Fuest, Clemens, Andreas Peichl and Sebastian Siegloch, Do higher corporate taxes reduce
       wages? Micro evidence from Germany, American Economic Review, February 2018, 108
       (2), 393-418.
Fullerton, Don and Gilbert E. Metcalf, Tax incidence, in Alan J. Auerbach and Martin Feldstein,
        eds. Handbook of public economics, volume 4 (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2002), 1787-
        1872.
Goolsbee, Austan, Taxes, organizational form, and the deadweight loss of the corporate income
      tax, Journal of Public Economics, July 1998, 69 (1), 143-152.
Goolsbee, Austan, The impact of the corporate income tax: Evidence from state organizational
      form data, Journal of Public Economics, September 2004, 88 (11), 2283-2299.

Gordon, Roger H., Taxation of corporate capital income: Tax revenues versus tax distortions,
      Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1985, 100 (1), 1-27.
Gordon, Roger H., Taxation of investment and savings in a world economy, American Economic
      Review, December 1986, 76 (5), 1086-1102.
Gordon, Roger H. and James R. Hines Jr., International taxation, in Alan J. Auerbach and Martin
      Feldstein, eds. Handbook of public economics, volume 4 (Amsterdam: North-Holland,
      2002), 1935-1995.
Gravelle, Jane G. and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, The incidence and efficiency costs of corporate
       taxation when corporate and noncorporate firms produce the same good, Journal of
       Political Economy, August 1989, 97 (4), 749-780.
Gravelle, Jane G. and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, Corporate tax incidence and inefficiency when
       corporate and noncorporate goods are close substitutes, Economic Inquiry, October 1993,
       31 (4), 501-516.

Gravelle, Jane G. and Kent A. Smetters, Does the open economy assumption really mean that
       labor bears the burden of a capital income tax? Advances in Economic Analysis & Policy,
       2006, 6 (1), Article 3.

Gravelle, Jennifer, Corporate tax incidence: Review of general equilibrium estimates and
       analysis, National Tax Journal, March 2013, 66 (1), 185-214.
Guvenen, Faith and Greg Kaplan, Top income inequality in the 21st century: Some cautionary
      notes, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, October 2017, 38 (1), 2-
      15.

Hamilton, Barton H., Does entrepreneurship pay? An empirical analysis of the returns to self-
      employment, Journal of Political Economy, June 2000, 108 (3), 604-631.
Harberger, Arnold C., The incidence of the corporation income tax, Journal of Political
      Economy, June 1962, 70 (3), 215-240.




                                                                                           32
Harberger, Arnold C., The ABCs of corporate tax incidence: Insights into the open economy
      case, in Tax Policy and Economic Growth (Washington, DC: American Council for
      Capital Formation, 1995).
Harberger, Arnold C., Corporation tax incidence: Reflections on what is known, unknown and
      unknowable, in John W. Diamond and George R. Zodrow eds., Fundamental Tax
      Reform: Issues, Choices, and Implications, (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2006).
Harberger, Arnold C., The incidence of the corporate tax revisited, National Tax Journal, June
      2008, 61 (2), 303-312.
Hassett, Kevin A. and Aparna Mathur, A spatial model of corporate tax incidence, Applied
       Economics, March 2015, 47 (13), 1350-1365.

Hurst, Erik and Benjamin Wild Pugsley, What do small businesses do? Brookings Papers on
       Economic Activity, Fall 2011, 43 (2), 73-118.
Jones, Charles I., Pareto and Piketty: The macroeconomics of top income and wealth inequality,
       Journal of Economic Perspectives, Winter 2015, 29 (1), 29-46.
Jones, Charles I. and Jihee Kim, A Schumpeterian model of top income inequality, Journal of
       Political Economy, October 2018, 126 (5), 1785-1826.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J. and Lawrence H. Summers, Tax incidence, in Alan J. Auerbach and
       Martin Feldstein, eds. Handbook of Public Economics, volume 2 (Amsterdam: North-
       Holland, 1987).
Lejour, Arjan and Gabriella Massenz, Income shifting and organizational form choice: Evidence
       from Europe, Tilburg University Working Paper, April 2020.

Lim, Katherine, Elena Patel, and Molly Saunders-Scott, Examining S-corporation losses and
      how they are used, National Tax Journal, June 2018, 71 (4), 661-686.
Liu, Li and Rosanne Altshuler, Measuring the burden of the corporate income tax under
        imperfect competition, National Tax Journal, March 2013, 66 (1), 215-238.
Mackie-Mason, Jeffrey K., and Roger H. Gordon, How much do taxes discourage incorporation?
      Journal of Finance, June 1997, 52 (2), 477-506.

McLure, Charles E., General equilibrium incidence analysis: The Harberger model after ten
      years, Journal of Public Economics, February 1975, 4 (2), 125-161.
Moskowitz, Tobias J. and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, The returns to entrepreneurial investment:
     A private equity premium puzzle? American Economic Review, September 2002, 92 (4),
     745-778.
Nallareddy, Suresh, Ethan Rouen, and Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato, Do corporate tax cuts increase
       income inequality? NBER Working Paper No. 24598, revised August 2019.
Nirei, Makoto and Shuhei Aoki, Pareto distribution of income in neoclassical growth models,
        Review of Economic Dynamics, April 2016, 20, 25-42.


                                                                                           33
Prisinzano, Richard and James Pearce, Tax based switching of business income, Penn Wharton
        Budget Model Working Paper 2018-2, March 2018.

Quadrini, Vincenzo, Entrepreneurship, saving, and social mobility, Review of Economic
      Dynamics, January 2000, 3 (1), 1-40.
Randolph, William C., International burdens of the corporate income tax, Congressional Budget
      Office Working Paper 2006-09, 2006.
Ratti, Ronald A. and Parthasarathi Shome, On a general equilibrium model of the incidence of
        the corporation tax under uncertainty, Journal of Public Economics, October 1977, 8 (2),
        233-238.
Robb, Alicia M. and David T. Robinson, The capital structure decisions of new firms, Review of
      Financial Studies, January 2014, 27 (1), 153-179.
Roussanov, Nikolai, Diversification and its discontents: Idiosyncratic and entrepreneurial risk in
      the quest for social status, Journal of Finance, October 2010, 65 (5), 1755-1788.

Smith, Matthew, Danny Yagan, Owen M. Zidar, and Eric Zwick, Capitalists in the twenty-first
       century, Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 2019, 134 (4), 1675-1745.
Suárez Serrato, Juan Carlos and Owen M. Zidar, Who benefits from state corporate tax cuts? A
       local labor markets approach with heterogeneous firms, American Economic Review,
       September 2016, 106 (9), 2582-2624.
Toda, Alexis Akira, Incomplete market dynamics and cross-sectional distributions, Journal of
       Economic Theory, November 2014, 154 (C), 310-348.




                                                                                            34
       Figure 1: Income Dispersion Effects of a Corporate Tax Increase.




                                                     Median




          A (1 - c )                                            A (1 + c )
        ^
        y                        ^
                                 y A
                                       ^B
                                       y  (1 - c )            ^
                                                              y              ^B
                                                                             y                  ^B
                                                                                                y  (1 + c )



                            ^A
                            y                                                     ^B
                                                                                  y

                                                                                                Income




Note: Figure 1 depicts incomes before and after a corporate tax increase. There are two types of
individuals, A and B, with respective incomes y           ^ B prior to the tax increase. A higher
                                                  ^ A and y
corporate tax (and accompanying lower labor tax) increases type A's expected after-tax income
from y       ^
      ^ A to y                                                               ^     ^
               A , and reduces type B's expected after-tax income from y B to y B . The higher
corporate tax also stimulates noncorporate investment with risky outcomes, as a result of which a
                                                                A (1 - c ) , and a fraction p 2 have
fraction p 2 of type A individuals have realized incomes y     ^
                   A (1 + c ) ; similarly, a fraction p 2 of type B individuals have realized
                 ^
realized incomes y
        ^B
incomes y  (1 - c ) , and a fraction p 2 have realized incomes y
                                                               ^B (1 + c ) .




                                                                                                  35
      Figure 2: Lorenz Curves before and after a Corporate Tax Increase.


   Cumulative
   income




                                                  Pre-reform
                                                  Lorenz curve


                                                                              Post-reform
                            Post-reform
                                                                              Lorenz curve
                            Lorenz curve
                            without
                            noncorporate
                            business




                      p 4                  0.5 - p 4        0.5   0.5 + p 4       1.0 - p 4
                                                                                              Cumulative
                                                                                              population




Note: Figure 2 depicts the distribution of income before and after a reform that increases the
corporate tax rate and reduces the labor income tax rate. There are just two types of individuals,
and the tax reform increases the expected after-tax incomes of those with lower incomes while
reducing the expected after-tax incomes of those with higher incomes. The solid dark Lorenz
curve plots the cumulative income distribution prior to the tax reform, and the lightly shaded
Lorenz curve plots what the income distribution would have been if a higher corporate tax had
not induced some investors to start unincorporated businesses. The dashed Lorenz curve plots
the income distribution after the tax reform, including the greater income dispersion due to
noncorporate business activity, for a case in which condition (4) in the text holds with equality.
Since the post-reform Lorenz curve lies weakly below the original Lorenz curve, the tax reform
makes the income distribution less equal in a second order stochastic sense.



                                                                                              36
                                            Table 1
         Noncorporate Business Riskiness and the Concentration of High Incomes



 


0.55      0.26 0.47



0.50      0.20 0.37 0.59



0.45      0.16 0.29 0.46 0.68



0.40      0.13 0.24 0.37 0.53 0.73



0.35      0.11 0.19 0.29 0.42 0.57 0.75 0.96



0.30      0.08 0.15 0.23 0.33 0.45 0.58 0.73 0.91 1.10



0.25      0.06 0.11 0.18 0.25 0.34 0.44 0.56 0.69 0.83 0.98 1.15 1.33



0.20      0.05 0.08 0.13 0.19 0.25 0.33 0.41 0.50 0.61 0.72 0.84 0.97



           0.6    0.8   1.0    1.2    1.4   1.6    1.8   2.0    2.2    2.4   2.6    2.8        k



Note to Table 1: The table presents values of (1 + k )  + (1 -  - k ) (1 -  ) - 1 , denoted 
                                                                                1-
                                                                                     
in the text, with  = 1.67 , k taking values indicated on the horizontal axis, and  taking values
indicated on the vertical axis. k corresponds to the factor by which noncorporate business
success increases an entrepreneur's income, and  is the probability of success. An entry such
as 0.46 (for k = 1.0 and  = 0.45 ) indicates that the aggregate income of the population with


                                                                                          37
incomes above y equals  y (1 + 0.46 p ) , in which  y is the aggregate income of the population
with incomes above y in the absence of noncorporate investment, and p is the fraction of the
population making noncorporate investments.




                                                                                          38
                                         Table 2
       Effect of a One Percent Higher Corporate Tax Rate on Income Concentration

                                   p = 0.20                           p = 0.30

                            1.60     1.67     1.75             1.60     1.67       1.75

            k

0.50       1.0             0.088    0.095     0.103           0.084    0.090       0.097

           0.6             0.032    0.035     0.039           0.031    0.035       0.038




0.40       1.4             0.105    0.115     0.125           0.100    0.108       0.117

           1.0             0.056    0.062     0.068           0.054    0.060       0.066

           0.6             0.021    0.023     0.026           0.021    0.023       0.026




0.30       1.4             0.066    0.074     0.082           0.064    0.071       0.078

           1.0             0.035    0.039     0.044           0.035    0.039       0.043

           0.6             0.013    0.015     0.017           0.013    0.015       0.016




0.20       1.4             0.038    0.043     0.049           0.038    0.042       0.047

           1.0             0.020    0.023     0.026           0.020    0.023       0.026

           0.6             0.008    0.009     0.010           0.008    0.009       0.010




                                                                                   39
Note to Table 2: The table presents the effect of a one percent higher corporate tax rate on the
concentration of high incomes due to induced greater income dispersion from noncorporate
                                              d  d    
investments. The table entries correspond to       +   in equation (20), and assume that
                                                      
dp d = 0.3 . The net effect of a one percent higher corporate tax rate then equals the difference
between the entry in Table 2 and  , where  is the effect of the corporate tax on expected
incomes. Thus for example, if p = 0.20 ,  = 1.67 ,  = 0.40 , and k = 1.4 , then the greater
income dispersion caused by a one percent higher corporate tax rate increases the concentration
of high incomes by 0.115 percent. If the relevant value of  is smaller in magnitude than 0.115
percent, it would then follow that a higher corporate tax rate increases the concentration of high
incomes.




                                                                                              40
                                              Table 3

    Implications of U.S. Data for the Effect of Corporate Taxes on Top 1%
                            Income Concentration



                                                                                 d  d
Year            NC          k                       m                     p              +
                                                                                    


2014           0.350       0.879      0.504       0.892      0.456      0.270      0.0730


2015           0.362       0.861      0.508       0.888      0.446      0.282      0.0711


2016           0.356       0.771      0.535       0.887      0.401      0.282      0.0648


2017           0.368       0.928      0.485       0.875      0.468      0.284      0.0743




Note to Table 3: The table presents values of model parameters fit to U.S. tax return data for
taxpayers in the top one percent of the income distribution for years 2014-2017. Column 2
presents the fraction of top one percent income earned from active investments in partnerships
and S corporations. Columns 3-5 present fitted model parameters k,  , and m. k corresponds to
the factor by which noncorporate business success increases an entrepreneur's income, and  is
the probability of success; m is the fraction of potential income lost in an unsuccessful
noncorporate business venture. Column 6 presents the implied value of
 = (1 + k )  + (1 -  - k ) (1 -  ) - 1 for  = 1.67 , in which  is the effect of a given
                                      1-
 
                                            
level of investment in unincorporated business on the extent of top income concentration.
Column 7 presents the implied value of p, the fraction of the population engaging in
noncorporate business activity. Column 8 presents the change in income earned by the top one
percent due to a 1% higher corporate tax rate, restricting attention to that portion of the effect
attributable to income dispersion caused by greater investment in partnerships and S
corporations.




                                                                                            41
Appendix A
         This appendix considers the model of section 3. Denoting individual A's pretax income
                           ^ A , and individual B's as y
prior to the tax change as y                           ^ B , it follows that


(A1)                                      ^ A = w (1 - t ) LA + r (1 -  ) K A
                                          y


(A2)                                      ^ B = w (1 - t ) LB + r (1 -  ) K B ,
                                          y


in which w is the pretax return to labor, t the tax rate on labor income, r the pretax return to
corporate investment, and  the tax rate on corporate income. Individual A's labor ( LA ) and

capital ( K A ) are inelastically supplied, as are individual B's labor ( LB ) and capital ( K B ) . Tax

revenue is denoted R, for which

(A3)                                    R= tw ( LA + LB ) +  r ( K A + K B ) .


         Substituting (A3) into (A1) and (A2) produces


                                             LA                            LA           KA       
(A4)             ^ A = wLA + rK A - R
                 y                                   + r ( K A + KB )             -              
                                         ( LA + LB )                   ( LA + LB ) ( K A + K B ) 


                                            LB                            LA           KA       
(A5)            ^ B = wLB + rK B - R
                y                                   - r ( K A + KB )             -              .
                                        ( LA + LB )                   ( LA + LB ) ( K A + K B ) 

In an environment with fixed factor supplies, tax changes that do not affect total government
revenue also will not affect pretax factor returns. 28 Taking government revenue R to be a fixed
requirement, it follows from (A4) that a higher corporate tax rate (and accompanying lower labor
income tax rate) increases A's after-tax income if A's factor endowment is relatively more labor-
intensive than the economy as a whole. Conversely, a higher corporate tax rate reduces B's
after-tax income if A's factor endowment is relatively more labor-intensive than the economy's.

28
  See, for example, Kotlikoff and Summers (1987) and Fullerton and Metcalf (2002), who note that the same
incidence result can also arise with endogenous corporate-noncorporate substitution if corporate and noncorporate
activities have identical production functions (and therefore equal capital intensities), and the elasticity of
capital/labor substitution in the production sector equals the elasticity of substitution in demand between corporate
and noncorporate goods.


                                                                                                               42
Hence if type As have lower incomes than type Bs, and individuals of type A have relatively
labor-intensive factor endowments, it follows that, in the absence of noncorporate investment,
higher corporate tax rates narrow the income gap between types A and B.




                                                                                          43
Appendix B

This appendix offers detailed derivations of equations (10), (17), and (22) in the text of the
paper, and proofs of some properties of  for cases in which k > 0 and  > 0 , so that there is
meaningful risky noncorporate business activity.

B.1.   Derivations of (10),(17), and (22).

       Equation (8) in the text of the paper is

                                                                    3
(B1)         (1 - p )  y ( ) dF ( ) + p  y ( ) dF ( ) + p  y ( )(1 + k ) dF ( ) ,
             =
                             2                  3                   1



which can be rewritten as

                                            3                   3
(B2)            =           y ( ) dF ( ) - p  y ( ) dF ( ) + p  y ( )(1 + k ) dF ( ) .
                        2                   2                   1



                                                                             
Evaluating the integrals in (B2) while applying y ( ) =  and dF ( ) =             d yields
                                                                             1+


(B3)       =
                   y 1- 
                         +p
                            y 1- 
                  ( - 1) ( - 1)         {
                                  (1 - m ) - 1 +  (1 + k ) 
                                           -1
                                                            (1 + k ) - (1 - m )  .
                                                                     -1         -1
                                                                                         }
Using (6) to replace (1 - m ) with (1 -  - k ) (1 -  ) , (B3) becomes

                                         -1
               y 1-     y 1-   1 -  - k                                   
                                                                           
(B4)        =
                     +p                     1 -  (1 + k )  - 1 +  (1 + k ) ,
              ( - 1) ( - 1)    1 -                                         

from which (10) follows directly.

       Equation (16) in the paper is

                                                                    3
(B5)                          (1 - p )  dF ( ) + p  dF ( ) + p  dF ( ) ,
                             n=
                                        2            3              1



which can be rewritten as


                                                                                                 44
                                                    3                    3
(B6)                        n= dF ( ) - p  dF ( ) + p  dF ( ) .
                                 2                 2                     1



                                                                     
Evaluating (B6) while applying y ( ) =  and dF ( ) =                     d yields
                                                                    1+


(B7)               =
                         y - 
                          
                                +p
                                      y - 
                                         
                                             {(1 - m )  
                                                           - 1 +  (1 + k ) - (1 - m )  .
                                                                  
                                                                                     
                                                                                            }
Using (6) to replace (1 - m ) with (1 -  - k ) (1 -  ) , (B7) becomes

                                                  
                         y -       y -   1 -  - k                         
                                                                           
(B8)               =            +p                 (1 -  ) - 1 +  (1 + k )  ,
                                         1 -                               

from which (17) immediately follows.

        Equation (21) in the paper is

                                                              3
(B9)                   NC p  y ( ) dF ( ) + p 
                      =                                           (1 + k ) y ( ) dF ( ) .
                                  3                           1



                                                                                       
Evaluating the integrals in (B9) while applying y ( ) =  and dF ( ) =                       d yields
                                                                                      1+


(B10)          NC p
              =
                            y 1- 
                           ( - 1)    {
                                  (1 - m ) +  (1 + k ) 
                                           -1
                                                        (1 + k ) - (1 - m )  .
                                                                 -1         -1
                                                                                                }
Using (6) to replace (1 - m ) with (1 -  - k ) (1 -  ) , (B10) becomes

                              -1
             y 1-   1 -  - k                               
                                                            
 =
(B11)  NC p                      1
                                   -  (1 + k )  +  (1 + k ) ,
            ( - 1)  1 -                                     

which implies (22).

B.2.     is increasing in  .




                                                                                                       45
        Expression (12) defines  as


                                 (1 + k )  + (1 -  - k ) (1 -  )
                                                                                 1-
(B12)                                                                                 -1.


Differentiating both sides of (B12) with respect to  produces

           
            =  (1 + k ) ln (1 + k ) - (1 -  - k ) (1 -  )   ln (1 -  ) - ln (1 -  - k ) 
                                                         1-
(B13)                                                                                   .
           

From the fundamental theorem of calculus,

                                                ln (1 -  - s )               k        1               k
        ln (1 -  ) - ln=
                       (1 -  - k )
                                           0
(B14)                                      k
                                                  =
                                                     s
                                                               ds           (1 -  - s ) ds < (1 -  - k ) .
                                                                            0




It follows from (B13) and (B14) that

                                                                    -1
                                                          1 -  - k  
                             >  (1 + k ) ln (1 + k ) - k 
                                        
(B15)                                                               .
                                                             1 -       

A separate application of the fundamental theorem of calculus implies that
                                                              ln (1 + s )              1          k
               ln (1 + k )= ln (1 + k ) - ln (1)=
                                                         k                        k
(B16)                                                 0          s
                                                                          ds =    (1 + s ) ds > 1 + k .
                                                                                  0




Then (B15) and (B16) together imply that

                                                              -1
                                                -1  1 -  - k 
                                                                 
(B17)                             >  k (1 + k ) -             .
                                                    1-           


                                                   1 -  - k 
From expression (7) in the text of the paper, 1 >             0 ; and since  > 1 , it follows that
                                                   1- 
                -1
    1 -  - k 
                      0 . Given that (1 + k )
                                                 -1
1>                                                    > 1 , the term in brackets on the right side of (B17)
    1- 
is positive. Consequently,   > 0 .

B.3.    Monotonicity and convexity of  in k and in  .


                                                                                                             46
        It is possible to show that  is increasing and convex in k and  individually (though
                                                                                           2
not jointly), for which the necessary and sufficient conditions are that  k > 0 ,  2  k > 0 ,

  > 0 , and  2   > 0 .
                         2




        Differentiating (B12) with respect to k produces

                                                           -1
                                             -1  1 -  - k 
                                                              
(B18)                            =  (1 + k ) -             .
                               k                 1-           


The bracketed term on the right side of (B18) is the same as the bracketed term on the right side
of (B17), and is positive for the same reasons, from which it follows that  k > 0 .

        Further differentiating (B18) with respect to k produces

                                                              -2
                      2                             1 -  - k  
                          =  ( - 1) (1 + k ) + 
                                             -2
(B19)                                                         .
                      k 2                        1-   1-         

                                                                     2
Since all of the terms on the right side of (B19) are positive,  2  k > 0 .

        Differentiating (B12) with respect to  produces

                                                      
                                           1 -  - k      k 
                               (1 + k ) - 
                                       
(B20)                         =                      1 +   .
                                           1 -    1 -  - k 

Further differentiating (B20) with respect to  produces


                                        ( - 1) k
                                                                    -1
                              2                         1 -  - k 
                                                 2
(B21)                            =                                       .
                                   (1 -  ) (1 -  - k )  1 -  
                               2          2




Since all the terms on the right side of (B21) are positive, it follows that  2   > 0 .
                                                                                 2




        In order to determine the sign of   , it is useful to evaluate (B20) at the point at
which  = 0 ; this value is


                                                                                               47
                                                    (1 + k )   - (1 +  k ) .
                                                            
(B22)


If the first term in (B22) is larger in magnitude than the second, then this derivative is positive.
The logarithm of the first term is  ln (1 + k ) ; the logarithm of the second term is


                                            k    ln (1 + z )                      k  ln (1 + z )
(B23)                   ln (1 +  k )=                        dz = ln (1 + k ) +                  dz .
                                          0         z                           k       z

           k    ln (1 + z )      ( - 1) k , it follows from (B23) that ln 1 +  k < ln 1 + k + ( - 1) k .
Since                       dz <                                         (      ) ( )
        k          z              (1 + k )                                                     (1 + k )
Hence the difference of the logarithms of the two terms in (B22) is greater than

                                                                         k 
(B24)                                         ( - 1) ln (1 + k ) -             .
                                                                      (1 + k ) 

                                   ln (1 + z )         k
          ln (1 + k )
                              k
        =
And since                   0         z
                                               dz >
                                                    (1 + k )
                                                             , it follows that (B24) is positive, so   > 0 at


the point at which  = 0 . Then  2   > 0 implies that   > 0 for all positive values of  .
                                                     2




                                                                                                        48
Appendix C

       This appendix uses the model of section 4 together with U.S. tax return data to infer
values of model parameters, as discussed in section 5 and presented in Table 3. Available U.S.
tax data on the noncorporate business activities of individuals with top incomes include numbers
of tax returns and aggregate gains of those with partnership and S corporation gains and those
with sole proprietorship and farm gains, and corresponding information for those with losses.

C.1.   Average top incomes.

       The Pareto distribution described in (9) implies that the total population with values of 
exceeding  is

                                                              -
(C1)                                             dF ( ) =     ,
                                              
                                                            

and the aggregate value of  in excess of  is

                                                            
                                        dF ( ) = ( - 1) 
                                                                1-
(C2)                                   
                                                                     .



The average value of  among the population with values exceeding  is given by the ratio of

                     
(C2) to (C1), or           . Consequently, in the absence of noncorporate business activity, the
                   ( - 1)
                                                                      
average income level of those with incomes exceeding y is                   y.
                                                                     ( - 1)

       Aggregate tax return data on numbers of taxpayers with positive noncorporate business
income do not distinguish those making substantial investments from casual investors with trivial
stakes, but the model implies that the number of top income earners with successful and
substantial noncorporate businesses ( ng ) is


                                                        p y -
                                 dF ( )                         (1 + k )  ,
                                                                        
(C3)                      =ng p  =
                                          1                 


                                                                                           49
and that their incomes ( NC
                         g
                            ) sum to
                                                      p y 1-
                             p  (1 + k ) y ( ) dF ( ) = (1 + k )  .
                                                                
(C4)                      NC
                          g
                             =
                                   1                  ( - 1)

Consequently, the per capita income of top earners with successful noncorporate businesses is
                                                   y
the ratio  NC
           g
              ng , which from (C3) and (C4) is           . On this basis it is possible to use
                                                  ( - 1)
information on partnership and S corporation income among top taxpayers to infer the number
who are entrepreneurs.

       Finally, the model also implies that the number of top income earners with substantial but
unsuccessful noncorporate businesses ( nl ) is


                                             p (1 -  ) y -  1 -  - k 
                                                                          
                                       
(C5)                       p (1 -  )  dF ( ) =
                        nl =                                          ,
                                     3                      1- 

and that their incomes ( NC
                         l
                            ) sum to

                                                   p (1 -  ) y 1-  1 -  - k 
                                                                                     
                                 1 -  - k 
               l
                    p (1 -  )  
                    =                      ( ) ( )
                                                   =                         .
                                                      ( - 1) 
(C6)                                       y  dF
                                 1-                                1- 
               NC             3




As a result, the per capita income of top earners with unsuccessful noncorporate businesses is the
                                              y
ratio  NC
       l
          nl , which from (C5) and (C6) is          .
                                             ( - 1)

C.2.   Distinguishing substantial from casual noncorporate investors.

       In interpreting tax return data on noncorporate income it is important to distinguish
substantial noncorporate entrepreneurs from casual investors with trivial stakes. Denote by 
the ratio of the number of those with noncorporate investment gains that are casual investors
with trivial stakes in their investments to the number of more substantial investors with
significant stakes. It is very helpful to assume that this ratio  also equals the ratio of the



                                                                                                 50
number of casual noncorporate investors with trivial losses to the number of substantial investors
with significant losses. It follows that the number with trivial gains ( ng
                                                                          t
                                                                            ) among the top one
percent is

                                                             y -
(C7)                  = t
                       ng =
                           p  dF ( )  p                                ,
                                              2              

in which the lower bound of integration is  2 because trivial gains do not materially change

whether taxpayers are among top income earners. The number with trivial losses ( nlt ) is


                                                                       y -
(C8)                           p (1  )  dF ( ) =-
                            n =-
                             t
                                                p (1  )                      .
                             l                2                        

It follows from (C3), (C5), (C7) and (C8) that the ratio of the numbers of taxpayers with trivial
losses to those with substantial losses is

                                                             
                                                        
                                           t            
                                       t
                                      nl ng      1+ k    .
(C9)                                     =
                                      nl ng   1 -  - k  
                                              1-  
                                                       

And (C9) implies


(C10)                                nl =
                                                  (n + n )
                                                    l
                                                        t
                                                        l
                                                                   .
                                                                
                                                             
                                                t            
                                              n       1+ k
                                            1+ g             
                                              ng   1 -  - k  
                                                   1-  
                                                            

Since the numerator on the right side is the (observable) total number of taxpayers claiming
noncorporate business losses, for given parameters k and  , and empirically inferred values of
 t
ng and ng , equation (C10) can be used to infer the number of top income entrepreneurs with

business losses.



                                                                                             51
        The model implies that aggregate value of the business losses ( ) of top taxpayers with

substantial investments and significant losses is

                                                                                -1
                                                  y 1-  1 -  - k 
                   p (1 -  ) m  y ( ) dF ( ) =
                   =                         p k                                     .
                                                 ( - 1)          
(C11)
                               3
                                                         1- 

Together with (C5), (C11) implies that the per capita business loss for an unsuccessful top
income entrepreneur is

                                                      ky
(C12)                                       =                     .
                                       nl       ( - 1)(1 -  - k )

Since from (C5) and (C6) the per capita income of unsuccessful top income entrepreneurs is
 y
       , it follows that their per capita loss given by (C12) must reveal the value of m.
( - 1)
Specifically, (6) and (C12) together imply that

                                              k         1
(C13)                            =m          =                 .
                                            (1 -  ) 1 +  nl
                                                        y
                                                       ( - 1) 

        Since y ,  ,  , ( nl + nlt ) , ng , and ng
                                                 t
                                                   are all either observable or inferable from the data,

(C10) and (C13) together form a single equation with two unknowns, k and  . A second

equation is available by taking the ratio of  to  NC
                                                  g
                                                     , which yields

                                                                      
                                                   1 -  - k  
                                                             
                                           k          1-      .
(C14)                               =
                                 NC
                                 g
                                       1 -  - k   (1 + k ) 
                                       1-                    
                                                             




                                                                                                 52
Together, (C10), (C13), and (C14) constitute two separate equations in two unknowns, which
                                                                                 
                                                                            
                                                                            
                                                                     1+ k    to produce
can be readily solved by choosing levels of the single variable
                                                                  1 -  - k  
                                                                 1-  
                                                                           
implied values of k and  . The resulting discrepancy between chosen and implied values of
                                                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     1+ k    can be resolved by numerically iterating over             1+ k    using Newton's
  1 -  - k                                                          1 -  - k  
 1-                                                                1-  
                                                                             
method.

        Using (C10), (C13), and (C14) to solve for k and  also yields solutions for  from (12)
and m from (C13). Using (C10) to infer nl from the data and values of k and  then permits a

calculation of  NC  , which can also be used to infer p, since from (23),


                                                  NC 
(C15)                                   p=                    .
                                                           
                                             1 +  1 - NC   
                                                           

Finally, (C5) and (C8) together imply that

                                                           
                                         nt  1 -  - k 
(C16)                                   = l            .
                                         nl  1 -  


It is possible to use (C16), together with k and  , the value of nl from (C10), and the implied

value of nlt from nl plus data on numbers of taxpayers with noncorporate losses ( nl + nlt ) , to

obtain a fitted value of  .

C.3.    Extraneous Roots.

        The solution to the system defined by (C10), (C13), and (C14), given empirical
magnitudes of y ,  ,  , ( nl + nlt ) , ng , and ng
                                                 t
                                                   , generally has either two roots or no roots among


                                                                                              53
solutions satisfying 0  p  1 and 0  m  1 . Table 3 presents the results of fitting this system to
data for 2014-2017, in each case reporting parameters corresponding to the more reasonable of
the two roots. Parameters corresponding to the extraneous roots differ significantly from those
reported in Table 3:  is roughly 0.7, k is roughly 0.10, and p in the neighborhood of 0.43. 29
The solutions described by these extraneous roots share the feature that noncorporate businesses
are likely to succeed, but produce little additional income in doing so. As a result, a higher
corporate tax rate would have very little effect on income dispersion or the concentration of top
incomes. Since the features of these solutions are inconsistent with other empirical evidence of
the riskiness of entrepreneurial income earned by top taxpayers, these alternative model solutions
appear not to correspond to economic reality, which is why the paper focuses on the other
equation roots and the parameters reported in Table 3.

C.4.     Sole Proprietorship and Farm Income.

         Table 3 reports model parameters fit to data on partnership and S corporation income
earned by U.S. taxpayers with top one percent incomes. The IRS also reports data on the sole
proprietorship and farm incomes of top one percent taxpayers. Sole proprietorship and farm
income of the top one percent is roughly one-tenth the size of the partnership and S corporation
income of the top one percent, and appears to have very different business characteristics. The
only year for which the model of section 4 fit the data for sole proprietorship and farm income is
2016, in which case the implied value of k is 0.24, and the implied value of  is 0.68,
corresponding to business ventures that when successful increase incomes by just one-quarter,
and do so two-thirds of the time. The inconsistency of this implication with other evidence of
entrepreneurial behavior, together with the inability of the model to fit sole proprietorship and
farm income data for 2014, 2015, and 2017, suggests that a model modification, such as that
considered in Appendix D, may be needed in order to understand the process generating sole
proprietorship and farm income.




29
  Fitting the model to 2014 data, the extraneous root yields implied values of  = 0.71 , k = 0.096 , and p = 0.42 ;
using 2017 data, the extraneous root produces  = 0.70 , k = 0.112 , and p = 0.44 .



                                                                                                             54
Appendix D

       The purpose of this appendix is to consider the model of Section 4 with investors who do
not evaluate noncorporate investments in a risk-neutral manner. In such cases (6) no longer
holds, and can be replaced by

(D1)                                    k (1 - s ) = m (1 -  ) ,


in which - < s < 1 reflects the (assumed common) extent to which noncorporate investors
require higher or lower expected returns. Investor risk aversion increases s, whereas utility
benefits of earning financial returns in a noncorporate business venture reduce s. Furthermore, s
may differ across types of noncorporate business ventures. Replacing (6) with (D1) changes the
derivation of (10), which becomes

(D2)                                      = y (1 + p),


with


(D3)                       (1 + k )  + (1 -  )1- 1 -  - k (1 - s )  - 1 .
                                                                   

The remainder of the analysis of Section 4, including the determination of n in (17) and d  d

in (20), is modified simply by replacing  with  , assuming that ds d = 0 .


       The Appendix C calculations change when applying (D1). Equation (C5) becomes

                                                                   
                                   p (1 -  ) y -  1 -  - k (1 - s ) 
(D4)                          nl =                                   ,
                                                       1-           

and similarly (C6) becomes

                                                                      
                                     p (1 -  ) y 1-  1 -  - k (1 - s ) 
                              l
                                   =                                    .
                                        ( - 1) 
(D5)
                                                          1-
                              NC
                                                                       




                                                                                            55
                                          NC
                                          l
                                                      y
As a result, it remains the case that            =          . Furthermore, (C10) becomes
                                          nl         ( - 1)


(D6)                             nl =
                                                        (n + n )
                                                          l
                                                                  t
                                                                  l
                                                                               .
                                                                            
                                                                   
                                                                   
                                                     1+ k
                                             t
                                            ng                     
                                         1+
                                            ng  1 -  - k (1 - s )  
                                               
                                                                  
                                                     1-            

Aggregate business losses in (C11) become

                                                                             -1
                                      y 1-  1 -  - k (1 - s ) 
                               = p k                                               ,
                                     ( - 1)                   
(D7)
                                                 1-           

and the per capita business loss for an unsuccessful entrepreneur is no longer given by (C12), but
instead is

                                                          ky
(D8)                                     =                                 .
                                    nl         ( - 1) (1 -  - k (1 - s ) )

It follows from (D8) and (D1) that

                                                              1
(D9)                                         m=                         .
                                                               y nl
                                                     1- s +
                                                              ( - 1) 

And (D6) and (D7) imply that

                                                                                       
                                                     1 -  - k (1 - s )  
                                                                       
                                        k                  1-           .
(D10)                        =
                          NC
                          g
                                1 -  - k (1 - s )         ( )
                                                           1 + k        
                                                                        
                                     1-                                 

        These equations can be used to fit the data to model parameters for specified levels of s.
Appendix Table D1 presents parameters fit to data for sole proprietorship and farm income in a



                                                                                             56
model for which s = -0.2 , so entrepreneurs are assumed willing to accept lower returns in
exchange for earning their income in proprietorships and farms. The model with s = -0.2 fits
the sole proprietorship and farm data for all four years 2014-2017, which is not true of the model
with s = 0 , suggesting that s = -0.2 may better capture the behavior of these entrepreneurs. The
model parameters displayed in Table D1 include higher values of k, and lower values of  , than
is the case for partnership and S corporation income as reported in Table 3 (for s = 0 ). Expected
returns from sole proprietorships and farms are - sk , which ranges between -8.2% and -10.6%
for the parameter values reported in Table D1. The estimated income dispersion effect of a 1%
higher tax rate on the concentration of top one percent income lies between 0.06-0.14, which is
somewhat higher than the corresponding range for partnership and S corporation income with
s = 0 , as reported in Table 3. The aggregate effect on the U.S. economy is the average of the
partnership and S corporation effect and the sole proprietorship and farm effect, weighted by
respective shares in the economy. 30

        Appendix Table D2 presents parameters fit to data for partnership and S corporation
income in models with different values of s. The middle panel presents parameters for a model
with s = 0 ; these parameters are identical to those reported in Table 3, and are included to
facilitate comparisons. The top panel presents parameters for a model with s = -0.2 , which
corresponds to investors being willing to accept lower returns in exchange for earning their
income in partnerships and S corporations. The fitted values of k are considerably larger than
those reported in the middle panel for s = 0 , and the fitted values of  correspondingly smaller.
As a result, the estimated tax effect on income concentration is three to four times larger than
with s = 0 .

        The opposite appears among parameters fit to a model with s = 0.2 , as reported in the
bottom panel. In this case, which corresponds to investor risk aversion dominating any
willingness to accept lower expected returns from entrepreneurial ventures, the fitted values of k
lie in the range 0.35-0.43, so are roughly half the size of those in a model with s = 0 , and the
fitted values of  are very large, ranging from 0.7 to 0.74. These are investments with high

30
  Assuming that noncorporate sectors of the economy expand proportionately in response to corporate tax changes,
weights are the p values reported in Tables 3 and D1, which are roughly ten times greater for partnership and S
corporations than for sole proprietorships and farms.


                                                                                                         57
probabilities of relatively modest payouts, and therefore different than the entrepreneurial
ventures described by much of the literature. This suggests that, if the model is valid, risk
aversion is not the only important consideration determining expected returns to noncorporate
business ventures, as risk aversion appears to be offset by investor desires to earn income in
entrepreneurial fashion.




                                                                                                58
                                    Appendix Table D1

 The Effect of Corporate Taxes on Top 1% Income Concentration with Risk
     Non-Neutrality among Owners of Sole Proprietorships and Farms


                                                                                 d  d
Year            NC          k                      m                     p              +
                                                                                   

s = -0.2


2014           0.042       1.412     0.317       0.786       0.431     0.0296      0.0764


2015           0.042       2.145     0.238       0.804       0.663     0.0259      0.1171


2016           0.040       2.522     0.211       0.808       0.776     0.0231      0.1369


2017           0.039       1.128     0.362       0.769       0.334     0.0298      0.0594




Note to Appendix Table D1: The table presents values of model parameters fit to U.S. tax return
data on sole proprietorship and farm incomes of taxpayers in the top one percent of the income
distribution for years 2014-2017. The model imposes that s = -0.2 , so entrepreneurs are
assumed to receive lower returns from their sole proprietorship and farm activities than they do
from other economic activities. Column 2 presents the fraction of top one percent income earned
from sole proprietorships and farms. Columns 3-5 present fitted model parameters k,  , and m.
k corresponds to the factor by which noncorporate business success increases an entrepreneur's
income, and  is the probability of success; m is the fraction of potential income lost in an
unsuccessful noncorporate business venture. Column 6 presents the implied value of
  (1 + k )  + (1 -  - k ) (1 -  )1- - 1 for  = 1.67 , in which 
 =                                                                      is the effect of a given
                                          
level of investment in unincorporated business on the extent of top income concentration.
Column 7 presents the implied value of p, the fraction of the population engaging in
noncorporate business activity. Column 8 presents the change in income earned by the top one
percent due to a 1% higher corporate tax rate, restricting attention to that portion of the effect
attributable to income dispersion caused by greater investment in sole proprietorships and farms.




                                                                                            59
                           Appendix Table D2

 The Effect of Corporate Taxes on Top 1% Income Concentration with Risk
    Non-Neutrality among Owners of Partnerships and S Corporations


                                                            d  d
Year        NC      k                m                p            +
                                                             

s = -0.2

2014       0.348   7.225   0.086    0.816   1.957   0.153    0.2706

2015       0.360   6.950   0.089    0.816   1.894   0.163    0.2602

2016       0.353   7.090   0.088    0.818   1.932   0.157    0.2663

2017       0.365   5.927   0.102    0.810   1.646   0.178    0.2286


s=0

2014       0.350   0.879   0.504    0.892   0.456   0.270    0.0730

2015       0.362   0.861   0.508    0.888   0.446   0.282    0.0711

2016       0.356   0.771   0.535    0.887   0.401   0.282    0.0648

2017       0.368   0.928   0.485    0.875   0.468   0.284    0.0743


s = 0.2

2014       0.357   0.392   0.726    0.830   0.275   0.303    0.0457

2015       0.369   0.389   0.726    0.824   0.272   0.315    0.0449

2016       0.363   0.354   0.742    0.815   0.247   0.314    0.0411

2017       0.376   0.432   0.702    0.814   0.297   0.317    0.0487




                                                                      60
Note to Appendix Table D2: The table presents values of model parameters fit to U.S. tax return
data on partnership and S corporation incomes of taxpayers in the top one percent of the income
distribution for years 2014-2017. The top panel reports parameters fit to a model that imposes
that s = -0.2 , so entrepreneurs are assumed to receive lower returns from their partnership and S
corporation activities than they do from other economic activities. The middle panel reports
parameters fit to a model that imposes that s = 0 ; this is the model of section 4 of the paper, and
these parameters are the same as those reported in Table 3. The bottom panel reports parameters
fit to a model that imposes that s = 0.2 , so entrepreneurs are assumed to receive higher returns
from their partnership and S corporation activities than they do from other economic activities.
Column 2 presents the fraction of top one percent income earned from sole proprietorships and
farms. Columns 3-5 present fitted model parameters k,  , and m. k corresponds to the factor by
which noncorporate business success increases an entrepreneur's income, and  is the
probability of success; m is the fraction of potential income lost in an unsuccessful noncorporate
business venture. Column 6 presents the implied value of
  (1 + k )  + (1 -  - k ) (1 -  )1- - 1 for  = 1.67 , in which 
 =                                                                      is the effect of a given
                                            
level of investment in unincorporated business on the extent of top income concentration.
Column 7 presents the implied value of p, the fraction of the population engaging in
noncorporate business activity. Column 8 presents the change in income earned by the top one
percent due to a 1% higher corporate tax rate, restricting attention to that portion of the effect
attributable to income dispersion caused by greater investment in partnerships and S
corporations.




                                                                                             61
Appendix E

        The model of section 4 takes individuals to have common values of of p, k and  . This
appendix explores consequences of relaxing this assumption.

        It is instructive to consider cases in which the values of p, k and  differ among
individuals, but are entirely uncorrelated with  , in the sense that the distributions of p, k and 
are the same at each value of  . In such cases it is possible to redo the analysis of section 4
separately for each value of ( p, k ,  ) , which yields expressions for  and d  d identical to

those in (10) and (20), with values of  corresponding to the chosen k and  . Since the
economy's value of  is simply the sum of the values for each subgroup in the population, the

economy's  and d  d are averages of those generated by each value of ( p, k ,  ) , weighted

by shares of the population with those parameters. Appendix B shows that  is convex in each
of k and  , from which it follows that, holding mean values constant, population heterogeneity
in one of these parameters increases aggregate  and thereby increases  .


        Heterogeneity that entails nonzero correlation of ( p, k ,  ) with  can take many different

possible forms. It is useful to consider a simple specification in which these parameters take the
                                                                                                      
values ( p1 , k1 , 1 ) for all individuals with  < y , and ( p2 , k2 , 2 ) for all individuals with   y .
                          
Considering the case that y > y (1 + k1 ) ,

                                                          
                     (1 - p2 )  y ( ) dF ( ) + p2  y ( ) dF ( )
                     =
                                    2                    3
(E1)                         3
                                                                                    ,
                      + p22  y ( )(1 + k2 ) dF ( ) + p11  1 y ( )(1 + k1 ) dF ( )
                                                             y

                             y                               1



                                               
                                               
in which y ( 2 ) = y , y (3 ) =         y       and y (=
                                                       11 ) y (1 + k1 ) . Evaluating (E1) yields
                                  1 - 2 - k22  
                                              
                                  1 - 2
                                               




                                                                                                   62
                                  y  -1              y  -1      
(E2)               =
                    2 +  y  p11 1 -    + k1  - p22 1 -    + k2   ,
                                  y
                                                     y
                                                                

in which  2 is the value of  if the whole population had the parameters ( p2 , k2 , 2 ) . Equation

(E2) carries the intuitive implications that  2 <  for values of ( p1 , k1 , 1 ) smaller than

( p2 , k2 , 2 ) , and that the difference ( - 2 )   is increasing in the differences between ( p2 , k2 , 2 )

and ( p1 , k1 , 1 ) . Furthermore, p and  influence this difference only through their product, and
                         
in the special case that y = y , the difference is a function of ( p11k1 - p22 k2 ) . The value of

d  d then depends in part on any differences between dp1 d and dp2 d .

       It is possible to fit model parameters to tax data for incomes other than the top 1%; doing
so relies on the model's assumptions holding for these populations. Table E1 presents
parameters fit to data for the top 0.1%, 2%, and 5% of the U.S. income distribution. While there
is variation in other parameters, the fitted values of p for every year increase steadily as the
sample narrows to ever higher-income populations. This suggests that p may increase with
income, though testing that proposition would require a more careful specification along with
additional data. Model implications vary with the precise nature of population heterogeneity,
though the parameter fits reported in Tables 3, D1, D2, and E1 all suggest that the data are
consistent with income dispersion effects of corporate taxation significantly influencing the
concentration of top U.S. incomes.




                                                                                                     63
                           Appendix Table E1

 The Effect of Corporate Taxes on Income Concentration among Top 0.1%,
                       2%, and 5% Income Earners


                                                            d  d
Year        NC      k                m               p             +
                                                             

Top 0.1%

2014       0.400   0.823   0.502   0.830    0.394   0.324    0.0628

2015       0.408   0.815   0.500   0.815    0.383   0.332    0.0610

2016       0.423   0.778   0.514   0.821    0.370   0.348    0.0588

2017       0.421   0.932   0.461   0.797    0.422   0.339    0.0663


Top 2%

2014       0.301   1.051   0.461   0.899    0.542   0.218    0.0870

2015       0.312   1.018   0.469   0.898    0.526   0.229    0.0843

2016       0.308   0.998   0.475   0.904    0.520   0.227    0.0836

2017       0.315   1.166   0.432   0.888    0.586   0.225    0.0930


Top 5%

2014       0.220   1.288   0.412   0.902    0.653   0.146    0.1071

2015       0.227   1.312   0.407   0.902    0.664   0.150    0.1085

2016       0.224   1.323   0.407   0.908    0.674   0.147    0.1101

2017       0.231   1.515   0.370   0.891    0.743   0.147    0.1203




                                                                      64
Note to Appendix Table E1: The table presents values of model parameters fit to U.S. tax return
data for taxpayers in the top 0.1%, 2%, and 5% of the income distribution for years 2014-2017.
Column 2 presents fractions of top incomes earned from active investments in partnerships and S
corporations. Columns 3-5 present fitted model parameters k,  , and m. k corresponds to the
factor by which noncorporate business success increases an entrepreneur's income, and  is the
probability of success; m is the fraction of potential income lost in an unsuccessful noncorporate
business venture. Column 6 presents the implied value of

= (1 + k )  + (1 -  - k ) (1 -  ) - 1 for  = 1.67 , in which  is the effect of a given
                                 1-

                                     
level of investment in unincorporated business on the extent of top income concentration.
Column 7 presents the implied value of p, the fraction of the population engaging in
noncorporate business activity. Column 8 presents the change in the aggregate income of top
earners due to a 1% higher corporate tax rate, restricting attention to that portion of the effect
attributable to income dispersion caused by greater investment in partnerships and S
corporations.




                                                                                               65
Appendix F

        The model of section 4 posits that noncorporate business activity imposes additional risks
to an individual's income. The model does not exclude the possibility that other forms of
income are risky, since  can be interpreted to include the factors that determine risky outcomes,
but the model requires that noncorporate business risks are additive to these other risks ­ that the
parameters k and m apply to potential incomes inclusive of any potentially risky components.
The purpose of this appendix is to generalize this model to include the possibility that individuals
who engage in noncorporate business thereby avoid certain risks, such as employment risks or
losses on passive corporate investments.

        The determination of income for those not engaging in noncorporate business ventures
can be modeled as a probabilistic gamble that is successful with probability  * , in which case an

individual has income (1 + k * ) y ( ) , and unsuccessful with probability (1 -  * ) , in which case

the individual has income of (1 - m* ) y ( ) . If this activity is a fair gamble, then


(F1)                                      =
                                          k   m* (1 -  * ) .
                                            * *




The restriction that individuals cannot lose more than they have, previously captured in (7), then
becomes


(F2)                                         k   *
                                                     
                                                      (1 -  ) .
                                                              *


                                                         *

        Applying (F1) and (F2), equation (8) becomes

(F3)                                    ^= p^1 + (1 - p )^2 ,


in which

                                                          3
(F4)                       ^1   y ( ) dF ( ) +   y ( )(1 + k ) dF ( )
                           
                                  3                       1



and


                                                                                                66
                          ^ 2   y ( ) dF ( ) +  *  y ( ) (1 + k * ) dF ( ) ,
                                                           3
                                                           *

(F5)                      
                                   3
                                   *
                                                           1
                                                           *




with y (=                        3* ) y (1 - m* ) . Together, (F3-F5) imply that
        1* ) y (1 + k * ) and y (=

                                         
(F6)                =^                  y ( ) dF ( ) + p^ + (1 - p )^
                                         2
                                                               3               4   ,


with

                          2                         3                              3
(F7)            ^ 3    y ( ) dF ( ) + k  y ( ) dF ( ) - (1 -  )  y ( ) dF ( )
                
                       1                          1                                2




             ^ 4   *  y ( ) dF ( ) + k * *  y ( ) dF ( ) - (1 -  * )  y ( ) dF ( ) .
                      2                             3
                                                    *
                                                                                       3
                                                                                       *

(F8)         
                      1
                      *
                                                    1
                                                    *
                                                                                       2



        Evaluating the terms in (F6)-(F8), the analogue to equation (10) becomes


(F9)                                    ^ =  y 1 + p + (1 - p ) 
                                                                ^ ,
                                                                  

with


(F10)                         ^  (1 + k * )  * + (1 -  * - k * * ) (1 -  * )1- - 1 .
                              


(F9) implies that the analogue to (13) becomes

                       d^ dy
(F11)                  =
                       d   d 
                             1 + p + (1 - p ) ^  +  dp  - 
                                                   y
                                                     d
                                                          ^ .              (               )
Applying (F9), (F11) yields:

                                                                    
                                                                    
                  d^  dp                                   1
                                                                    
                                                                    
(F12)            =                                               -   ^.
                  d  d                                              
                                                        1+ ^
                                                             + p    
                     
                                                 
                                                    (   -  )
                                                           ^    
                                                                    



                                                                                               67
Equation (F12) is the analogue to (15) for cases in which noncorporate entrepreneurs avoid
income risks with properties summarized by ^.


        Denoting by ^ the concentration of top incomes with corporate return riskiness, (F12)
implies that

                                     
                                     
                                     
                 d^  dp    1         
(F13)           =                 -   ^.
                 d  d                
                         1+ ^
                              + p    
                        
                         -  ^
                                 
                                 
                                                (      )
        Equation (F13) is identical to (20) for cases in which those who choose not to start
noncorporate business ventures thereby avoid any additional income risks, as then ^ =0 .

Alternatively, as ^ approaches  , so that noncorporate business activity becomes just as risky
as the alternative, then the first term on the right side of (F13) is zero, and the equation implies
that d     - . It is noteworthy that all of these derivations take the values of  * , k * , and
       ^ d =

m* to be unaffected by  , which need not be the case, particularly since k * and m* are after-tax
returns.




                                                                                                68
