                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                ESTIMATING THE COSTS OF FILING TAX RETURNS AND
                  THE POTENTIAL SAVINGS FROM POLICIES AIMED
                           AT REDUCING THESE COSTS

                                        Youssef Benzarti

                                       Working Paper 27946
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27946


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Youssef Benzarti. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Estimating the Costs of Filing Tax Returns and the Potential Savings from Policies Aimed
at Reducing These Costs
Youssef Benzarti
NBER Working Paper No. 27946
October 2020
JEL No. H0,H20

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper estimates the cost of filing taxes and assesses several policy proposals aimed at
reducing these costs. Using US tax returns, a quasi-experimental method and additional
extrapolations based on survey evidence, I uncover three main findings. First, filing costs are
large and have been steadily increasing over time. Second, part of this increase in filing costs can
be attributed to an increase in the number of schedules filed per taxpayer. Third, pre-populating
tax returns and offering free filing options can result in substantial cost savings for taxpayers.


Youssef Benzarti
Department of Economics
University of California
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
and NBER
youssef.benzarti@gmail.com
    Estimating the Costs of Filing Tax Returns and the
    Potential Savings from Policies Aimed at Reducing
                                          these Costs

                           Youssef Benzarti (UCSB and NBER)

                                         October 12, 2020



                                                Abstract

          This paper estimates the cost of filing taxes and assesses several policy proposals
       aimed at reducing these costs. Using US tax returns, a quasi-experimental method
       and additional extrapolations based on survey evidence, I uncover three main findings.
       First, filing costs are large and have been steadily increasing over time. Second, part of
       this increase in filing costs can be attributed to an increase in the number of schedules
       filed per taxpayer. Third, pre-populating tax returns and offering free filing options
       can result in substantial cost savings for taxpayers.



1      Introduction

The compliance costs of taxation, which encompass the money, time, hassle and effort spent

filing tax returns every year, have received renewed interest recently with the passing of the
Tax Cuts and Jobs Act in 2017 which promised to reduce these costs by shrinking the 1040
form to the size of a postcard. Attempts at reducing tax filing costs date back to at least
the Tax Reform Act of 1986, that aimed at simplifying the tax code, in part by reducing

the number of tax brackets and increasing the standard deduction. However, in spite of the
   Youssef Benzarti, UCSB and NBER (benzarti@ucsb.edu). This paper draws on some of the results and
    

methods from Benzarti (2020): sections 2, 3.1 and 3.2 are mostly based on Benzarti (2020), while the rest is
mostly new. I am very grateful to Robert Moffitt and Alisa Tazhitdinova.
policy interest surrounding this issue, there has been limited research aimed at putting a
dollar value on these costs.
   This paper presents a simple method of estimating tax filing costs. Importantly, this
method moves beyond survey evidence, which has only accounted for the time spent filing

taxes. Instead, the approach taken in this paper is able to capture all monetary costs, effort
costs and disutility costs taxpayers experience by estimating their willingness to pay to avoid
filing taxes. The intuition behind this approach is simple: individuals will only perform a
costly action if the benefit of doing so exceeds its cost. Therefore, one can estimate the
cost by measuring the forgone benefits associated with the action. I apply this intuition

to the decision to itemize deductions. Given that itemizing is more costly than claiming
the standard deduction, it only makes sense to itemize if the associated costs are smaller
than the tax benefits of itemizing. I test this prediction empirically and show that some
taxpayers claim the standard deduction even if their itemized deductions exceed the standard

deduction, resulting in a missing mass in the distribution of itemized deductions just above
the standard threshold. The magnitude of this missing mass, i.e. the proportion of itemizers
who forgo deductions, determines the distribution of the cost of itemizing.
   I develop a method to measure the missing mass in order to estimate how much taxpayers

are willing to pay in order to avoid the hassle of itemizing their deductions. This number
ranges from $175 to $591 depending on the type of taxpayer. I also show that this hetero-
geneity in willingness to pay mostly stems from income differences, this in turn generates
heterogeneity in the opportunity cost of time of each taxpayer. I also show that, while tax
preparers and electronic filing have little bearing on the magnitude of this cost, the timing of

filing matters substantially. Taxpayers who file their taxes close to the April 15th deadline,
tend to forgo more deductions that those who file further away.
   Using this estimate, survey evidence from the IRS on the time it takes to file given
schedules and a new methodology, I extrapolate these costs in order to estimate compliance

costs for different types of individuals. I then extrapolate itemization cost to other types of


                                               2
schedules by relying on survey evidence from the IRS. Accounting for all taxpayers, I find
that tax filing in the U.S. imposes a yearly cost in excess of 1% of GDP and that this cost
has been steadily increasing since the 1980's. While this increase is in part driven by the
fact that the number of tax filers increased, it is also due to the fact that taxpayers have

to file an increasing number of schedules. For example, Schedule B must be filed when the
taxable interest income or dividend income exceed $400. Because the $400 threshold has
been nominally fixed for decades, the number of individuals who must file Schedule B has
been steadily increasing.
    A number of policies have been been proposed to reduce compliance costs. Using the

methods and estimates derived above, I can provide an estimate of the efficacy of these
policies at reducing compliance costs. The first such policy is to pre-populate tax forms with
information that the IRS currently possesses (so no additional collection efforts are needed).
Overall, such a policy could cut compliance costs by approximately 43%. Similarly, the

government could offer a free electronic filing option to all taxpayers. Currently, only certain
taxpayers have access to free electronic filing options, but this could be expanded, presumably
at low costs. My estimates suggest that a free e-filing option could lead taxpayers to save
$5.1 billion annually in fees paid to purchase tax software or use the services of tax preparers.

Implementing one (or both) of these policies would bring the US tax system in line with most
tax systems in OECD countries.



2     Estimating the Cost of Filing Tax Returns

2.1    Data

The empirical analysis in this paper relies primarily on the Statistics of Income (SOI) dataset
which consists of a random sample of tax returns. These tax returns are sampled every year
and represent approximately 0.1% of the US population. The randomization is designed to
create a representative sample of the US population and weights are provided in the SOI


                                               3
dataset in order to make the sample representative. Note that the dataset oversamples high-
income individuals allowing more precise estimates at the top of the income distribution. This
dataset has been used extensively in public finance, including, for example, when analyzing
the evolution of top-income earners as in Piketty and Saez (2003).

   While this dataset is well suited for the current analysis, there are other administrative
datasets that could be used with the proposed approach. Naturally, the full sample of US
tax returns would allow more in depth analysis, since it not only contains more information
(such as location, education level, family information, etc.) but it is also longitudinal and
provides information on third-party reported items such as 1098 forms, W2 forms, etc.

   This type of information can further shed light on the specific mechanics that are driving
compliance costs and could help further validate the empirical approach adopted in this
paper. For example, having access to the W2 and 1098 forms would allow identification of a
portion of the missing deductions without relying on any particular assumptions: one would

simply count the number of individuals who do not itemize and yet have mortgage interest
and state tax amounts in excess of the standard deduction. Similarly, knowing what level
of education a given taxpayer has reached could help explain why so much money is left on
the table. As has been documented in the personal finance literature (e.g. Van Rooij et al.

(2011)), financial literacy is one important driver of money left on the table, as is the case,
for example, for the failure to save for retirement. Finally, the longitudinal dimension of
the dataset would help track taxpayers over time and help us understand whether they are
prone to learning and how they respond to different events. Longitudinal data could help us
understand how long it takes for a taxpayer to start itemizing once their total deductions

cross the standard deduction threshold, and whether it takes longer for less financially literate
taxpayers or faster for taxpayers who use a tax preparer.




                                               4
2.2       Approach

The basic approach used to identify and estimate the cost of filing tax returns relies on
a simple and easy to export approach that requires minimal assumptions. There are two

important data ingredients: repeated cross sectional data (longitudinal data would be even
better but is not required) and a change in the amount of the filing threshold (an increase in
the standard deduction amount in this case). With these two ingredients, a researcher can
apply the methodology below to another setting and get the cost estimate that is the basis

for estimating costs for the rest of the population and other forms.
       This simple approach relies on the observation that, in the case of any filing requirement
where a threshold is involved above which a taxpayer has to file a separate return or perform
a costly action (submit a receipt, implement more calculations, consult with an accountant,

etc.), we should observe a missing mass in the distribution of tax preparers just above the
threshold. For example, if the cost of itemizing relative to claiming the standard deduction
is positive, some taxpayers will choose the standard deduction even when the sum of their
itemized deductions is greater than the standard deduction. This implies that the distri-
bution of itemized deductions will have a missing mass just above the standard deduction

threshold. The magnitude of the missing mass, i.e., the proportion of itemizers who forgo
deductions, determines the distribution of the cost of itemizing.
       This prediction can be easily tested by plotting the distribution of itemizers in the neigh-
borhood of the standard deduction threshold. Using the SOI dataset, these distributions can

be plotted for all available years and all filing statuses. Figure 1 shows the distributions for
a number of years using the SOI data.1 As can be easily seen, each distribution exhibits a
missing mass right above the standard deduction threshold: the distribution of itemizers is
systematically lower close to the standard deduction, increases steadily and then peaks two

to three bins away from the standard deduction before decreasing again.
   1
    Note that all remaining years can be found in Benzarti (2020). Note also that all dollar amounts discussed
in the paper are in 2016 dollars.



                                                      5
   An important point worth noting is that this evidence is only suggestive. This is because
we cannot observe the distribution of itemizers below the standard deduction threshold in
any available datasets, even ones that are only available to the IRS. Indeed, while the mort-
gage interest and state and local taxes are third-party reported to the IRS, a number of

deductions are not and are therefore not recorded in any data. These deductions include
medical expenses and charitable donations, which constitute approximately 30% of an aver-
age taxpayer's total deductions. If we do not know what shape the distribution of deductions
has below the standard deduction threshold, we cannot make any definitive statements as
to whether the standard deduction threshold is causing the missing mass or whether the

missing mass is merely a natural feature of the distribution. This issue is illustrated in Fig-
ure 2, which plots hypothetical distributions below the standard deduction threshold and
connects them to the observed distribution of itemizers above the standard deduction. Case
(a), which assumes that the distribution of itemizers below the threshold is simply smoothly

increasing throughout its support and then peaks just above the standard deduction, is im-
possible, simply because it would fail to account for most of the population of taxpayers who
choose the standard deduction. Case (b), however, although unlikely, is possible: it assumes
a distribution that is double peaked. Case (c), which is the one that is consistent with the

standard deduction causing a missing mass in the distribution of itemizers just above the
standard deduction is the most likely, but cannot be confirmed with only one cross section
of data.
   I now turn to a quasi-experimental design in order to show that the standard deduction
threshold is indeed causing the missing mass in the distribution of itemizers by prompting

some taxpayers to forgo tax benefits from itemizing and claim the standard deduction to
avoid the costs of filing schedule A. My approach uses a change in the standard deduction
amount and a pre- and post-change cross sections of the dataset to estimate the counter-
factual distribution of itemized deductions and the implied compliance costs. The standard

deduction changed four times during the studied period ­ in 1971, 1975, 1988 and 2003.


                                              6
I focus on the 1988 change for two reasons. First, it is the largest change thus providing
more precise estimates. And second, the 1971, 1975 and 2003 changes coincided with other
changes to the itemization rules.2
       Figures 3a and 3b show the 1987-1989 and 1987-1988 distributions of itemized deduc-

tions. Three main patterns emerge. First, the missing mass clearly tracks the standard
deduction threshold: as the standard deduction increases, the missing mass moves with the
standard deduction. Second, when comparing the pre- and post-reform distributions away
from the standard deduction it is clear that they are overlapping, i.e. only the distribution
in the neighborhood of the standard deduction is affected by the standard deduction, the

remaining portion of it remains the same, further reinforcing that the standard deduction is
indeed causing the missing mass. Third, the missing mass appears larger for the 1987-1989
distributions relative to the 1987-1988 distributions consistent with the idea that there is
likely to be a lagged response. A likely explanation is that some taxpayers may only learn

about the standard deduction increase once they file their return in 1988 and would, in
that case, still itemize even if it would only save them a few dollars, simply because they
have already done most of the record-keeping and have already worked through Schedule
A. I account for such lagged responses by estimating the compliance costs using the 1987

pre-reform and 1989 post-reform distributions of itemizers.
       Ideally, had the distribution of itemized deductions been observable, we could simply
estimate compliance costs by comparing the difference in total itemized deductions available
versus itemized deductions claimed, which would provide an accurate estimate of forgone
deductions. If instead, we use the pre-reform distribution as a proxy for the distribution of

itemized deductions, we would estimate a lower bound on the amount of forgone deductions,
simply because the pre-reform distribution also exhibits a missing mass. However, the pre-
reform distribution can be adjusted, using the post-reform distribution, in order to reflect
the true counterfactual distribution of itemized deductions. Here I explain this procedure
   2
    The graphical evidence for the 1971, 1975 and 2003 standard deduction changes can be found in Benzarti
(2020).


                                                    7
using a graphical and intuitive representation of the approach and a hypothetical example
borrowed from Benzarti (2020). For a more formal treatment of the approach, interested
readers can refer to Benzarti (2020).
      Assume that f (·) is the counterfactual distribution of itemizers where all taxpayers with

total deductions in excess of the standard deduction itemize (as if it was costless to itemize).
This distribution corresponds to the lightest distribution in Figure 4. Further, assume that
each bin size is equal to $100 of deductions and that the cost distribution in the population
is given by the following, where the cost is expressed in deductions rather than dollars and
C (·) represents the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of costs:3


   · 40% have a cost lower than 100, i.e, C (100) = 40%
   · 50% have a cost lower than 200, i.e, C (200) = 50%
   · 60% have a cost lower than 300, i.e, C (300) = 60%
   · 70% have a cost lower than 400, i.e, C (400) = 70%
   · 80% have a cost lower than 500, i.e, C (500) = 80%
   · 90% have a cost lower than 600, i.e, C (600) = 90%
   · 92% have a cost lower than 700, i.e, C (700) = 92%
   · 96% have a cost lower than 800, i.e, C (800) = 96%
   · 100% have a cost lower than 900, i.e, C (900) = 100%


      Assume that the standard deduction amount corresponds to the second bin in Figure

4. Consequently, the mass at every bin that comes after the standard deduction should be
affected by the cost defined above. Denote by g0 (·) the pre-reform distribution, which we can
estimate using the SOI dataset directly and represents the distributions plotted in Figure 1.
g0 (·) corresponds to the second lightest distribution In Figure 4. Estimating the cost would

have been easy had f (·) been observable: we would simply estimate the percentage difference
between f (·) and g0 (·). But since f (·) is not observable we have to rely on comparing the
pre- and post-reform distributions g0 (·) and g (·), where g (·) is the post-reform distribution
  3
   In order to convert deductions into dollars, one simply needs to multiply the deduction amount by the
marginal tax rate.



                                                   8
of itemizers when the standard deduction increases by  . For the purpose of illustration,
assume that the standard deduction amount increases by $500 (5 bins). Denote by di the
distortion introduced by the standard deduction in bin i. Since 40% of the population has
a cost that is smaller than 100, as assumed above, 60% of the population will claim the

standard deduction in the first bin, which will be distorted by 60% i.e. d1 = 60%. Similarly,
d2 = 50%, d3 = 40%, d4 = 30%, d5 = 20%, d6 = 10%, d7 = 8%, d8 = 4% and di = 0 for any
i > 8. Then we can recover the true density of deductions f (·) as follows.
    Denote by bi a bin of size 100 that starts at i dollars, i.e, b200 = [200, 300] and f (b200 )
is the number of itemizers with total deductions in the 200 to 300 dollar range. Since

f (·) is the undistorted counterfactual distribution of itemizers, f (b200 ) corresponds to the
counterfactual number of itemizers with deductions ranging from 200 to 300 dollars had
there been no distortion imposed by the cost of itemizing, i.e., every person, irrespective of
their cost would itemize if their deductions exceed the standard deduction. Similar notation

applies to g0 (·) and g (·): g0 (b200 ) is the number of itemizers with deductions 200 to 300 in
excess of the pre-reform standard deduction; and g (b200 ) is the number of itemizers with
deductions 200 to 300 in excess of the post-reform standard deduction once it increases by
.

    Using this notation, we can introduce the adjustment process. Start by considering
g (b900 )/g0 (b1400 ), which represents the ratio of the darkest and second darkest distributions
at the bin that is 14 bins away from the pre-reform distribution (and nine bins away from the
post-reform distribution), in Figure 4. Here, g0 (.) and g (.) are overlapping, which implies
that g (b900 )/g0 (b1400 ) = 1.

    Since g b900 /g0 b1400 = 1, no taxpayer has a cost in excess of 900. This has two implica-
tions: (1) costs do not exceed $900, and relatedly, (2) both the pre- and post-reform distribu-
tions are undistorted when considering taxpayers with deductions $900 in excess of the stan-
dard deduction. This means that for any deductions $900 in excess of the standard deduction,

f (·) = g0 (·), i.e., g0 (·) is the true counterfactual distribution and C (x) = 1 for x  900. Simi-


                                                 9
larly, consider g (b800 )/g0 (b1300 ). As established above, costs do not exceed $900 and therefore
g0 (b1300 ) must be undistorted and hence g (b800 )/g0 (b1300 ) = g (b800 )/f (b1300 ) = 96%.
        The same procedure is applied to recover C (700) = 92%, C (600) = 90%, C (500) = 80%
and C (400) = 70%. These are all the bins in Figure 4 where f (·) = g0 (·), and where g0 (·)

can be used as the true counterfactual.
        Next, notice that f (·) and g0 (·) do not overlap anymore three bins away from the standard
deduction. Therefore, we need to re-construct f (·) from g0 (·) and g (·). Notice that f (·) and
g0 (·) diverge 8 bins away from the pre-reform standard deduction and that we know, from
the calculations above, that 4% of individuals will not itemize when their deductions are

lower than $800 (since g (b800 )/f (b1300 ) = 96%). This implies that the distortion imposed
by the cost of itemizing on g0 (·) is 4%. Therefore, f (800) = g0 (800)/96%.
        Now that we know f (800), it follows that C (300) = f (800) - g (300) = g0 (800)/C (300) -
g (300), which is equal to 60%. Similarly, we can calculate C (200) = f (700) - g (200) =

g0 (700)/C (200)-g (200), which is equal to 50% and C (100) = f (600)-g (100) = g0 (600)/C (100)-
g (100), which is equal to 40% and therefore recover the entire cost distribution.



3         Cost of Filing Tax Returns

3.1        Estimating the Cost of Itemizing Deductions (Schedule A)

In this section I estimate the cost of itemizing deductions by applying the approach outlined
in the previous section to the 1988 increase in the standard deduction, which increased it
from $2,540 to $3,000 for single filers, from $3,760 to $5,000 for joint filers, and from $2,540

to $4,400 for head-of-household filers (in 1988 dollars).4 The cost estimation is performed
separately for each one of these filing categories, generating three different estimates. Note
that standard errors are estimated using bootstrap.
    4
    The allowable amount for the personal interest deduction was decreased in 1988, I adjust for this in my
calculations (more details available in Benzarti (2020)).



                                                    10
   Table 1 reports the results of this estimation for single, joint and head-of-households filers
in the 15% and 28% marginal tax brackets. The estimated costs vary from 0.57% to 0.85%
of adjusted gross income (AGI), or from $175 for single filers in the 15% bracket to $591
for joint filers in the 28% bracket. Hence, costs expressed in dollars are systematically lower

for individuals in lower tax brackets but are substantially more similar when expressed as a
percent of AGI. This suggests that income matters in determining the cost, which we discuss
next.


3.2     Main drivers of the cost of itemizing

Costs Increase With Income If compliance costs are indeed preventing taxpayers from

itemizing even though they could benefit from it, taxpayers with a higher value of time
should be forgoing even more benefits. This can be tested by breaking down the sample of
itemizers by income and re-estimating the cost of itemizing for each income group.
   To do so, I construct ten subsamples of the population of itemizers by deciles of income
and estimate the cost separately for each one of these deciles. The results of this estimation

are shown in Figure 6: as income increases, taxpayers forgo more deductions, consistent with
the idea that they value their time more.


Record Keeping Compliance cost surveys have systematically reported that record keep-
ing costs are the main driver of compliance costs, as shown, for example, in Guyton et al.
(2003), Slemrod and Sorum (1984), Slemrod and Bakija (2008) and Blumenthal and Slemrod
(1992). If this is true, the observed missing mass should be present even for individuals who

use electronic filing (e-filing) and tax preparers since these only reduce the cost of filling out
forms but do not affect the cost of record keeping.
   This prediction can be easily tested by plotting the density of itemizers who use a tax
preparer or e-file. Figures 7 shows these distributions: both exhibit a clear missing mass,
implying that e-filing and use of tax preparers do not eliminate the cost of itemizing. This is


                                               11
consistent with record keeping costs being the main driver behind the large cost of itemizing
deductions.


Procrastination Anecdotal evidence suggests that some taxpayers systematically wait

until the April 15th deadline to file their returns. While, in principle, waiting to file one's
return does not necessarily mean that it will be more time consuming or costly to file it,
waiting until the last moment can prove out to be costly if one misplaces records or forms
or gets a surprise shock specifically on April 15th.

      This prediction can be tested with the SOI data, as well as with public data on when
returns are filed ­ available on the IRS website or using Google Search data. If taxpayers are
indeed waiting until April 15th to file their taxes, graphically, this should result in an excess
mass in the distribution of filing just before April 15th. And if April 15th filing results in

more deductions being forgone, we should observe a larger missing mass in the distribution
of itemizers just above the standard deduction threshold for those taxpayers who file just
before the April 15th deadline compared to those that file their returns in February or March.
      This prediction clearly appears in the data no matter what dataset is being used: a

substantial portion of taxpayers tend to systematically bunch at the April 15th deadline.
Figure 9a graphs the volume of Google searches for the term 1040 by week, and Figure 9b
uses data from irs.gov and plots the number of tax returns filed by week: in both cases, there
is a clear spike in the weeks that include April 15th.5
      More importantly, Figure 9c shows that taxpayers who file close to the deadline tend to

forgo more deductions: the missing mass for those that file close to the April 15th deadline
is larger than for March filers, consistent with procrastination accounting for a portion of
the estimated forgone deductions.


Tax Evasion Could it be that taxpayers believe that itemizers are more likely to be
audited than individuals claiming the standard deduction which would then cause them to
  5
      Link for the IRS data: https://www.irs.gov/uac/2016-and-prior-year-filing-season-statistics.


                                                      12
forgo deductions so as to avoid higher odds of being audited? The probabilities of audit for
this share of the population are lower than 1% and are virtually the same for itemizers in the
neighborhood of the standard deduction and individuals who claim the standard deduction.6
In order to shed light on this possibility, consider a taxpayer with a Constant Relative Risk
                                                  1
Aversion (CRRA) utility function U (x) =         1-
                                                    x1- .   Denote by p the probability of audit, S
the after tax benefit of the standard deduction, T the after tax benefit of itemized deductions,
and k the cost imposed by an audit on the taxpayer, which includes both a fixed cost of being
audited (collecting receipts and dealing with the IRS) and the penalty that the taxpayer may
have to pay. Consider the extreme case in which all charitable deductions are false.7 Denote

by C , the proportion of charitable donations to total deductions. On average, charitable
deductions are equal to 13% of total deductions. Taxpayers evade taxes by reporting C × T
fake deductions. Therefore, if a taxpayer is audited, her deduction level will be brought back
to T (1 - C ) from T and she will incur a cost k of being audited.

       The taxpayer will itemize deductions if the expected benefit of itemizing given a proba-
bility p of facing an audit is greater than the benefit of claiming the standard deduction:

                   1                                  1          1
              p      (T (1 - 0.13) - k )1- + (1 - p)    (T )1-     S 1- .                             (1)
                  1-                                 1-         1-

       In addition, the taxpayer will switch to the standard deduction if her total deductions
reduced by the amount of charitable deductions is smaller than the standard deductions i.e.

(1 - C ) × T < S . Otherwise ­ if she is afraid of being audited ­ she can still itemize and only
claim her true deductions, she should still be above the standard deduction threshold. This
                                                               S
implies that any taxpayer with total deductions T >            C
                                                                   would not switch to the standard
deduction.
       This can be calibrated in order to estimate how much of the forgone benefits evasion
   6
    See Miller et al. (2012) and Slemrod and Gillitzer (2013).
   7
    It is very hard for taxpayers to evade other major deductions such as the mortgage interest, state tax
and property tax deductions since these are third-party reported.




                                                   13
could explain. The first term of equation 1 is the benefit derived if the taxpayer is audited:
she can only deduct the standard deduction (T - C ) and incur the cost of itemizing (c) and
the cost of evasion (k ). It is multiplied by the probability of audit p. The second term is the
benefit derived from itemizing: it is equal to the level of deductions T and is multiplied by

the probability of not being audited (1 - p). Overall, the sum of these two terms is equal to
the expected benefit of itemizing. The right hand side of the inequality is the benefit from
claiming the standard deduction. To perform the calibration, I solve equation 1 for T , which
determines the level of total deductions of a taxpayer who would stop itemizing because of
evasion. Assuming a risk aversion coefficient of 1, that an audit would cost half a day of

work and that taxpayers correctly perceive audit probabilities, taxpayers would reduce their
deductions by 5 to 6 dollars to avoid an audit. If they misperceive audit probabilities and
believe they are 20 times what they truly are, they would forgo 102 to 114 dollars to avoid
an audit. Overall, this is not consistent with the average compliance cost I estimate.

       In addition, if evasion was driving the result we should observe that taxpayers who itemize
- even when they are close to the standard deduction threshold ­ have a low proportion of
deductions that are easy to evade. Mortgage interest, state and local tax deductions are hard
to evade because they are third-party reported to the IRS. Charitable donations, however,

are easy to evade because they are not third-party reported.8 Figure 10 shows the proportion
of charitable donations for taxpayers who are close to the standard deduction threshold and
rejects the assumption that taxpayers switch to the standard deduction by reducing their
deductions because of a fear of audit.
   8
    Kleven et al. (2011) show that taxpayers understand that third-party reported deductions are harder to
evade and behave accordingly.




                                                   14
3.3       Estimating the Costs of Filing Other Schedules and Tax Forms

          Over Time

Extrapolation Approach The cost I estimate is specific to the taxpayers who are just
above the standard deduction. In order to get a cost estimate that is more representative
of the rest of the population of taxpayers, I need to estimate the cost for individuals away
from the standard deduction threshold. These individuals differ in their demographics, in
particular, they are more likely to have higher incomes since deductions and income tend to

be positively correlated and we know, from above, that higher income individuals tend to
forgo more deductions. For this reason, I need to estimate the effect that these demographics
have on cost. I do so for four variables: income, dependents, use of tax preparers and
electronic filing.9

      To estimate the effect of dependents and the use of tax preparers on the cost of itemizing,
I apply the procedure outlined in Section 2.2 for the 1988 reform on subsamples of joint filers.
I use joint filers to perform this subsample analysis because they represent more than 50% of
the population of filers, which is essential to getting enough power when breaking down the

main sample into multiple groups. This means that my approach relies on the assumption
that these demographics affect filing costs in the same way for different types of filers and
for different years. To estimate the effect of tax preparers, I compare the cost for joint filers
who use a tax preparer to the the cost for those who do not. I use a similar approach for
taxpayers with and without dependents. To estimate the effect of income on the cost of

filing, I use the estimates from Section 3.2. Because electronic filing did not exist in 1988,
I cannot use the procedure from Section 2.2. Instead, I pool all cross-sections in years in
which electronic filing was commonly used ­ 1998 to 2006; fit a polynomial through the bins
that are away from the standard deduction to extrapolate the counterfactual distribution

close to the standard deduction; and compare the distribution of electronic filers and paper
filers to this counterfactual to assess the size of the missing mass for each group. Formally,
  9
      Unfortunately, the SOI dataset does not contain information on education or occupation.


                                                    15
I assume that the filing cost is given by the following equation:


            C =   {[(ef i ½ef i + ef i (1 - ½ef i )] + [prep ½prep + prep (1 - ½prep )]
                                                      9
                 + [dep ½dep + dep (1 - ½dep )] +          i ½i ,                          (2)
                                                     i=0


where  is the baseline cost of itemizing, as estimated in Section 2.2; ef i is the effect of
electronic filing on the cost of itemizing; and ef i is the effect on the cost of not filing

electronically. The remaining variables are defined similarly, with prep corresponding to
the use of a tax preparer and dep having at least one dependent child. Each i coefficient
corresponds to the effect of income on the cost. These are derived in Section 3.2: each i is
equal to the ratio of the cost of itemizing for income group i divided by the average cost of

itemizing for all groups.
   The resulting coefficients are reported in Table 2. Note that the  coefficients provide
estimates for both demographic and non-demographic characteristics of taxpayers. On the
one hand, the  coefficients for the effect of income on costs, denoted by i where i is the
income decile, tend to increase monotonically with i, which is consistent with a value of time

explanation of the forgone benefits as discussed above. On the other hand, the  coefficients
for using a tax preparer or electronic filing are not demographic characteristics but instead
a choice made by the taxpayer. Note that the effect on cost of using either electronic filing
or a tax preparer are very limited. The main reason for this limited effect is the fact that

compliance costs appear to be mostly driven by record keeping rather than the cost of filing
forms and returns. And neither electronic filing nor tax preparers can affect record keeping
effectively since records have to be kept prior to using electronic filing or visiting a tax
preparer. This is what likely explains that the estimated coefficients have so little effect on

cost and is consistent with the evidence and discussion from Section 3.2.




                                                16
Extrapolation to Other Schedules and Tax Forms To infer the cost of filing other
schedules, I assume that, holding constant the number of hours spent working on a given tax
schedule, taxpayers derive the same disutility from each tax schedule. In other words, they
do not dislike filing any particular schedule more than others, as long as each requires the

same number of hours. I also assume that the demographics estimated in Section 3.3 affect
the cost of other schedules in the same way. The IRS provides estimates of the number of
hours required to file each tax schedule based on surveys of taxpayers at the time of filing.10
I use these survey estimates to scale the cost estimates of other schedules. For example,
filing schedule B requires 1 hour and 19 minutes, which is 28% of the total time required

to file schedule A; therefore, I assign a baseline cost of filing schedule B of 28% of that of
schedule A. The filing cost for each taxpayer is given by an equation similar to equation (2),
with a subscript x that corresponds to each tax schedule:


            Cx = x  {[(ef i ½ef i + ef i (1 - ½ef i )] + [prep ½prep + prep(1 - ½prep )]
                                                         9
                   + [dep ½dep + dep (1 - ½dep )] +           i ½i },                                 (3)
                                                        i=0


where Cx is the cost of schedule x = 1040, A, B, C, D, E, F, SE, and x is the baseline cost
estimate of schedule x. The coefficients are reported in Table 2.


Filing Costs Have Been Increasing Since the 1980s Using equation (3), I estimate
the total cost of filing all federal income tax schedules for every year from 1984 to 2006.11
Figure 8a shows that costs have been increasing steadily, from $150bn in 1984 to $200bn in
2006 (both in 2016 dollars). Part of this increase is mechanically driven by an increase in the
number of tax filers. But it is also driven by a steady increase in the number of taxpayers

who have to file other schedules in addition to the 1040 form. Some of these schedules
  10
     According to the IRS survey estimates, the 1040 form requires 9.4 hours, Schedule A 4.5 hours, Sch. B
1.3 hours, Sch. C 9.6 hours, Sch. D 3.8 hours, Sch. E 5.8 hours, Sch. F 16.1 hours and Sch. SE 1.1 hours.
  11
     I start in 1984 because prior years are missing information on Schedule SE.




                                                   17
require a substantial amount of time to be filed. Figure 8b plots the number of forms filed
by schedule over time. The proportion of non-1040 forms filed increased by 15% from 1984
to 2009. While it is often believed that filing costs have decreased over time since the 1980s
because of the rapid increase in electronic filing, Figure 8b shows two countervailing forces to

electronic filing that drive total costs upwards: the number of individuals who file taxes and
the number of scheduled filed by each taxpayer. My estimates suggest the upward pressure
on filing costs exerted by these two forces outweigh the cost savings of electronic filing. The
number of non-1040 forms filed can be easily reduced by increasing the filing thresholds
for their corresponding schedules. The cost savings from increasing these thresholds would

need to be weighed against the effect they would have on increasing evasion. Tazhitdinova
(2018) investigates these trade-offs in the setting of non-cash charitable donations in the
U.S., providing evidence of the effectiveness of reporting requirements against evasion and
the costliness of these requirements to taxpayers.

   Note that, in order to construct Figures 8a and 8b, I simply use the number of forms
filled by each taxpayer, which is information included in the SOI dataset. And as mentioned
above, part of the increase in costs is mechanically driven by more and more taxpayers having
to file more and more forms and schedules. This, in part, is due to taxpayers having income

from more varied sources, not only wage income but also capital gain income, dividends,
etc. but part of this is also due to the thresholds for having to file separate schedules
being fixed in nominal terms. For example, Schedule B must be filed when taxable interest
income or dividend income exceeds $400 and this limit has been fixed nominally for several
decades, mechanically increasing the number of taxpayers having to file Schedule B. While

differentiating between the two explanations is difficult with the current dataset, it could be
possible with more detailed data.




                                              18
4     Assessing Policy Proposals to Reduce the Cost of

      Filing Tax Returns

This section considers four different policy proposals to reduce tax filing costs and assesses
their likely effects.


4.1     Pre-Populated Forms

One policy proposal that is believed to be one of the more cost-effective ways of reducing

compliance costs is to pre-populate tax forms with information that tax authorities already
have access to from third-party information reports sent to the IRS. Third-party reporting
is the norm for wage earners, for example, whose earnings are reported by employers to the
employee and to the IRS on the W2 form. This form also contains other pieces of information
that can be used to pre-populate other tax return fields: such as the amount of state taxes

paid, which can pre-populate part of Schedule A. Similarly, mortgage interest is also reported
by lenders to borrowers and to the IRS and can be pre-populated. Finally, banks and brokers
report some of their clients' transactions to the IRS via the 1099 and 1098 forms. There are
also proposals to have counties report property taxes paid by home owners to the IRS.

    There are two versions of this policy proposal. The first version proposes to only pre-
populate forms with information the IRS already has access to using the W2, 1098 forms,
etc. The second proposal expands informational reporting and requires more institutions to
disclose information to the IRS. While expanding third-party reporting could result in large

time savings for taxpayers, and could also reduce evasion substantially, it has the disadvan-
tage of imposing a potentially heavy administrative burden on reporting institutions. And
while this burden is likely to be small for larger firms, that already have a well-established
informational system, it can be prohibitive for smaller firms. Harju et al. (2019), for exam-

ple, show that some firms would reduce their activity just to avoid compliance costs. For this
reason, we restrict our evaluation to the first policy proposal, but it should be noted that


                                             19
large savings, potentially at a low cost, can be achieved by requiring entities with well estab-
lished informational systems to report information to the IRS. These entities may include
counties, large charitable organizations, and banks.
   There is one possible downside from pre-populating forms with information that is al-

ready available to the IRS, which has often been used to advocate against such a policy
and is a similar argument used by Milton Friedman against tax withholding. According to
Friedman and others, one would ideally want to make taxes as salient as possible and force
taxpayers to work through all forms in detail in order for them to clearly understand the
burden they are bearing and also so that they can reduce this burden as much as possi-

ble. While theoretically sound, empirically there is little basis for such argument. In fact
Gillitzer and Skov (2018) explores this tradeoff in case of the introduction of third-party
reporting of charitable donations in Denmark. They find that third-party reporting reduces
the tax burden of Danish taxpayers. As forms are pre-populated, taxpayers end up with more

charitable deductions claimed, simply because prior to forms being pre-populated, there were
several charitable deductions they did not bother with. And while it is true that taxpayers
are less likely to pay attention to their tax returns if they are already pre-populated, some
may argue that the current forms are so complicated that few taxpayers engage with them

and instead outsource them to tax preparers or use tax softwares.
   In order to estimate the potential savings from pre-populating tax forms with the in-
formation that the IRS currently has, I classified every field in the 1040 form and also in
every tax schedule into whether it could currently be pre-populated or not. I then used the
proportion of fields that can be pre-populated to deflate the current compliance costs for

each of the forms and schedules by that proportion. For example, I estimate that 70% of the
fields in Schedule A can be pre-populated, which would reduce the compliance costs of filing
Schedule A from $24 to $7 billion, if those fields are pre-populated. Of course, this simple
approach relies on potentially strong assumptions. The first one is that pre-populating these

forms is cost-free for the IRS. While this is likely to be true at the margin, especially for


                                              20
electronically filed forms, it will certainly involve substantial one-time fixed costs needed to
implement a system that would automatically pre-populate forms. Second, it is likely that
the reduction in record keeping costs is heterogenous: here I assume a one-to-one relation-
ship between the reduction in fields needed to be filled and record-keeping costs. In reality,

some fields might require higher record-keeping costs than others especially the fields that
are not third-party reported. For example, since all mortgage interest is reported on one
single form, which also has the advantage of being sent very close to the filing deadline, the
record-keeping costs for this field is likely to be low. Whereas charitable donations appear
in several different receipts, one for each donation, and are likely to be harder to keep track

of and require larger record-keeping costs. While this is the best available estimate of pre-
populating forms, conducting surveys aimed specifically at estimating record-keeping costs
for each category could help refine this estimate further.
   Overall, and according to these estimates, pre-populating forms reduce compliance costs

by 43%. This reduction mostly comes from large time savings from the time required to
file the 1040 form for individuals who cannot file the 1040A or 1040EZ forms but also from
Schedule A and to a lesser extent from Schedule C.
   Finally, it is worth emphasizing that this policy comes with a "double dividend", which is

not accounted for in the estimations above: it allows compliance costs savings for taxpayers,
but can also substantially reduce tax evasion. Pomeranz (2015) and Kleven et al. (2011)
have shown that some of the most effective ways to reduce evasion are to require third-party
reporting. Therefore one desirable consequence of such policies would be a reduction in the
tax gap.


4.2    Free Electronic Filing Options for All Taxpayers

Another policy proposal, which is likely to be less costly than pre-populating forms but
also less beneficial in terms of compliance costs reduction is to offer a free electronic filing
option for taxpayers. According to the latest statistics published by the IRS for the 2020


                                              21
filing season, 98% of taxpayers (114 million of them) either file their returns electronically
or use a tax preparer. While there are free electronic filing options for taxpayers who have
simple enough returns and low enough earnings, which represents approximately 37% of the
population of taxpayers, these options are not available for the remaining of the population

of taxpayers.
      Here, I assess how much money US taxpayers would save by having access to a free
electronic filing option. Similarly to the previous policy proposal, I do not assess how much
it would cost the IRS to offer such a free service. However, similarly to pre-populating
forms, this is likely to be a one time fixed expense with some small future maintenance costs.

Instead, I simply estimate how beneficial the free electronic filing would be to taxpayers. And
similarly to the previous analysis, the estimates presented here rely on several important
assumptions which I lay out below.
      In contrast to the analysis of the pre-populated forms, these estimates rely on using

2020 filing statistics from the IRS, which are publicly available on the IRS website. The
SOI dataset is not needed because estimating the cost of a free electronic filing option only
requires to know how many of each schedule and form are filed by taxpayers which does not
require the underlying micro data.12 All is left, in order to estimate how much money would

be saved from offering a free electronic filing option, is to know how much do the electronic
filing and tax preparer services cost. Unfortunately, the IRS filing statistics do not distinguish
between taxpayers who electronically file because they use tax software versus taxpayers who
are counted as electronically filing because they use the services of a tax preparer who in
turn files electronically using their own tax software. For this reason, and in order to be

more conservative, since tax preparer services are often substantially more expensive than
using a tax software, I assume that all taxpayers who are counted as filing electronically use
a tax software.
      I use the prices charged by Intuit's TurboTax in order to estimate how much it costs
 12
      Link to the IRS filing statistics: https://www.irs.gov/statistics/filing-season-statistics



                                                        22
taxpayers to use their software. TurboTax offers four pricing categories: (1) a free option
available for taxpayers who either file a 1040EZ or a 1040A form and have W2 earnings
that are less than $100,000, do not file any Schedule, do not have 1099 income and are
not self employed; (2) a $60 option for taxpayers who either have W2 income in excess

of $100,000 and/or itemize their deductions; (3) an $80 option for taxpayers who have
substantial investment income and/or investment rental properties; and (4) a $120 option
for self-employed taxpayers. TurboTax is the most commonly used tax software but other
software packages offer similar prices.
   Using these prices and the number of taxpayers who belong to each of the corresponding

categories, I estimate that $5.1 billion have been spent in 2020 on tax preparation. It is
worth emphasizing that this figure ignores any time or disutility cost that a taxpayer might
have to bear in order to file these taxes and only accounts for filling out the required forms
assuming all forms and receipts have been collected prior to it, and hence also ignores any

record keeping costs.


4.3    Shortening the 1040 form

A recent policy proposal has been to shorten the 1040 form, which was implemented in the
Tax Cuts and Jobs Act reform of 2017. This policy shortened the 1040 form to the size of a
"postcard" and eliminated the 1040A and 1040EZ forms. Practically, since 98% of taxpayers

either rely on tax software or tax preparers, there is no reason to expect that any of these
taxpayers would save time or money because of the "postcard" size of the 1040 form. For
the remaining 2% of taxpayers who file their returns on paper, it is unclear how their costs
have changed: on the one hand, there are fewer lines on the 1040 "postcard" form but some

of these lines were either going to be removed because of some of the changes imposed by the
TCJA 2017 and would have been dropped even in the old 1040 forms or some of these lines
were moved to other schedules therefore requiring taxpayers to spend more time working
these schedules. Therefore, this policy, at best kept filing costs constant and at worst may


                                             23
have increased them for the 2% of the population that files returns by hand.



5      Conclusion and Discussions

In this paper, I show that compliance costs of taxation are large and have been increasing
steadily over time. This paper discusses two policy proposals, namely pre populating forms
and offering a free electronic filing option to all taxpayers, that can help alleviate these costs

or even eliminate them. While we do not have a precise estimate of how costly these solutions
are, we know that most OECD countries have adopted them. Even some US States, such
as California, offer a free electronic filing to most taxpayers. Given their prevalence, they
appear to be a low cost way to save taxpayers money, time and effort.



References

Benzarti, Y. (2020). How Taxing is Tax Filing? Using Revealed Preferences to Estimate
    Compliance Costs. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy .
Blumenthal, M. and J. Slemrod (1992). The compliance cost of the us individual income tax
    system. National Tax Journal , 185­202.

Gillitzer, C. and P. E. Skov (2018). The use of third-party information reporting for tax
    deductions: evidence and implications from charitable deductions in denmark. Oxford
    Economic Papers 70 (3), 892­916.
Guyton, J., J. O'Hare, M. Stavrianos, and E. Toder (2003). Estimating the compliance cost
    of the US individual income tax. National Tax Journal , 673 ­688.

Harju, J., T. Matikka, and T. Rauhanen (2019). Compliance costs vs. tax incentives: Why
    do entrepreneurs respond to size-based regulations? Journal of Public Economics 173,
    139­164.
Kleven, H. J., M. B. Knudsen, C. T. Kreiner, S. Pedersen, and E. Saez (2011). Unwilling



                                               24
  or unable to cheat? evidence from a tax audit experiment in denmark. Econometrica ,
  651­692.
Miller, S., R. Marcuss, S. Boehmer, B. Johnson, and W. Kei (2012). Internal revenue service
  data book. Annual report.

Piketty, T. and E. Saez (2003). Income inequality in the united states, 1913­1998. The
  Quarterly journal of economics 118 (1), 1­41.
Pomeranz, D. (2015). No taxation without information: Deterrence and self-enforcement in
  the value added tax. American Economic Review 105 (8), 2539­69.
Slemrod, J. and J. Bakija (2008). Taxing Ourselves: a Citizen's Guide to the Debate Over

  Taxes. MIT Press Books .
Slemrod, J. and C. Gillitzer (2013). Tax Systems. MIT Press.
Slemrod, J. and N. Sorum (1984). The Compliance Cost of the US Individual Income Tax
  System. National Tax Journal , 461 ­474.

Tazhitdinova, A. (2018). Reducing evasion through self-reporting: Evidence from charitable
  contributions. Journal of Public Economics 165, 31­47.
Van Rooij, M., A. Lusardi, and R. Alessie (2011). Financial literacy and stock market
  participation. Journal of Financial Economics 101 (2), 449­472.




                                             25
                                                                  Figure 1: Missing Mass Just Above the Standard Deduction

                             3




                                                                                                                                  3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
             Number of itemizers in millions




                                                                                                                  Number of itemizers in millions




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Number of itemizers in millions
                                    2




                                                                                                                                         2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                 1




                                                                                                                      1
                             0




                                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                               0   9903           20000          30000           40000   50000                                      0   7896             20000          30000           40000   50000                                      0   10,008         20,000         30,000         40,000   50,000
                                                   Total Itemized Deductions in 1980 bin size of $2000                                                    Total Itemized Deductions in 1985 bin size of $2000                                                  Total Itemized Deductions in 1990 bin size of $2000



                                                               (a) 1980                                                                                               (b) 1985                                                                                             (c) 1990




                                                                                                                                  3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3
             Number of itemizers in millions




                                                                                                                  Number of itemizers in millions




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Number of itemizers in millions
                                           2
26




                                                                                                                                         2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2
                    1




                                                                                                                      1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                             0




                                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                               0   10,315         20,000        30,000          40,000   50,000                                     0     10,244         20,000         30,000         40,000   50,000                                     0      12,289      20,000         30,000         40,000   50,000
                                                   Total Itemized Deductions in 1995 bin size of $2000                                                    Total Itemized Deductions in 2000 bin size of $2000                                                  Total Itemized Deductions in 2005 bin size of $2000



                                                              (d) 1995                                                                                                (e) 2000                                                                                             (f ) 2005
     Notes: The figures above plot the density of deductions for itemizers filing jointly. The bin size is $2,000 and the vertical line represents the standard
     deduction threshold for each year. Notice the missing mass just above the standard deduction threshold. Additional years can be found in Benzarti
     (2020).
                                       Figure 2: Different Scenarios Below the Standard Deduction
                    (a) Increasing: Impossible                                   (b) Double Peaked: Unlikely                                         (c) Missing Mass


                                          65% of taxpayers claim                                                                                                  65% of taxpayers claim
                                            Standard Deduction                                          65% of taxpayers claim                                      Standard Deduction
                                                                                                          Standard Deduction
27




                                                                                                                                           0
            0




                                                                             0


                                                                                                                                               0
                0                                                                0                                                                 Total Itemized Deductions in 2006 bin size of $2000
                       Total Itemized Deductions in 2006 bin size of $2000           Total Itemized Deductions in 2006 bin size of $2000
                                                                                                                                                                Hypothetical               Missing
                                   Hypothetical              Observed                            Hypothetical              Observed                             Observed




     Notes: The graphs above plot the different scenarios that could be happening below the standard deduction. Graph (a) assumes that the density is
     strictly increasing, which is impossible given that 65% of taxpayers claim the standard deduction. This scenario would fail to account for most of
     the population of taxpayers. Graph (b) accounts for most of the population and is continuous at the standard deduction but the density is double
     peaked. This is possible but unlikely given that densities are usually single peaked. This however does not rule out densities that are double-peaked
     because of the standard deduction. Graph (c) assumes that there is a discontinuity at the standard deduction threshold because of compliance costs
     creating a missing mass.
Figure 3: Density of Deductions for Itemizers Filing Jointly Pre
and Post Reform
                                                                    (a) 1987-1989 Comparison
                             1.2
             Number of Itemizers In Millions
             0.2 0.4      0.60  0.8      1
                                               0



                                                       10 010
                                                            73




                                                                           00




                                                                                         00




                                                                                                      00




                                                                                                                    00
                                                         ,1




                                                                        ,0




                                                                                     ,0




                                                                                                   ,0




                                                                                                                  ,0
                                                        8,




                                                                      20




                                                                                    30




                                                                                                 40




                                                                                                              50
                                                   Total Itemized Deductions bin size of 2000 adjusted to account for inflation

                                                                                 1987                 1989



                                                                   (b) 1987-1988 Comparison
                             1.2
             Number of Itemizers In Millions
             0.2  0.4     0.60  0.8       1
                                               0



                                                           ,2 0
                                                             38




                                                                           00




                                                                                        00




                                                                                                     00




                                                                                                                  00
                                                        10,01




                                                                        ,0




                                                                                     ,0




                                                                                                  ,0




                                                                                                               ,0
                                                         8




                                                                      20




                                                                                   30




                                                                                                40




                                                                                                             50




                                                   Total Itemized Deductions bin size of 2000 adjusted to account for inflation

                                                                                 1987                 1988




Notes: The first graph plots the density of itemizers one year before and one year after the standard deduction
reform while the second one plots these densities one year before and during the reform.
                             Figure 4: Reconstruction of the Counterfactual Density




Notes: This graph illustrates the method used in section 2.2 to reconstruct the counterfactual density of itemizers f (·) using the pre- and post-reform
densities g0 (·) and g (·).
                     Figure 5: Reconstructed Counterfactual
             0




                 0
                          Total Itemized Deductions bin size of 2000 inflation adjusted

                                    missing mass                 reconstructed 1989
                                    observed 1989



Notes: This graph plots the reconstructed counterfactual in 1989 using the method outlined in section 2.2
and the observed density for 1989. The missing mass used to estimate the burden of itemizing is given by
the area lying between the two curves.




                                                    30
Figure 6: Relationship Between Income and the Burden of Itemiz-
ing Deductions
                                                                        (a) Burden of Itemizing and Income

                        150 300 450 600 750 900 1050 1200 1350
                                 Burden of Itemizing
                                              0




                                                               70000       80000   90000      100000   110000   120000
                                                                                           Income

                                                                       (b) Hours Spent Itemizing and Income
                   0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100110120130
                          Burden of Itemizing/Hourly Wage




                                                          70000           80000    90000      100000   110000   120000
                                                                                           Income



Notes: (a) The first graph shows the increasing relationship between income and the burden of itemizing:
richer households are more likely to forgo deductions. This relationship controls for the variation in MTR
across the different income groups. (b) The second graph divides the burden of itemizing by the hourly wage
and shows the implied hours spent itemizing by each income group. The y-axes of each graphs have scales
of the same magnitude.



                                                                                           31
           Figure 7: Use of Tax Preparer and Electronic Filing
                                                      (a) Tax Preparer



                     density
                               0




                                       0      5000           10000          15000          20000     25000
                                            Total Itemized Deductions bin size of 2000 (1980-2006)

                                                    (b) Electronic Filing
                     0




                                   0             10000             20000               30000         40000
                                           Total Itemized Deductions bin size of 2000 (1998-2006)

                                                               Not efi             efi



Notes: The x-axis is normalized such that 0 corresponds to the standard deduction threshold. Graph (a)
plots the density of total deductions for taxpayers who use tax preparers from 1980 to 2006 by bin size of
$2000. Graph (b) plots the density of total deductions for taxpayers who file returns electronically from 1998
to 2006 by bin size of $2000 and compares it to the density of taxpayers who do not file returns electronically.
Both graphs exhibit a missing mass close to the standard deduction implying that neither tax preparers nor
electronic filing eliminate the burden of itemizing. The use of electronic filing slightly reduces the missing
mass consistent with compliance costs being the driver of the missing mass and record-keeping being the
largest portion of the cost of itemizing.



                                                                  32
                                                                   Figure 8: Cost Trends
                                                                           (a) Total Costs




                     Total Cost in 2016 Dollars (billion)
                   100             150             200




                                                            1985    1990       1995      2000       2005         2010
                                                                                   Years

                                                                   1040                         1040+Sch A
                                                                   1040 + SchA + Sch C          1040 + ... + Sch E
                                                                   1040 + ... + Sch D           1040 + ... + Sch B
                                                                   1040 + ... + Sch F           All Forms


                                                                   (b) Number of Forms Filed
                                                    300
                    Total Nb. of Forms Filed (million)
                   100             200




                                                            1985    1990       1995      2000       2005         2010
                                                                                   Years

                                                                   1040                         1040 + Sch A
                                                                   1040 + SchA + Sch C          1040 + ... + Sch E
                                                                   1040 + ... + Sch D           1040 + ... + Sch B
                                                                   1040 + ... + Sch F           All Forms




Notes: The first Figure plots the cost of filing each schedule for the total US population over time as estimated
in equation (3). The second figure plots the total number of forms filed over time. Each curve is cumulative:
it incrementally adds each schedule to the previous curve.
                                                                           Figure 9: Deadline Effects
                                          (a) Google Search of the Term 1040                                                                (b) Number of Returns Filed by Week



                            100




                                                                                                                             2.0e+07
                                                                        Week 15 ~ April 15th
                                     80                                 Week 41 ~ October 15th
                 Search Volume of 1040




                                                                                                               5.0e+06 1.0e+07 1.5e+07
                                                                                                                     NB. of returns filed
                20     40   060




                                          1   5    15                               41
                                                        Week of the Year




                                                                                                                             0
                                                         2013                2012                                                           0           5    10           15     20
                                                                                                                                                            Filing Week
                                                         2011                2010
                                                         2009                2008                                                                           2015          2014


                                                                    (c) March Itemizers v.s. April Itemizers
                                                                0




                                                                    0               5000         10000           15000           20000             25000
                                                                        Total Itemized Deductions bin size of 1000 adjusted to account for inflation

                                                                                                      March                                     April


Notes: Panel (a) plots the volume of search of the term "1040 " in Google and panel (b) plots the volume of tax returns filed by week in 2014 and
2015. The red vertical line corresponds to the week of April 15. Panel (c) plots the density of itemizers who file in March versus in April, the x-axis
is normalized such that 0 corresponds to the standard deduction. Panel (d) plots the average week in which a return is processed in year t on the
y-axis and the average week in which a return is processed in year t - 1 on the x-axis.
Figure 10: Fraction of Charitable Donations in Itemized Deductions by Size of Total Deduc-
tions



                  Fraction of Charitable Donations in Total Deductions
                   0             .05             .1             .15

                                                                          2000
                                                                          4000
                                                                          6000
                                                                          8000
                                                                         10000
                                                                         12000
                                                                         14000
                                                                         16000
                                                                         18000
                                                                         20000
                                                                         22000
                                                                         24000
                                                                         26000
                                                                         28000
                                                                         30000
                                                                         32000
                                                                         34000
                                                                         36000
                                                                         38000
                                                                         40000
                                                                         42000
                                                                         44000
                                                                         46000
                                                                         48000
                                                                         50000
                                                                         52000
                                                                         54000
                                                                         56000
                                                                         58000
                                                                         Total Deductions Amount In Excess of Standard Deduction

Notes: This graph shows the proportion of deductions that are charitable donations for itemizers pooling all years from 1980 to 2006 by their distance
to the standard deduction. Deductions are adjusted for inflation and the standard deduction amount is subtracted from them to calculate the distance
to the standard deduction. The proportion of charitable donations does not change close to the standard deduction threshold implying that taxpayers
do not respond to the change in the standard deduction by reducing their charitable donations. This rules out the explanations of the missing mass
based on the behavioral response to a concave kink point and evasion.
                                        Table 1: Cost Estimates

                               Filing Status     MTR        Cost as      Cost
                                                           % of AGI      in $
                                   Single         15%        0.74        $175
                                   Single         28%        0.85        $369
                                   Joint          15%        0.57        $242
                                   Joint          28%        0.74        $591
                                   Head           15%        0.76        $270
                                   Head           28%        0.72        $458
This Table shows the cost of itemizing as estimated in section 2.2 for different brackets and filing status.


                                         Table 2: Cost Variables

                                            Variable            Cost
                                       A , Single,  =15%        $175
                                       A , Single,  =28%        $369
                                       A , Joint,  =15%         $195
                                       A , Joint,  =28%         $591
                                       A , Head,  =15%          $270
                                       A , Head,  =28%          $458
                                              1040             2.08A
                                               B               0.28A
                                               C               2.13A
                                               D               0.83A
                                               E               1.29A
                                               F               3.55A
                                              SE               0.25A
                                              dep               0.99
                                              dep               1.01
                                              ef i              1.07
                                              ef i              0.93
                                              prep              0.99
                                              prep              1.01
                                               1                0.21
                                               2                0.21
                                               3                0.27
                                               4                0.38
                                               5                0.61
                                               6                0.99
                                               7                 1.4
                                               8                1.74
                                               9                 2.7

Notes: This table shows the estimates used in equations (2) and (3). A is estimated in section 2.2. 1040 ,
B , C , D , E , F and SE are estimated in section 3.3. Section 3.3 explains how dep , ef i and prep are
estimated. Section 3.2 explains how i , i = 1, ..., 10 are estimated.
