                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        TEMPTATION AND COMMITMENT:
                   UNDERSTANDING HAND-TO-MOUTH BEHAVIOR

                                      Orazio Attanasio
                                       Agnes Kovacs
                                       Patrick Moran

                                     Working Paper 27944
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27944


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2020




An earlier version of this paper was circulated as Kovacs and Moran (2018) "Temptation,
Commitment, and Hand-to-Mouth Consumers". We are grateful to Taha Choukhmane, Andreas
Fagereng, Andrea Ferrero, Greg Kaplan, Mike Keane, Hamish Low, Costas Meghir, Ben Moll,
Peter Neary, Cormac O'Dea, Carlo Pizinelli, Akos Valentinyi, Gianluca Violante, and seminar
participants at Oxford, Yale, Manchester, Reserve Bank of New Zealand, Statistics Norway,
Bank of England, and Institute for Fiscal Studies for helpful comments. We would like to
acknowledge the use of the University of Oxford Advanced Research Computing (ARC) facility
in carrying out this work (http://dx.doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.22558). The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Orazio Attanasio, Agnes Kovacs, and Patrick Moran. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Temptation and Commitment: Understanding Hand-to-Mouth Behavior
Orazio Attanasio, Agnes Kovacs, and Patrick Moran
NBER Working Paper No. 27944
October 2020
JEL No. D11,D14,D91,E21,R21

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper presents a model of consumption behavior that explains the presence of `wealthy
hand-to-mouth' consumers using a mechanism that differs from those analyzed previously. We
show that a two-asset model with temptation preferences generates a demand for commitment
and thus illiquidity, leading to hand-to-mouth behavior even when liquid assets deliver higher
returns than illiquid assets. This model fits other features of the data, such as the fact that the
Marginal Propensity to Consume declines only slowly with shock size. Moreover, temptation
and commitment have important policy implications: we show that housing subsidies and
mandatory mortgage amortization increase household savings.

Orazio Attanasio                                 Patrick Moran
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
Yale University                                  University of Copenhagen
37 Hillhouse Avenue                              Oster Farimagsgade 5
New Haven, CT 06511                              Building 26
and Institute for Fiscal Studies, FAIR,          Copenhagen, Denmark 1353
BREAD and CEPR                                   patedm@gmail.com
and also NBER
orazio.attanasio@yale.edu

Agnes Kovacs
The University of Manchester
Department of Economics
Oxford Road
Manchester M139PL
United Kingdom
agnes.kovacs@manchester.ac.uk
1       Introduction

   A large fraction of households in the US and other developed countries have almost
zero liquid assets, despite holding substantial wealth in illiquid assets, primarily housing,
but also retirement accounts. Data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics indicate
that roughly 20% of U.S. households own a house, but have liquid assets worth less than
two weeks of income. The fact that wealthy consumers and in particular homeowners do
not have liquid savings implies that they have a limited ability to absorb adverse income
shocks and therefore, as documented in many studies, have a relatively large Marginal
Propensity to Consume (MPC) out of temporary shocks. These consumers have been
labeled as `wealthy hand-to-mouth' households.
    In an influential paper, Kaplan and Violante (2014) have proposed an interesting
explanation of wealthy hand-to-mouth consumers. They consider a model with two assets:
one which is liquid and delivers a meager return (such as bank deposits) and one which
is illiquid and yields an attractive return. They then show that such a model is able
to deliver a substantial fraction of wealthy hand-to-mouth consumers that are willing to
withstand some fluctuations in consumption to exploit the returns on the illiquid asset.
    This model, however, cannot explain an additional puzzling aspect of the large con-
centration of household wealth into housing. Many households concentrate their wealth
in housing even though it delivers a lower risk-adjusted return than liquid assets such as
equities, even when accounting for imputed rent and other benefits to homeownership,
as documented in many studies.1 Indeed, in this paper, we document that a two-asset
model, of the type analysed by Kaplan and Violante (2014), cannot fit the large share of
wealthy hand-to-mouth consumers when there exists a high-return liquid asset.
    We make three contributions to the existing literature. First, we propose a differ-
ent explanation for the presence of wealthy hand-to-mouth consumers. In particular, we
study the role of self-control problems, which may generate a desire for illiquidity. We
construct a model with temptation preferences and an endogenous demand for commit-
ment and calibrate its parameters using data on consumption, assets, and housing from
the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). Temptation preferences are attractive from
a theoretical point of view, as choices emerging from this axiomatization are time con-
sistent, and from an empirical point of view, as this type of behaviour is consistent with
experimental evidence (Toussaert, 2018) and consumption behavior (Kovacs, Low, and
Moran, 2020). We find that our model fits the data well, matching the large share of
wealthy hand-to-mouth households despite the fact that housing does not deliver higher
returns than equities.
    1
    See for instance Flavin and Yamashita (2002), Goetzmann and Spiegel (2002), and Piazzesi, Schnei-
der, and Tuzel (2007).

                                                 2
    Second, in addition to the ability to explain the large share of wealthy hand-to-mouth
households with a high Marginal Propensity to Consume (MPC), our model generates
patterns of consumption, saving and portfolio behaviour that are in line with the available
evidence. Our model is consistent with recent empirical evidence, which we review below,
showing that the consumption response to income shocks declines only slowly with shock
size. This evidence is difficult to rationalize using a traditional two-asset model, and
yet, it has important implications for the design of targeted fiscal stimulus policies. In
addition, our model is in line with a growing experimental literature which finds that
households often save in low-return illiquid accounts despite the availability of liquid
accounts with higher or equal returns (Thaler and Benartzi, 2004; Ashraf, Karlan, and
Yin, 2006; Beshears et al., 2020). This type of saving behavior is difficult to explain with
traditional models, but has important implications for our understanding of wealthy
hand-to-mouth behavior, as well as policies designed to promote savings.
    Finally, we use our model to analyse the impacts of three important policies: the tar-
geting of stimulus measures, the tax deductability of mortgage interest payments, which
effectively constitute a sizeable subsidy to home ownership, and mandatory ammorti-
zation of mortgages. On the first issue, we find that fiscal stimulus is more effective
if targeted to the poorest consumer. Furthermore, our model's implications on savings
imply that subsidies to home ownership, as well as mandatory amortization, stimulate
total savings, as they increase the demand for commitment.
    Why do so many homeowners hold very small amounts of liquid assets? To try to
explain this behavior, we start with a two-asset life-cycle model of consumption and
saving behavior, where one asset, such as stocks, is liquid and the other, such as housing,
is not. In our model, liquid assets deliver higher risk-adjusted returns than illiquid ones
consistent with the empirical evidence.2 We find that such a model cannot match the large
share of hand-to-mouth homeowners without failing to match other targeted moments,
even when allowing for flexibility in time preferences, risk aversion, and taste for housing,
as well as generous tax benefits to homeownership.
    To explain the presence of wealthy consumers with a relatively high MPC, we need a
mechanism that increases demand for illiquid assets but not liquid assets. Rather than
introducing additional changes to the nature of assets households can access, following
Kaplan and Violante (2014) and a large number of heterogeneous agent macro models,
we consider a different class of preferences. In particular, we introduce a temptation
element into preferences, using the approach proposed by Gul and Pesendorfer (2001,
2004). These preferences imply that households suffer from self-control problems, which

   2
    The importance of return differences was also highlighted by Shiller (2014), who says, "It would be
perhaps smarter, if wealth accumulation is your goal, to rent and put money in the stock market, which
has historically shown much higher returns than the housing market."

                                                  3
introduces present bias behaviour. Temptation represents the idea that households may
find it difficult to save in liquid assets, due to the possibility of instantaneous gratification
that is hard to resist. Temptation, therefore, creates a demand for commitment devices
that may allow households to mitigate self-control problems. Housing may act as such
a savings commitment device, not only because it is illiquid and allows households to
lock away their wealth, but also because amortizing mortgages force households to make
regular mortgage payments and accumulate wealth in the form of home equity.
    Temptation preferences are not the only ones that give rise to self control problems,
present biases and, possibly, to a demand for commitment devices. Another strand of the
literature that focuses on self-control problems, which may make it difficult for house-
holds to save in liquid assets, uses a model with hyperbolic discounting, as developed by
Strotz (1956), Phelps and Pollak (1968), Laibson (1997), Harris and Laibson (2001) and
Angeletos et al. (2001). Temptation preferences, however, unlike hyperbolic discounting,
do not generate time inconsistent choices, making equilibria easier to define and allowing
for straightforward welfare analysis.
     In our model, we allow households to save in two instruments: liquid assets and illiq-
uid housing, where housing provides direct utility, serves as collateral for mortgages, and
provides realistic tax advantages. The return on liquid asset (shares) is higher than the
return to housing. Households can borrow using fixed-rate, fully-amortizing mortgages.
We calibrate and simulate our model to evaluate the ability of self-control problems and
commitment generated by temptation preferences to explain the observed life-cycle pro-
files of consumption and wealth accumulation. Having established the consistency of the
model with a variety of facts, as well as its ability to explain some of the puzzling evidence
mentioned above, we use the model to assess the consequences of different policies, such
as fiscal stimulus targeting, mandatory mortgage amortization, and housing subsidies.
    The view of illiquidity that we highlight helps improve our understanding of observed
consumption behavior. For instance, our model can explain recent empirical evidence
showing that the marginal propensity to consume (MPC) declines relatively slowly with
shock size. While historically it has been difficult to study how the MPC varies by shock
size (as most stimulus payments are small), there exists a growing empirical literature
that studies this question using new sources of variation and better quality data. The
early empirical literature suggested that MPCs were small for large shocks (Hsieh, 2003).
However, new empirical evidence has overturned this finding (Kueng, 2018), and shown
that MPCs remain sizeable even in response to large income shocks (Kueng, 2018; Fuster,
Kaplan, and Zafar, 2018; Aladangady et al., 2018; Bunn et al., 2018; Fagereng, Holm,
and Natvik, 2019). This new empirical evidence is difficult to rationalize in traditional
two-asset models, where the consumption response to large income shocks is negligible.
We show that our model can accommodate it.

                                               4
     We also show that temptation preferences and the demand for commitment (and
illiquidity) have important implications for saving behavior and wealth accumulation.
We find that the opportunity to purchase a savings commitment device (in our case,
housing) induces households to accumulate more wealth over the life-cycle. Furthermore,
a subsidy to the commitment device may increase overall wealth because households are
able to reduce temptation by locking their wealth in illiquid form, which, in turn, binds
them to save by committing to regular mortgage payments that build up wealth in the
form of home equity.
     We briefly summarize the implications of temptation and commitment for the three
different policies we consider. First, we use our model to asses the effects on consumption
of fiscal stimulus payments targeted towards different segments of the income distribution.
We find that the largest change in aggregate consumption is achieved when larger stimulus
payments are targeted towards the bottom 20% of the income distribution, rather than
smaller payments to the entire population. This result is driven by the fact that these
households have a higher than average MPC, which declines only slowly with the size of
the stimulus payment. In contrast, stimulus payments have historically been rather small
and targeted to a large proportion of the population. In the US, for instance, stimulus
checks were given to 80-85% of households in both 2008 and 2020.
    In addition, there is a growing debate about the effect of mandatory amortization
policies. While mandatory amortization requirements have recently been introduced by
Sweden and the Netherlands, there exists concern that these policies may simply result
in a re-balancing of household portfolios away from liquid assets and into illiquid hous-
ing, potentially reducing households' resilience to income shocks (Svensson, 2019, 2020).
However, if mortgage payments serve as a commitment device, amortization might not
result in simple portfolio re-balancing, but may also induce households to accumulate
more wealth. Simulating our calibrated model, we find that while there is some port-
folio re-balancing from liquid to illiquid assets, it is not one-to-one. In our simulations,
mandatory amortization policies increase overall wealth accumulation by around 10% by
the time of retirement. Every additional dollar of housing wealth only reduces liquid
assets by roughly 60 cents. This finding is consistent with recent empirical evidence from
the Netherlands, showing that mandatory amortization results in increased wealth accu-
mulation, as households accumulate more housing wealth due to this policy, but do not
reduce their non-housing assets (Bernstein and Koudijs, 2020).
    Finally, we show that our model generates similar effects by providing an incentive
to purchase housing, through the mortgage interest tax deduction. The debate around
this program is similar to the arguments around the provision of tax incentives to save
in illiquid retirement accounts, such as IRAs or 401(k) accounts. Some studies argued
that such subsidies may not increase savings and result only in household portfolio re-

                                             5
allocation, while others thought that such tax incentives would result in an increase
in savings.3 Yet none of these papers consider the effect of making commitment more
affordable, which could stimulate savings. Using our calibrated model, we find evidence
of some substitution from liquid to illiquid assets as a result of housing subsidies: every
additional dollar of housing wealth reduces liquid assets by roughly 33 cents. However,
the increase in housing wealth is not perfectly offset by a reduction in liquid assets, thus
overall wealth accumulation is increased by around 7% by the time of retirement.
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. First we develop a life-cycle model of hand-
to-mouth behaviour driven by temptation preferences (Section 2). We demonstrate that
temptation generates a desire for illiquidity and a demand for commitment devices (Sec-
tion 3). We calibrate the model using U.S. data (Section 4) and evaluate the implications
for consumption behavior and the marginal propensity to consume (Section 5). Finally,
we use our calibrated model to study the effect of policies designed to incentive saving
behavior (Section 6).


2       A Model with Temptation Preferences

     We develop a life-cycle model of consumption and housing with temptation prefer-
ences, building upon a model of consumption behavior with uninsurable income risk.
In this model, households save for two reasons: to maintain consumption following ad-
verse income shocks (the precautionary motive) and following retirement (the life-cycle
motive). We extend this model by allowing households to save in either liquid assets
or illiquid housing, where housing gives flow utility, serves as collateral, and provides
tax advantages. This generates a third incentive for households to accumulate wealth
(the housing motive). Housing transactions incur significant costs, thus making housing
illiquid.
    Households live for T years and work during the initial W years. Households maximize
their present discounted lifetime utility, which depends on both nondurable consumption
and housing services. Households have access to two investment assets: liquid assets
and illiquid housing. While all households are born as renters, they have the possibility
to purchase housing which comes in discrete sizes, offers a utility benefit, and serves as
collateral for mortgages.
Temptation Preferences. Households with standard preferences have no demand for
commitment, as more choice and more flexibility are always weakly beneficial. To allow for
the possibility that households desire commitment, we incorporate temptation preferences
    3
    In the case of retirement accounts, see Venti and Wise (1986, 1987), Gale and Scholz (1994), Attanasio
and DeLeire (2002). In the case of housing, see Rosen (1985); Poterba (1992), Gervais (2002), Chambers,
Garriga, and Schlagenhauf (2009), Floetotto, Kirker, and Stroebel (2016), and Nakajima (2020).

                                                    6
by Gul and Pesendorfer (2001, 2004). According to these preferences, it may be difficult
to save due to the temptation to spend for short term gratification. This generates a
desire for commitment, as households would like to reduce temptation by locking away
their wealth in illiquid form. More specifically, households want to maximize the sum of
their expected discounted lifetime utility, subject to a budget constraint we define later:

                                                 T
                                     max Et            t U (ct , ht , c    ~ t)
                                                                      ~t , h                         (1)
                                                t=0


where ct and ht are the chosen level of nondurable consumption and housing, while c      ~t
     ~
and ht are the most tempting consumption and housing alternatives each period. The
key feature of temptation preferences is that utility U () depends not only on actual
consumption and housing decisions, but also the most tempting consumption and housing
alternatives available in the choice set each period. We define the utility function as:

                      U (ct , ht , c    ~ t ) = u(ct , ht ) -  u(~
                                   ~t , h                             ~ t ) - u(ct , ht )
                                                                 ct , h                              (2)

where the felicity function u() is concave and increasing in both ct and ht . We define the
most tempting feasible alternative as that which maximizes current period felicity:

                                     c    ~ t = arg max u(ct , ht ),
                                     ~t , h                                                          (3)
                                                        ct ,ht At



where At represents the current period choice set, which will be defined later. The term
in square brackets in equation (2) represents the utility cost of temptation. The cost
of temptation is proportional to the felicity you could enjoy if you only cared about
the present u(~    ~ t ) minus the felicity you actually enjoy given your current consumption
              ct , h
and housing decisions u(ct , ht ). The parameter  captures the degree of temptation. This
model nests standard preferences, as temptation disappears when  = 0.
    Temptation preferences have been applied in a number of macroeconomic models
(Amador, Werning, and Angeletos, 2006; Krusell, Kuruscu, and Smith, 2010; Nakajima,
2012; Schlafmann, 2020). That said, temptation is not the only way to generate present-
biased households and therefore to create demand for commitment devices. The main
alternative is to use dynamically inconsistent preferences in the form of hyperbolic dis-
counting (Strotz, 1956; Laibson, 1997; Harris and Laibson, 2001). There are two main
advantages of the temptation model over the model with hyperbolic-discounting. First,
temptation preferences are dynamically consistent, which makes welfare analysis straight-
forward.4 Second, the importance of temptation preferences can be measured directly

   4
    For more information on the difficulty of welfare analysis under hyperbolic discounting, see Fang and
Silverman (2009).

                                                        7
from observed consumption decisions using a linearized Euler equation, as in Kovacs,
Low, and Moran (2020).
Assets. Households who wish to save can invest in two types of assets: a fully liquid
financial asset, at , or less-liquid housing, ht . The financial asset, at , yields a certain return
r in each period. We abstract away from the idea of return risk in our model, therefore
we calibrate our model using risk-adjusted returns.
    Households can adjust housing in any period. We assume that housing exists on a
discrete grid with k different sizes: hk  {h1 , h2 , ..., hk }. The price of each house pt (hk )
depends on its size and is determined relative to the index price p    ¯t :


                                          pt (hk ) = g (hk )¯
                                                            pt

where 0 < g (hk )  1, g (hk ) > 0 and g (hk ) < 0. House prices grow at a constant rate,
1 + rH , over time, representing a fixed gross return on the housing asset, therefore the
initial index price determines all other house prices for each time period:


                              ¯t = (1 + rH )¯
                              p             pt-1 .       t given p
                                                                 ¯1                             (4)


   Buying or selling a home incurs a fixed cost, which is a fraction F of the price of the
home:
                                        F pt (hk ).

   We assume that housing markets are segmented, therefore renters are only permitted
to live in the smallest available house (h1 ).5 We assume that the cost of renting is
proportional to the price of this unit:

                                          rentt = pt (h1 ).

where  represents rental scale.
    Note that we abstract from the option to save in retirement accounts, as we want
to focus our attention on the choice between liquid assets and housing. This seems
like a reasonable simplification, as most households hold very little in retirement assets.
As Kaplan and Violante (2014) note, the median household keeps only $950 in their
retirement account, according to the Survey of Consumer Finances. In Section A.7.2, we
consider sensitivity to this assumption.
Mortgages. The most widely used mortgage contract in the U.S. is the fully-amortizing

  5
      For evidence of segmentation in housing markets, see Greenwald and Guren (2019).

                                                     8
fixed-rate mortgage.6 Therefore we assume that mortgages are of this kind with regular
required mortgage payments that force households to gradually build up wealth in the
form of home equity. As a result, housing may act as a commitment device not only
because of its illiquidity, but also because of the regular mortgage payments mpt every
period.
       The mortgage balance for households who buy a house at time t is

                                  mt+1 = (1 -  )pt (ht )(1 + rM )                                   (5)


where  is the down-payment households choose to pay, but at least 10 % of the home's
actual value,  min = 0.1. The law-of-motion for existing mortgages on the other hand is

                                   mt+1 = (mt - mpt )(1 + rM )                                      (6)


where mpt represents the required mortgage payment at time t. We assume that mort-
gages are fully-amortizing with constant-level payment plans, as is the case for the vast
majority of mortgages in the United States, therefore households must make equal mort-
gage payments mpt every year that they own the house until they pay off the mortgage.
We assume that all mortgage debt must be paid off by age W when households retire.
Thus households make fixed repayments each year based on the following formula:

                                                (1 + rM )s
                                     mpt =      s          M j
                                                               mt                                   (7)
                                                j =1 (1 + r )


where the required payment depends on s = W - t + 1 which is the number of periods
until retirement. If there exists a positive mortgage balance mt > 0 at the time a house
is sold, the value of the house is used to repay the mortgage and the remaining home
equity goes to the household. As households are required to pay off their mortgages by
the time of retirement, the terminal condition, mW +1 = 0, is satisfied.
   If households receive large negative income shocks such that they cannot make their
mortgage payment, they are forced to default on their mortgage. In this situation, house-
holds are forced to sell their home and repay their remaining mortgage debt.7

   6
      These mortgages accounted for approximately two-thirds of mortgage origination in the U.S. during
the 2000's (Amromin et al., 2018). The prevalence of these mortgage features began with the passage
of the National Housing Act in 1934 which created the Federal Housing Administration (FHA). By
offering to insure mortgages, the FHA was able to insist on fixed-rate mortgages with constant-level
fully-amortizing payment plans (Wiedemer and Baker, 2012). The Dodd-Frank Financial Reform Bill of
2010 reaffirmed these standards by introducing the concept of a "qualified" mortgage that requires fixed
rate mortgages to have fully amortizing payments.
    7
      In the case where mortgage debt is larger than the house value plus transaction costs, then the
remaining debt is written off and the government provides a minimum consumption floor. This modeling
choice ensures that households never experience infinite negative utility.

                                                   9
    In our baseline model, we assume that households are not allowed to increase the size
of their mortgage using cash-out refinancing or home equity loans. While this makes hous-
ing more illiquid than in reality, it is consistent with evidence that homeowners are often
not allowed to extract home equity when they need it most (i.e. when their income falls).
DeFusco and Mondragon (2018) highlight that employment documentation requirements
prevent many homeowners from refinancing when they lose their job. Moreover, Boar,
Gorea, and Midrigan (2020) find that there are substantial frictions that prevent home-
owners from extracting home equity. They highlight that payment-to-income ratios often
bind on households that have experienced negative income shocks. For these reasons, we
believe it is worthwhile to assume that when household income falls, households will have
to rely on their liquid asset buffer, rather than extract home equity.8
Income. Each household i receives idiosyncratic labor income, yi,t , in every period before
retirement, t  W , which is assumed to evolve according to the following:


                                            ln yi,t = gt + zi,t                                       (8)

where gt is a deterministic age profile approximated by a third-order age-polynomial,
while zi,t is an idiosyncratic shock to log income that is described by an AR(1) Markov
process:

                                         zi,t = zi,t-1 + i,t                                          (9)
                                                    2
                                         i,t  N (0,   )
                                                   2
                                        i,0  N (0, 0 ).

Note that we let the initial variance of the income innovations, i,0 , to be different from
the subsequent periods' in order to account for initial heterogeneity in income at age 22
in the data.
Taxes and Pensions. We incorporate a number of realistic features into our model,
which are important if the model is going to have a chance to fit observed life-cycle pro-
files of consumption and wealth accumulation. More specifically, we include progressive
income taxation, large and realistic tax benefits to homeownership, and social-security
based retirement. We build progressive income taxation into the model following Keane
and Wasi (2016), who assume a nonlinear tax function:

                                  (yi,t , ai,t ) = e1 +2 log(yi,t +rai,t -d )                        (10)



   8
    In addition, we have experimented with allowing home equity withdrawal in our model and find that
the standard model still has difficulty matching the large share of homeowners holding zero liquid assets.

                                                     10
where the parameters 1 and 2 determine the progressivity of the aggregate tax sched-
ule. These parameters are estimated based on income and tax data from the Current
Population Survey, therefore  (yi,t , ai,t ) represents the sum of federal, state, and munic-
ipal taxes, plus mandatory social security contributions. Taxes are levied on both labor
income yi,t and capital gains rai,t , although it is important to note that capital gains
to owner-occupied housing are not taxed in our model, thus providing a tax benefit to
homeownership.
    In addition, d represents the deduction which is subtracted from income before the
                                                                               standard
tax is applied. We define d to be the greater of either the standard deduction d        or
mortgage interest payments. This allows our tax schedule to incorporate the mortgage
interest tax deduction, a second large subsidy to homeownership in the United States.
This results in an after-tax income for households given by the following equation:

                                      yi,t = yi,t -  (yi,t , ai,t )


    Following retirement at age W , households get a progressive social security-style pen-
sion determined by the following rule:

                       yi,t = max SS Income Floor, Annual PIA(yW )                                (11)


where Annual PIA(yW ) is the annual social security benefit (the primary insurance
amount) received upon retirement, based on average indexed monthly earnings (AIME),
which we approximate based on the last working period income, yW .9 We calibrate the
social security income floor and primary insurance amount based on U.S. legislation from
2015.10
Functional Form. Turning to the choice of functional form for the felicity function,
u, we follow Attanasio et al. (2012) and let home ownership affect the felicity function
flexibly. This is important as we do not have a strong prior on whether housing utility is
additive or multiplicative, therefore we want a very flexible functional form that includes
both options.

                                ct 1-
                                nt
             u(ct , ht ) = nt           exp (ht , nt ) + µ(ht , nt ) - Iht =ht-1                  (12)
                                1-


   9
     In reality, to calculate AIME, the worker's wage during the years of employment is first expressed
in today's dollars, then the wages of the highest 35 years are summed up. This sum is then divided by
420 (12*35) in order to get the real average monthly earnings.
  10
     The PIA is a piecewise linear function with two break points. Currently, the PIA is computed as
90% of AIME up to breakpoint 1, 32% of AIME up to breakpoint 2, and 15% of AIME up to the social
security wage base.

                                                  11
where nt is the exogenously given equivalence scale capturing the evolution of household
composition over the life-cycle,  is the risk aversion parameter,  and µ are housing
preference parameters, and (ht , kt ) represents the benefit of owning house ht with family
size nt . Housing affects immediate utility both directly and via the marginal utility of
consumption. The direct effect represented by µ(ht , nt ) makes the utility function non-
homothetic in consumption and housing. We will later calibrate the importance of µ and
 in explaining observed demand for housing.
    The utility benefit of housing depends on the size of the house, h, which exists on a
discrete grid with k values: hk  {h1 , h2 , ..., hk }. We assume a segmented housing market
by only allowing the smallest house, h1 , to be rented, which also provides lower utility
than owning the same unit. In addition, the utility benefit of housing (ht , kt ) increases
with the size of the house ht and decreases with the size of the family.

                                                         ht
                                       (ht , kt ) = ln                                            (13)
                                                         nt

Whenever a household adjusts housing (i.e. when Iht =ht-1 equals one in equation (12)),
it suffers a utility cost, .11 The utility cost, besides the financial transaction cost, plays
an important role in our model, as it increases the illiquidity of housing, thus making
housing more useful as a commitment device.
Budget Set. We define the budget set, At , as follows:

                   
                   
                    xt  R+ : xt  at + yt - Iownt  mpt - (1 - Iown
                                                              t   )rentt
                   
                       if no housing adjustment
                   
               At = xt  R+ : xt  at + yt - (1 + F )pt (ht ) - mt+1                                (14)
                                                                (1 + rM )
                   
                                  + (1 - F )pt (ht-1 ) - mt
                           if housing adjustment

This determines the choice set for households each period, which in turn pins down the
most tempting alternative each period. Households will always be tempted to spend all
of their available resources on either consumption or housing.
Recursive Formulation. We define the recursive formulation as follows:

                                Vt (t ) = max Vt0 (t ), Vt1 (t )                                  (15)


  11
     Here we think of the non-monetary cost of changing homes, like finding new schools, setting up new
utility providers, facing stress etc.

                                                  12
where Vt0 (t ), and Vt1 (t ) are the value functions conditional on not adjusting and ad-
justing housing. We define the vector of state variables t = {at , zt , mt , ht-1 }. Those
who choose not to adjust in period t solve the following dynamic problem:

                       Vt0 (t ) = max U (ct , ht , c    ~ t ) +  Et Vt+1 (t+1 ),
                                                   ~t , h                                               (16)
                                    {ct ,at+1 }


                                    subject to:

                  at+1 = (1 + r) at + yt - ct - Iown
                                                   t mpt - (1 - Iown
                                                                 t   )rentt
                         
                         exp(gt + zt ),       if t  W
                    yt =                                                                                (17)
                         SS Benefit(y ), if t > W
                                       W

                    zt = zt-1 + t           and          ct > 0

Those who choose to adjust housing in period t solve the following dynamic problem:

                  Vt1 (t ) =          max              U (ct , ht , c    ~ t ) +  Et Vt+1 (t+1 ),
                                                                    ~t , h                              (18)
                               {ct ,ht ,mt+1 ,at+1 }


                                    subject to:
                                                                    mt+1
    at+1 = (1 + r) at + yt - ct - (1 + F )pt (ht ) +                        + (1 - F )pt (ht-1 ) - mt
                                                                  (1 + rM )
    mt+1  (1 -  min )pt (ht )(1 + rM )
           
           exp(gt + zt ),       if t  W                                                                 (19)
      yt =
           SS Benefit(y ), if t > W
                         W

       zt = zt-1 + t     and      ct > 0


3      Key Model Insights

    In this section, we demonstrate two implications of our model that differ from those
of the standard model. First, our model generates a demand for illiquidity that is absent
in a standard model. Second, the availability of housing helps households save for retire-
ment. To better highlight the implications of temptation and commitment, we focus on
a simplified version of our model in this section.
   More specifically, we simplify our model by assuming that there is only one size of
housing to rent and buy; that housing does not enter the utility function; that labor
income is deterministic; and that the returns on liquid assets and housing are the same.
Table 1 presents the parameter restrictions imposed in the simplified model.

                                                          13
                                    Table 1: Parameters in the Simplified Model

            Parameter                                                                             Value

            k                            Housing options                                               1
                                         Housing preference (MU of consumption)                        0
            µ                            Housing preference (non-homotheticity)                        0
            z                            Idiosyncratic shock to log income                             0
            r                            Net return on liquid asset                                    0.021
            rH                           Net return on housing                                         0.021

Note: This table presents the parameter assumptions that we use to simplify our model in Section 3,
relative to the full model that we calibrate in Section 4.


3.1        Demand for Illiquidity

    In this simplified model, households with standard preferences ( = 0) have no de-
mand for housing. Homeownership comes with sizeable transaction costs, yet delivers no
benefits in terms of either utility or returns. This is demonstrated in Figure 1, which
presents the life-cycle profiles of assets and consumption in the model without tempta-
tion. The left panel presents asset accumulation, which reaches a peak at age 65 when the
household retires. The household saves only in liquid assets and never purchases a home.
The right panel presents income and consumption over the life-cycle. We see that income
rises in a hump shape, before dropping drastically at the time of retirement. Despite this
hump-shaped income process, the household is able to perfectly smooth consumption
between the early 30s and the end of life.

            Figure 1: Life-Cycle Asset and Consumption Profiles without Temptation

                          Asset Accumulation                             Income and Consumption
                                                             4
                Net Wealth                                         Income
      20        Liquid Wealth                                      Consumption
                                                            3.5
                Housing (0 or 1)
                                                             3
      15
                                                            2.5


                                                             2
      10
                                                            1.5


                                                             1
       5

                                                            0.5


       0                                                     0
                30       40        50     60   70   80        20    30     40      50     60      70       80
                                   Age                                            Age


Note: This figure shows the life-cycle profiles of assets, income, and consumption in a model without
temptation, where housing delivers equal return to liquid assets and provides no direct utility benefit.


                                                            14
     In contrast, households with temptation demand housing, despite the fact that housing
delivers no direct financial or utility benefits. In the left panel of Figure 2, we see that
households with temptation preferences begin to accumulate liquid assets relatively late in
life. This is because liquid wealth accumulation is difficult in the presence of temptation,
owing to the disutility cost of deviating from your most tempting consumption alternative
each period. As a result, households purchase housing despite the presence of sizeable
transaction costs. This is driven by the fact that housing provides commitment, which
helps households accumulating wealth for two reasons. First, households are able to
reduce temptation by locking their wealth in illiquid housing; second, households are able
to bind themselves to save in the future by committing to regular mortgage payments
that build up wealth in the form of home equity.12
    Households are able to decrease the utility cost of temptation by locking away their
wealth in housing. In other words, temptation and commitment generate a preference
for illiquidity. As a result, households spend a significant fraction of their lives holding
no liquid wealth despite owning housing.

             Figure 2: Life-Cycle Asset and Consumption Profiles with Temptation

                      Asset Accumulation                          Income and Consumption
                                                      4
       14
            Net Wealth                                      Income
            Liquid Wealth                            3.5    Consumption
       12   Housing (0 or 1)
                                                      3
       10
                                                     2.5
        8
                                                      2

        6
                                                     1.5

        4
                                                      1

        2                                            0.5


        0                                             0
             30      40        50    60    70   80     20    30     40      50     60      70   80
                               Age                                         Age


Note: This figure shows the life-cycle profiles of assets, income, and consumption in a model with
temptation, where housing delivers equal return to liquid assets and provides no direct utility benefit.


    The right panel of Figure 2 shows the implications of household portfolio decisions
for consumption. Since tempted households do not accumulate liquid wealth early in life,
consumption closely tracks income until shortly before home purchase.13 After buying a
house, consumption continues to follow income closely: the difference between the two is
  12
      This has been highlighted by Shiller (2014), who says, "One nice thing about investing in a house is
that you're committed to a mortgage payment. So if you don't take out a home equity line of credit or
do something like that, you will accumulate wealth."
   13
      Temptation causes households to accumulate their downpayment quickly prior to home purchase.
Consistent with this finding, Haurin, Hendershott, and Wachter (1997) find that households save the
majority of their downpayment in the year prior to homeownership. Similarly, Charles and Hurst (2002)
find that the vast majority of mortgage applicants have liquid wealth less than 10% of their predicted
house value at the time of mortgage application.

                                                     15
equal to the mandatory mortgage repayment each period. After age 55, when households
start accumulating liquid wealth, consumption drops steadily. This is the consequence
of temptation: households do not accumulate much wealth for retirement early in life,
therefore consumption declines when nearing retirement.

3.2     Access to Commitment Increases Wealth Accumulation
    In this section, we study how the availability of housing impacts the wealth accumula-
tion of households. We demonstrate that in a standard model, the presence of housing has
no impact on wealth accumulation, as housing delivers identical returns to liquid assets
in our simplified model. In contrast, in a temptation model, the presence of housing en-
ables households to accumulate greater wealth for retirement, as illiquid housing enables
households to "lock away" their wealth and therefore mitigate the effects of temptation.
    To see this, we look at patterns of wealth accumulation, imposing different assump-
tions on the availability of housing and household preferences. We therefore simulate
households under four scenarios: with and without housing and with and without temp-
tation. This allows us to observe the difference in wealth accumulation when housing is
not available (i.e. when a savings commitment device is not available).

                                           Figure 3: The Change in Wealth when Housing is Available
                                      3
                                               Standard Model
                                               Temptation Model
                                     2.5
             Net Wealth Difference




                                      2


                                     1.5


                                      1


                                     0.5


                                      0

                                                  5               10            15            20   25   30
                                                                       Duration of Homeownership

Note: This figure shows the difference in net wealth when housing is available versus when housing is
unavailable. The red line shows the difference for a tempted household, while the blue line with round
markers shows the difference for a standard household. The duration of homeownership is measured for
a household that owns housing and all other simulations are compared based on age.


    Figure 3 presents our results from these simulations using our simplified model. The
solid red line shows the difference in net wealth for a tempted household that has access
to housing, relative to an identical household that does not have access to housing. The
line is increasing over the duration of home ownership, indicating that the presence of

                                                                                16
housing changes the savings behavior of the tempted households. After buying a home,
households are required to repay the mortgage in each period, which acts as a self-imposed
commitment device that forces them to accumulate home equity. When housing is not
available, households have no way to mitigate their temptation, therefore they accumulate
less wealth by the time of retirement.
    It is interesting to note that the red line begins to decline towards the end of the 30
year window that we consider, as households near retirement. This is because tempted
households without access to housing decide to accumulate liquid assets rapidly imme-
diately prior to retirement. When the tempted household does not have access to a
commitment device, they suffer a temptation cost for every period that they hold liquid
assets, therefore they try to accumulate wealth for retirement as late and as quickly as
possible. They catch up with the tempted household with housing, although this effect
is only partial.
    In contrast, the blue line with round markers in Figure 3 shows the difference in wealth
accumulation for a standard household that has access to housing, relative to an identical
household that does not have access to housing. The line is horizontal, indicating that
the presence of housing does not change the savings behavior of the standard household.
In this model, the type of asset choice does not impact the amount of asset accumulation.


4     Calibration and Model Fit

   We divide our model parameters into two sets. The first set (P) contains parameters
that we assign based on external evidence. The second set () contains parameters that
we internally calibrate using the Method of Simulated Moments (MSM), which minimizes
the distance between key moments in the model and the data.

4.1    External Parameter Values

  In this section we discuss the parameters that are assigned based on external evidence.
The complete list of parameter values can be found in Table A.1
    Asset Returns. Traditional models rationalize the behavior of the wealthy hand-
to-mouth by assuming that illiquid assets deliver excess returns relative to all available
liquid assets. However, this assumption does not hold when we look at specific assets
such as housing and equities. There exists a wide body of empirical literature showing
that housing delivers lower risk-adjusted returns than publicly traded equities. This
poses a challenge for traditional models of hand-to-mouth behavior. If a liquid asset
such as equities were added to the model of Kaplan and Violante (2014), the wealthy
hand-to-mouth would disappear.

                                            17
    We set ourselves the challenge of rationalizing the large share of the wealthy hand-
to-mouth, despite the presence of a high-return liquid asset. We calculate average real
risk-adjusted returns between 1950 and 2016 using data from the Federal Reserve Bank
of St. Louis. Details of the computation can be found in Appendix A.2, while the results
are reported in Table 2. The average real risk-adjusted return is 5.40% for stocks and
2.10% for housing.

                                     Table 2: Real Asset Returns

                                                Mean           St.Dev.        Risk-adj. Mean

         Stock                                   8.24           16.82                5.40
         Housing                                 2.34            5.06                2.10

        Note: Stock: S&P 500, Housing: Case-Shiller index augmented by average housing
        service flow, maintenance cost and home insurance.


    Our calculated returns show that there exists a liquid asset (stock) that delivers
substantially higher risk-adjusted returns than housing. Based on the above findings,
we set a real risk-adjusted return of 2.1% for housing (rH = 0.021) and 5.4% for liquid
assets (r = 0.054) in our baseline model. This calibration is consistent with a wide body
of literature including Flavin and Yamashita (2002), Goetzmann and Spiegel (2002),
and Piazzesi, Schneider, and Tuzel (2007) who show that housing delivers worse risk-
adjusted returns than stock, even when accounting for imputed rents and other benefits
to homeownership.14
    Temptation Parameter. We set  = 0.28 following the parameter estimate ob-
tained by Kovacs, Low, and Moran (2020). These authors develop two complementary
strategies to estimate the strength of temptation: first, a semi-structural Euler equation
approach using observed consumption data, and second, a simulation based approach
targeting the life-cycle profiles of consumption and wealth accumulation. The authors
apply these two estimation strategies to the U.S. using data from the Consumer Expen-
diture Survey (CEX) and find similar estimates of  in both cases. We opt to use the
point estimate from the Euler equation method, as this semi-structural approach requires
fewer assumptions about the economic environment faced by households.
    By assuming that households suffer from temptation, our model implies a desire
for illiquidity which is consistent with a growing experimental literature. For instance,
  14
    We compute imputed rents using the balance sheet approach, following Piazzesi, Schneider, and
Tuzel (2007) among others, which we describe in Appendix A.2. That said, Jord`        a et al. (2019) develop
an alternative method to compute imputed rents. Based on their imputation, housing and equities in
the U.S. have delivered roughly equivalent returns since the 1950s. For this reason, in Appendix A.7.1
we evaluate the sensitivity of our results to r = rH . We find that it has little effect on our core results.

                                                     18
Ashraf, Karlan, and Yin (2006) conduct a field experiment where households are offered
a savings account that does not permit withdrawals before a certain date or before a
certain savings goal is achieved. The authors find that this savings account is taken up
by a large share of households and leads to increased savings. Similarly, Beshears et al.
(2020) conduct a lab experiment to study how individuals divide money between liq-
uid and illiquid accounts. They find that illiquid accounts with higher early-withdrawal
penalties attract more deposits.
    House Sizes and House Prices. Determining the set of available house sizes in
the data is difficult because we only observe house prices for those that have chosen to
purchase a house. Nonetheless, we calculate the distribution of house prices for households
between age 20 and 30. We use this distribution of house prices to define the different
house sizes, and these sizes are then kept constant over time. However, the price of each
house will evolve over time following equation (4). In our model, we set the maximum
house price (size) at 8 times average income at age 22, corresponding to the 90th percentile
of observed house prices for the age group 20-30 in the data, and we set the minimum price
to be equal to average income. We allocate the remaining points on the house size grid
to a logarithmic scale, following Nakajima and Telyukova (2020). We assume that there
are k = 7 different house sizes available. We impose the same house size structure on the
models with and without temptation. Following Attanasio et al. (2012), we impose a 5%
fixed cost of moving, F , representing the cost of real estate agents, lawyers, surveyors, and
moving companies. This is consistent with empirical evidence showing that transaction
costs for housing are usually at least 5% of the asset value (OECD, 2011). Finally, we
assume that capital gains to owner-occupied housing are not taxable.
   Mortgages. We calculate the average mortgage rate over the period between 1950
and 2016 based on the 30-year fixed rate mortgage. The average mortgage rate is 4.1%,
therefore we calibrate the net mortgage rate, rM = 0.041, which is two percentage points
higher than the risk-adjusted return on housing. We assume that each household can
borrow up to 90% of the value of its home, hence the minimum downpayment requirement,
 is set to be 10%. Following the U.S. tax code, we assume that mortgage interest
payments are fully deductible from taxable income.
   Income and Taxes. We calibrate income over the life-cycle in two steps. First, we
use the estimated parameters for the stochastic component of income from Choukhmane
(2019). We then estimate a third-order age polynomial on income in order to approximate
the deterministic part of labor income. For the parameters of the non-linear tax function
we use the estimation results by Keane and Wasi (2016) and convert them to 2015 units.
We parametrize the progressive social security-style pension based on U.S. legislation
from 2015. All income parameters are listed in Table A.1 in the Appendix.



                                             19
    Demographics. In the model, we account for changes in household composition over
the life-cycle by assuming an exogenous and deterministic life-cycle profile for household
composition. This is performed using the equivalence scale nt which enters into the utility
function. To calculate the equivalence scale nt , we follow the OECD methodology using
PSID data. This methodology assigns weight 1 to the first adult in the household, weight
0.7 to the second adult and each subsequent person aged 14 and over, and weight 0.5 to
each child aged under 14. We then average by age in order to construct nt .
   Initial wealth. We assume zero initial housing wealth. We set the initial liquid
wealth distribution to match the distribution for 22-25-year-old households in the PSID.
   Prices. All variables in the model are expressed in 2015 prices. Where necessary,
exogenous parameters from the existing literature are adjusted to represent 2015 prices.


4.2    Calibrated Parameters

    The remaining parameters in the model,  = {, , µ,  }, the the impatience param-
eter, the risk aversion parameter, the housing preference (taste) parameters respectively,
and the utility cost of changing home, are internally calibrated by the Method of Sim-
ulated Moments such that the model matches aggregate statistics of consumption and
wealth accumulation. This second stage takes the first stage calibrated parameters fixed,
^ , while choosing  to minimizes some measure of the distance, f , between the empirical
P
moments, me , and the simulated moments, ms (P  ^ , ).

                                   ^ , )  [ms (P
                                f (P           ^ , ) - me ]                           (20)

We choose to target the mean life-cycle profiles of four variables: consumption, liquid
assets, net housing wealth, and the share of homeowners with zero liquid assets. To
focus on the working life, we target the mean of each variable between ages 25 and 65,
giving 164 moment conditions. We also target the average homeownership rate and the
average share of homeowners who move in a given year, giving two additional moments.
Altogether we target Nm = 166 moment conditions to calibrate the five parameters in .
    In order to capture the fact that these targeted moments vary substantially in both
scale and volatility, we use a weighting matrix, W, to create our scalar-valued final dis-
tance function, f W , equal to the weighted sum of squared deviations of simulated moments
from their corresponding empirical counterparts:


                                ^ , )  f (P
                           f W (P         ^ , ) · W -1 · f (P
                                                            ^ , )                     (21)

where W is a diagonal Nm x Nm matrix that includes the variance of the targeted moments
along the main diagonal. In effect, this means that our MSM approach places more weight

                                             20
on moments that are more precisely estimated in the data.15
    Pinning down the structural parameters requires that each structural parameter in 
has an independent effect on at least one targeted moment in ms (P   ^ , ). More formally,
our model is identified if the mapping from structural parameters  to targeted moments
    ^ , ) is full rank near the true . In Section 5 we discuss the way in which structural
ms (P
parameters impact targeted moments.
    Our MSM results are based on simulations for 1,000 households for two scenarios each.
In the first scenario, we set  to be 0.28 following Kovacs, Low, and Moran (2020) and
we call this the model with temptation. In the second scenario, we set parameter  to
be zero and we call this the model without temptation. As a result, we can compare the
ability of these two models to match the empirical patterns of household consumption
and portfolio allocation together with their calibrated parameters.
   We target the mean life-cycle profiles of consumption, liquid assets, net housing
wealth, and the share of homeowners with no liquid wealth between ages 25 and 65.
We also target the average homeownership rate and the average share of homeowners
who move in a given year. All data comes from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics
(PSID) waves 1999 to 2015. Detailed information on the sample is contained in Appendix
A.3. In this section, we describe each targeted moment in turn.
    Consumption. We compute real nondurable consumption following the classification
in Blundell, Pistaferri, and Saporta-Eksten (2016). With this classification our consump-
tion measure covers approximately 70 percent of consumption expenditure on nondurable
goods and services.
    Liquid assets. We compute liquid assets as the sum of bank account deposits and
publicly traded stock. We believe that publicly traded stock are essentially liquid because
there are very low transaction costs on these assets, thus it would be easy for households
to sell their stock position for consumption smoothing purposes.
   Net housing wealth. We measure net housing wealth as the reported value of the
household's main residence minus all mortgage debt on this home. We exclude net wealth
from other real estate.
    Wealthy Hand-to-Mouth. We target the share of homeowners with liquid assets
less than two weeks of income, which we refer to as the wealthy hand-to-mouth. This is an
appealing description: these households are wealthy as they own a house, yet live hand-
to-mouth with essentially zero liquid wealth that can be used for consumption smoothing
(Kaplan, Violante, and Weidner, 2014).

  15
   We choose to use the diagonal weighting matrix rather than the full variance-covariance matrix as
many authors have found that the full variance-covariance matrix leads to biased estimates in small
samples. See Altonji and Segal (1996) for example.

                                                21
       Homeownership. We target the average homeownership rate between ages 25 - 65.
   Movers. We target the average share of homeowners that move for non-work reasons
each year. We exclude moves for work since that is outside the scope of our model.

4.2.1      Calibrated Parameter Values

   Table 3 presents the results for the calibrated preference parameters: time preference
( ), risk aversion ( ), taste for housing (µ, ), and the disutility of moving (). The first
column shows the calibrated parameters for the temptation model. The second column
shows the calibrated parameters for the model without temptation, where we turn off
temptation.
    The model with temptation yields an annual discount factor ( ) of 0.96 and a risk
aversion parameter ( ) of 2.41, consistent with most of the macroeconomic literature.
The additive utility benefit of housing (µ) is roughly 0.3, while the non-separable utility
benefit of housing () is 0.16. It is worth noting that the calibrated positive value of 
implies that consumption and housing are complements. This is in line with the results
from Attanasio et al. (2012) who calibrate a similar utility function for housing, albeit
with two types of homes, and find that consumption and housing are complements.16 We
find that the utility cost of moving () is 0.43 in the temptation model. For an easier
interpretation, we calculate the consumption equivalence of parameter, , by expressing
it as the amount of additional consumption that households require to be indifferent
between moving and not moving homes. An average homeowner aged 25, for example,
has to face a utility cost that is equivalent to an additional $6, 000 of consumption if it
decides to buy a bigger house.17
    The model without temptation yields both a lower impatience parameter of ( = 0.91)
and a lower risk aversion parameter ( = 1.88). Moreover, without temptation the model
features significantly higher housing taste parameters (µ = 0.59 and  = 0.28). This
is because the model without temptation requires strong discounting of future utility
and greater tolerance to risk to try to explain the large share of the wealthy hand-to-
mouth, while matching the substantial housing wealth accumulation over the life-cycle.
Compared to the model with temptation, the model without temptation delivers a higher
  16
    Since µ is positive, an increase in housing has a direct positive effect on utility. In addition, it is
worth noting that a positive  implies Edgeworth complementarity of consumption and home ownership,
as the cross derivative of utility with respect to consumption and housing is positive

                           u(ct , ht )/ct
                                          =  (ht , nt )c- 
                                                        t exp((ht , nt )) > 0
                               ht
Thus in the model with temptation, housing and consumption are complements, whereas in the model
without temptation housing and consumption are (weak) complements.
  17
     Naturally, the consumption equivalence is different depending on the age of households, their current
housing status, and their next period housing status.

                                                    22
                          Table 3: Internally calibrated parameters

                                                          Temptation    No Temptation
       PARAMETER                                            Model           Model

       Time preference                                       0.959           0.914
                                                            (0.000)         (0.000)

       Risk aversion                                         2.415           1.884
                                                            (0.052)         (0.019)

       Housing utility (separable)                  µ        0.291           0.591
                                                            (0.000)         (0.004)

       Housing utility (non-separable)                       0.160           0.282
                                                            (0.007)         (0.003)

       Utility cost of housing adjustment                    0.437           0.887
                                                            (0.037)         (0.039)


       Goodness of Fit                            ^ , )
                                             f W (P   ^      5.667           10.059

      Note: In the temptation model we set  = 0.28. In the model without temptation we set
       = 0. Goodness of fit is defined by equation (21).



value of utility cost of moving ( = 0.88).


4.3      Model Fit

Baseline Model with Temptation. We first analyze the performance of their cali-
brated model with temptation. Figure 4 shows the simulated life-cycle moments from
the temptation model (the solid blue line) and the targeted moments from the PSID (the
black dotted line). In general, the temptation model obtains a good fit of the life-cycle
profile of consumption and liquid asset accumulation. The model obtains a good fit of
net housing wealth up until age 50, although after this point, net housing wealth starts
diverging a bit as households approach retirement. The divergence of net housing wealth
arises from the simplifying assumption in our model that all mortgages must be paid off
by age 65, when households are forced to retire. In reality, some households continue to
work and/or maintain positive mortgage balances after age 65, which helps explain this
difference. Notice that, apart from very young ages, household's wealth is concentrated in
illiquid housing: by the age of 40, housing wealth accounts for about 70% of the average
U.S. household's wealth. This overwhelming dominance of housing wealth only starts

                                               23
declining later in life, close to retirement, reaching roughly 60% by age 65.

                                   Figure 4: Fit of the Temptation Model

                Nondurable Consumption                                            Liquid Assets
  40k                                                         150k
                                                                                                             PSID
                                                                                                             Model
  30k
                                                              100k

  20k

                                                              50k
  10k


   0k                                                          0k
           30          40           50           60                    30          40           50           60

                  Net Housing Wealth                                        Hand-to-Mouth Homeowners
 250k
                                                              60%

 200k                                                         50%

                                                              40%
 150k
                                                              30%
 100k
                                                              20%
  50k
                                                              10%

   0k                                                          0%
           30          40           50           60                    30          40           50           60
                             Age                                                         Age
Note: This figure shows the life-cycle moments from the temptation model (solid blue line) and the PSID (black dotted
line). The moments from the PSID are shown with bands of 1.96 standard deviations around the mean. Table A.4 in the
Appendix shows the fit of the other moments that we target: the average homeownership rate and the average share of
homeowners moving each period.



   Most importantly, the temptation model obtains a good fit of the wealthy hand-to-
mouth. In the temptation model, wealthy hand-to-mouth behaviour is mainly driven by
the fact that households are willing to withstand fluctuations in consumption in order to
obtain the commitment benefit of illiquid assets. The age profile for the wealthy hand-
to-mouth is hump-shaped with a peak around age 45, when roughly 25% of households
own a home but hold essentially zero liquid wealth. These findings are very similar to
what Kaplan, Violante, and Weidner (2014) document using the U.S. Survey of Consumer
Finances: they find a hump-shaped life-cycle profile of the wealthy hand-to-mouth with
a peak of around 22% at age 40.
    As noted by Parker (2017), hand-to-mouth status may be either situational (i.e. a
result of poor income shocks or temporary illiquidity, as in Kaplan and Violante (2014))
or reflective of persistent household traits (i.e. preferences or behavioral characteristics).
Our model of temptation and commitment implies a relatively high persistence of hand-
to-mouth status. In our calibrated model, there is a roughly 60% probability that a
household who is wealthy hand-to-mouth in one year remains wealthy hand-to-mouth
two years later. This is consistent with empirical evidence from the PSID showing that
hand-to-mouth status is highly persistent in the data (Aguiar, Bils, and Boar, 2020).

                                                         24
Model without Temptation. We next analyze the performance of the model where
we turn off temptation ( = 0) and re-calibrate the remaining preference parameters.
We document that our two-asset model without temptation, of the type analysed by
Kaplan and Violante (2014), cannot fit the large share of the wealthy hand-to-mouth
when housing does not deliver higher risk-adjusted returns than liquid assets.
   Figure 5 shows the simulated life-cycle moments from the model without temptation
(the solid blue line) and the targeted moments from the PSID (the black dotted line).

                               Figure 5: Fit of the No Temptation Model

                Nondurable Consumption                                            Liquid Assets
  40k                                                         150k
                                                                                                             PSID
                                                                                                             Model
  30k
                                                              100k

  20k

                                                              50k
  10k


   0k                                                          0k
           30          40           50           60                    30          40           50          60

                  Net Housing Wealth                                        Hand-to-Mouth Homeowners
 250k
                                                              60%

 200k                                                         50%

                                                              40%
 150k
                                                              30%
 100k
                                                              20%
  50k
                                                              10%

   0k                                                          0%
           30          40           50           60                    30          40           50          60
                             Age                                                         Age
Note: This figure shows the life-cycle moments from our no temptation model (solid blue line) and the PSID (black
dotted line), where we impose  = 0. The moments from the PSID are shown with bands of 1.96 standard deviations
around the mean.


    We observe that the model without temptation obtains a good match of the life-cycle
profile of consumption. After age 50, the model over predicts (similarly to the model with
temptation) housing wealth accumulation. However, in contrast to the temptation model,
in the model without temptation there is no combination of the preference parameters
that can match the large share of wealthy hand-to-mouth households without failing to
match other targeted moments. This is despite the fact that the model is relatively
flexible and allows for impatience, different types of housing taste, and varying degrees
of risk aversion.
   High impatience is unable to explain the large share of wealthy hand-to-mouth house-
holds without compromising model fit elsewhere. For instance, if  were lowered below
our calibrated value in the model without temptation (     ^ = 0.91), we would obtain a
better fit of the wealthy hand-to-mouth, but a worse fit of the life-cycle profile of wealth

                                                         25
accumulation.
   Greater tolerance towards risk (i.e. lower  ) reduces the degree to which households
are worried about consumption fluctuations. However, it also reduces the degree to
which households accumulate wealth for a down-payment in order to purchase housing,
thus reducing the homeownership rate. As a result, a lower value of  slightly decreases
the share of the wealthy hand-to-mouth, while simultaneously increasing the share of
poor hand-to-mouth households.
    Higher housing taste (µ or ) is unable to explain the large share of the wealthy hand-
to-mouth. This is because higher housing taste makes homeowners more averse to losing
their homes, thus generating a stronger precautionary savings motive for homeowners.
This "housing smoothing" motive results in a smaller share of homeowners holding zero
liquid assets.



5      Implications for Consumption Behavior

    Understanding households' preference for illiquidity is interesting not only from a
theoretical point of view, but also for understanding the consumption response to income
shocks and fiscal stimulus payments. A growing macro literature argues that households
with low liquid assets are important in explaining aggregate consumption behavior.18 In
this section, we study the implications of the alternative view of illiquidity that we have
developed.
    First, we evaluate the ability of our model to match empirical evidence on hetero-
geneity in the marginal propensity to consume (MPC). Our most important finding is
that the average MPC in our model declines relatively slowly with shock size. In other
words, large income shocks still induce a sizeable increase in consumption. This result
is consistent with a growing empirical literature, but inconsistent with previous models
of hand-to-mouth behavior. To the best of our knowledge, our model is the first that is
able to replicate this empirical finding. In addition, our model fits well-known evidence
that MPCs decline slowly with wealth, but quickly with liquid assets.
    Next, we assess the implications for the design of targeted fiscal stimulus payments,
which depends crucially on MPC heterogeneity. We use our calibrated model to evaluate
the trade-off associated with targeting stimulus payments. We find that fiscal stimulus
is the most effective when the government targets households in the bottom 20% of the
income distribution.

  18
   See for instance Kaplan and Violante (2014), Carroll et al. (2017), Kaplan, Moll, and Violante (2018),
Auclert, Rognlie, and Straub (2018), Luetticke (2018), and Bayer et al. (2019).

                                                   26
5.1     MPC Heterogeneity: Model versus Data

    We use our calibrated model to study the consumption response to unanticipated and
transitory income shocks. The details of this procedure can be found in Appendix A.5.
We find that our model generates an average annual MPC of 0.43 in response to a $1,000
income shock. This lies well within the standard range of annual MPCs estimated by the
empirical literature. For instance, Carroll, Slacalek, Tokuoka, and White (2017) give a
comprehensive summary of the empirical literature and report that average annual MPC
estimates for the U.S. range between 0.2 and 0.6.

5.1.1    Heterogeneity by Shock Size

    To study the effect of shock size on consumption behavior, we experiment with chang-
ing the magnitude of the income shock. The results are contained in Table 4. We observe
that the average MPC declines only slowly with the size of the income shock. For in-
stance, changing the shock size from $1,000 to $10,000 only causes the average MPC to
decline from 0.43 to 0.29.

                            Table 4: MPC Heterogeneity by Shock Size

                                                                SHOCK SIZE
                                                      $1, 000       $5, 000       $10, 000

              MPC                                        0.43         0.37          0.29
                                                      (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.001)


            Note: Each coefficient represents the average annual MPC in our calibrated
            model. The procedure used to compute MPCs is described in Appendix A.5.


    This result is consistent with a growing empirical literature that finds that the aver-
age MPC remains large in response to large income shocks. Most similar to our analysis,
Fagereng, Holm, and Natvik (2019) study the consumption response to large and unan-
ticipated lottery winnings using administrative tax data from Norway. They find that
the average MPC only gradually declines as the size of the shock increases: households
that receive large payments still consume most of their payment shortly after receipt.
   In addition, Kueng (2018) studies the consumption response to large and anticipated
payments of the Alaska Permanent Fund and also finds a large MPC. In response to
an average payment of $4,600, Kueng (2018) finds a quarterly MPC of just under 0.3.19
  19
    While the early empirical literature suggested that MPCs were small for large shocks (Hsieh, 2003),
new empirical evidence has overturned this finding. More specifically, Kueng (2018) replicates the analysis
in Hsieh (2003) and shows that (i) the small and insignificant consumption response was a result of
nonclassical measurement error in income data attenuating the estimates, and (ii) the estimates in Hsieh
(2003) are of consumption elasticities rather than MPCs.

                                                    27
Finally, Aladangady et al. (2018) study the consumption response to the Earned Income
Tax Credit and also find a large MPC in response to this large and anticipated income
shock. This quasi-experimental evidence has been corroborated by survey evidence that
finds similar results. For instance, Bunn et al. (2018) and Fuster, Kaplan, and Zafar
(2018) both find a large MPC in response to large income shocks.
    Large MPCs in response to large income shocks cannot be explained by traditional
two-asset models. For instance, while the model of Kaplan and Violante (2014) obtains a
good fit of the average MPC out of small income shocks, it predates these recent empirical
findings and cannot rationalize large MPCs in response to large income shocks.20 Section
5.2 explores the reasons for these differences.

5.1.2    Heterogeneity by Asset Holdings

    There exists a large literature showing that liquidity is an important determinant
of MPC heterogeneity, most importantly Kaplan and Violante (2014). We assess the
predictive power of our model relative to existing literature. We find that the average
MPC in our model declines slowly with net wealth, but quickly with cash-on-hand. This
is consistent with empirical evidence by Jappelli and Pistaferri (2014) and Fagereng,
Holm, and Natvik (2019), as well as the model of hand-to-mouth households by Kaplan
and Violante (2014). The results are contained in Appendix A.6.

5.2     MPC Decomposition

    In our model, households exhibit high MPCs for two reasons. First, there is the effect
of illiquidity: households keep the vast majority of their wealth in illiquid form, thus
restricting their ability to smooth consumption over transitory income shocks. Second,
there is the mechanical effect of temptation: households experience increased temptation
(~
 c) in response to a positive income shock, therefore they consume more today. In this
section, we decompose the relative importance of these two mechanisms.
   We decompose the mechanical effect of temptation using the following procedure. For
each household i  [1, 2, ..., N ] and each period of working life t  [1, 2, ...W ], we simulate
two versions of household i starting at time t, where one receives an unanticipated and
transitory income shock of x dollars, while the other does not. This is performed using
our baseline parameter estimates for the temptation model with  = 0, thus turning off
the mechanical effect of temptation. We assume that the state variables at the time of
  20
    Note that historically it has been difficult to measure consumption response for large shocks, as
most governmental stimulus payments are small. As a result, most of the empirical work on MPCs
focuses on the consumption response to small income shocks. See for instance Shapiro and Slemrod
(2003), Johnson, Parker, and Souleles (2006), Shapiro and Slemrod (2009), Parker et al. (2013) or Misra
and Surico (2014) all analyze the consumption response of households to the 2001 and the 2008 fiscal
stimulus, with average payments of $600 and $1,200.

                                                  28
the shock (i,t ) are identical for the two versions of the same household and are based
on our baseline parameter estimates for the temptation model.21


                                        N    W
                                  1 1               ci,t (shock = x,  = 0, i,t ) - ci,t (shock = 0,  = 0, i,t )
   MPC(x) =                                                                                                       (22)
                                  NW    i=1 t=1
                                                                                 x


   Figure 6 presents the results from our model decomposition. The striped black bar
shows the effect of illiquidity on consumption behavior when we turn off temptation, while
the white bar shows the mechanical effect of temptation. We find that both mechanisms
are important in generating large MPCs. The effect of illiquidity explains roughly 55-
60% of the overall consumption response to an unanticipated and transitory income shock,
while the mechanical effect of temptation explains the remainder. Even when households
receive an income shock of $10,000, the effect of illiquidity remains substantial.

                                                     Figure 6: MPC Decomposition

                            0.5

                                            0.43
                            0.4
                                                                         0.37
       Average Annual MPC




                            0.3                                                                  0.29
                                            0.25

                                                                         0.2
                            0.2                                                                  0.18


                            0.1


                             0
                                            1,000                     5,000                     10,000
                                                                  Shock Size ($)

                                        Effect of Illiquidity        Mechanical Effect of Temptation

Note: This figure shows the mechanisms driving consumption behavior in response to an unanticipated and transitory
income shock. The striped black bar shows the effect of illiquidity, e.g. the MPC absent temptation (MPC(x)). The
white bar shows the mechanical effect of temptation (MPC(x) - MPC(x)).


  21
    In other words, we assume that households suffer from temptation prior to the realization of the
unanticipated and transitory income shock. This ensures that turning off temptation does not alter the
distribution of liquid assets, housing, and hand-to-mouth households prior to the shock.

                                                                    29
     Why does illiquidity have a large effect even when households receive an income shock
of $10,000? This is because a shock of $10,000 is insufficient to induce many households to
pay the housing transaction cost and adjust their housing stock. In our model, there are
substantial adjustment costs to housing, both financial and nonfinancial. As a result of
these adjustment costs, many households are liquidity constrained in the short-term, even
if they have significant housing wealth, therefore they respond strongly to unexpected and
transitory income shocks.
    In contrast, Kaplan and Violante (2014) find a very small MPC (almost zero) in
response to large income shocks. This is because their model has a small, additive ad-
justment cost of $1,000. Moreover, if they were to include a larger adjustment cost, the
wealthy hand-to-mouth would disappear. An important benefit of temptation is that it is
able to accommodate a large and realistic adjustment cost,22 yet still explain the presence
of wealthy hand-to-mouth households. In a model with temptation, larger adjustment
costs may actually increase demand for housing, whereas in a traditional model, larger
adjustment costs always reduce demand for housing.


5.3     Targeted Fiscal Stimulus

    As noted in the previous section, households with low cash-on-hand have the largest
consumption response to transitory income shocks. In addition, the average consump-
tion response declines relatively slowly with shock size. These two findings may have
important implications for the design of fiscal stimulus policies, as they suggest that
large and targeted fiscal stimulus payments could be very effective in boosting aggregate
consumption. In contrast, most governments have historically relied upon small fiscal
stimulus payments given to a large proportion of the population. In this section, we use
our estimated model to study the efficiency of targeted stimulus.
    We study the consumption response to alternative stimulus targeting policies by vary-
ing the fraction of households that receive a one time unanticipated stimulus payment
from the government, where the government uses an income based targeting approach.23
We focus on budget equivalent policies, for instance, giving $500 to all households or
$1,000 to the bottom half of the income distribution. We simulate N households using
our model and then compare their baseline consumption to a counterfactual simulation
where the same households (with the same income shocks) are given a one time unan-
ticipated stimulus payment at age t. We assume that all households between the ages
of 22 and 65 are eligible for stimulus payments, therefore we repeat this exercise for all

  22
     In our case, 5% of the value of the home (OECD, 2011), as well as the utility cost of moving.
  23
     We study the response to income targeting as most governments have comprehensive information on
residents' income, but not liquid assets. Of course, Fagereng, Holm, and Natvik (2019) might be able to
help Norway perform targeted stimulus based on liquid assets, which may be even more effective.

                                                  30
t within this age range and then aggregate our results.24 We then report the fraction of
aggregate stimulus that is consumed within one year after disbursal.
    Figure 7 shows the aggregate one year consumption response to budget equivalent
fiscal stimulus policies that target different fractions of the income distribution. At one
extreme, all households are given a stimulus payment of $500, while at the other extreme
the bottom 2% of households in the income distribution are given a stimulus payment of
$25,000. At either extreme, just under 40% of stimulus payments are consumed within
the year of disbursal. We observe that the consumption response gradually rises as the
government moves from a policy that distributes stimulus to all households to a policy
that targets the bottom 20% of the income distribution. At the optimum, when $2,500
is given to each household in the bottom 20% of the distribution, we observe that 68%
of aggregate stimulus is consumed within one year.

                                              Figure 7: Income Targeted Stimulus Payments
                                       80%
       Fraction Spent after One Year




                                       60%




                                       40%




                                       20%




                                         0%     20%            40%            60%             80%   100%
                                                Bottom Percentage of Income Distribution Targeted


    These results imply that fiscal stimulus can produce a much larger consumption re-
sponse when it is heavily targeted towards households in the lowest quintile of the income
distribution. In contrast, during the Great Recession, most governments that provided
stimulus payments decided to give payments to a large fraction of the population, with
very little targeting. For instance, under the Economic Stimulus Act of 2008, the U.S.
government gave tax rebates to approximately 80-85% of households, with an average
stimulus payment of $600-$1,200.
      Targeted fiscal stimulus allows the government to reach households with higher MPCs,
 24
      We choose N = 1, 000 for each time period, therefore there are 44,000 households in our simulation.

                                                                     31
but there exists a trade-off, as larger stimulus payments induce households to save a larger
fraction of their income in either housing or liquid assets. As a result, the consumption
response observed in Figure 4 declines when the government targets households in the
very bottom of the income distribution. For instance, in response to a stimulus pay-
ment of $25,000, approximately 29% is saved in housing wealth. Nevertheless, a very
large stimulus payment is needed to convince households to increase their investment in
housing, due to the presence of sizable housing transaction costs.
    We find a more important role for stimulus targeting than the existing theoretical
literature. For instance, while the model of Kaplan and Violante (2014) implies a similar
consumption response when stimulus payments are given to the entire population, they
find smaller gains to targeted stimulus payments, and their optimal policy is to target the
bottom half of the income distribution.25 This difference is driven by the above trade-off
between targeting households with high MPCs and giving larger payments. Their model
requires very small transaction costs ($1,000 in their preferred calibration) in order to
explain the presence of wealthy hand-to-mouth households, therefore there is a rapid
decline in the MPC based on size of stimulus payment, as larger stimulus payments
induce more households to pay this cost and put their wealth in the illiquid asset. In
contrast, in our model we have a realistic housing transaction cost of 5% of the value
of the home, as well as a utility cost  that we estimate, therefore fewer households are
willing to adjust housing due to a stimulus payment, unless that payment is very large.
As a result, our model is consistent with the recent empirical evidence showing a gradual
decline in MPCs based on shock size, thus suggesting a more important role for targeted
fiscal stimulus.



6      Implications for Saving Behavior

    The view of illiquidity that we highlight has important implications for saving behavior
and wealth accumulation. As we demonstrated in Section 3, the ability to purchase a
savings commitment device (in our case, housing) allows households to accumulate more
wealth over the life-cycle. This occurs for two reasons: first, households are able to reduce
temptation by locking their wealth in illiquid form; second, households are able to bind
their future self to save by committing to regular mortgage payments that build up wealth
in the form of home equity. In this section, we study two important policies that affect
housing and mortgage decisions, which in turn may affect wealth accumulation.

  25
     In their model, stimulus payments given to the entire population would imply that roughly 40% is
consumed within one year, while stimulus payments given to the bottom half would imply that 55%
is consumed within one year. In contrast, we find that 70% is consumed within one year if stimulus
payments are targeted towards the bottom 20% of the income distribution.

                                                 32
6.1    Mandatory Amortization

    There exists a growing debate about the effect of mandatory amortization policies on
household spending and wealth accumulation. While mandatory amortization require-
ments have recently been introduced by Sweden and the Netherlands, there exists concern
that these policies may simply result in a re-balancing of household portfolios away from
liquid assets and into illiquid hosuing, potentially resulting in reduced resilience to in-
come shocks (Svensson, 2019, 2020). But if mortgage payments serve as a commitment
device, then amortization might not result in simple portfolio re-balancing, but may also
help households accumulate wealth.
    We use our calibrated model to study the effect of mandatory amortization policies
on household wealth accumulation and to quantify the role of commitment. To do so, we
consider two different policy regimes. In the baseline, we assume that all mortgages are
fully-amortizing, thus mortgagors are required to gradually pay back their mortgage using
a periodic debt repayment plan that ends at the time of retirement. In the counterfactual,
we assume that all mortgages are interest-only (IO), with a balloon payment covering the
mortgage principal at the time of retirement. The latter option implies that homeowners
will only be required to make small interest payments on their mortgage during the course
of their working-life. This may potentially increase wealth accumulation, as it allows
households to invest in the high-return liquid asset using the money that they otherwise
would have been required to accumulate in the form of home equity. However, interest-
only mortgages may instead decrease wealth accumulation if amortization payments serve
as a savings commitment device.
    Figure 8 shows the life-cycle profiles of wealth accumulation in the baseline model
with mandatory amortization (the solid blue line) relative to the counterfactual model
with interest-only mortgages (the dashed pink line). Overall, we find evidence of portfolio
re-balancing from liquid to illiquid assets, but this is not a one-to-one effect, therefore
overall wealth accumulation is increased.
    The first two panels of Figure 8 show the life-cycle profiles of net housing wealth
and liquid wealth in the two different models. Mandatory amortization increases housing
wealth accumulation at the cost of slightly reduced liquid wealth accumulation. Overall,
we find that every additional dollar of housing wealth reduces liquid assets by roughly
60 cents by the time of retirement. The third panel of Figure 8 shows the share of the
wealthy hand-to-mouth in the two different models. We see that the share of the wealthy
hand-to-mouth is very similar across the two different models, and in fact is very slightly
higher in the model with interest-only mortgages. This suggests that mandatory amorti-
zation policies are not an important determinant of hand-to-mouth behavior. Finally, the
fourth panel shows the difference in wealth accumulation in the model with mandatory

                                            33
                                       Figure 8: Effect of Mandatory Amortization

                           Housing Wealth                                                       Liquid Wealth
                 Baseline: Mandatory Amortization                                    Baseline
          150k   Counterfactual: Interest Only                                150k   Counterfactual
 Wealth




                                                           Wealth
          100k                                                                100k


           50k                                                                50k


           0k                                                                  0k
                   30             40           50     60                               30             40         50   60


                 Hand-to-Mouth Homeowners                                                     Change in Wealth
           0.5
                 Baseline                                                            Housing Wealth
                                                                              50k
                 Counterfactual                                                      Liquid Wealth




                                                           Change in Wealth
           0.4
                                                                                     Net Wealth
                                                                              25k
           0.3
   Share




                                                                               0k
           0.2


           0.1                                                                -25k


           0.0                                                                -50k
                   30             40           50     60                               30             40         50   60
                                       Age                                                                 Age



amortization relative to the model with interest-only mortgages. We find that mandatory
amortization increases net wealth by around 10% by the time of retirement, relative to
the model with interest-only mortgages.
    The reason that wealth accumulation is increased is because mortgage amortization
serves as a form of commitment. By purchasing a home using an amortizing mortgage,
households not only lock-away their current wealth, but they also commit to accumulate
wealth in the future in the form of home equity. This finding is consistent with recent
empirical evidence from the Netherlands, showing that mandatory amortization results
in increased wealth accumulation, as households accumulate more home equity due to
this policy, but do not reduce their non-housing assets (Bernstein and Koudijs, 2020).
    More specifically, Bernstein and Koudijs (2020) study the effect of mortgage amor-
tization on wealth accumulation by exploiting a macroprudential policy change in the
Netherlands that restricted the availability of interest-only mortgages for first-time home
buyers starting in January 2013. These authors find that mandatory amortization results
in a near 1-for-1 rise in net worth, with no observable change in non-housing savings, at
least in the four years for which data is available. Our results are consistent with their
findings. Moreover, our calibrated model allows us to evaluate the potential long-term
effects of such a policy on household wealth accumulation. We find that the effect on
wealth accumulation builds over time, with the largest increase in wealth occurring at
age 65, when households in our model finish paying off their mortgage.26

  26
    In this paper, we do not explore the welfare implications of mandatory amortization. That said, the
presence of temptation generates an interesting trade-off between flexibility and commitment, which is

                                                           34
6.2     Housing Subsidies

    There is a long-standing debate about the effect of tax benefits that incentivize wealth
accumulation in illiquid assets such as housing or individual retirement accounts. In the
United States and many other countries, a large number of tax advantages have been
given to housing and retirement accounts. Some studies have argued that such tax
incentives may result in an increase in overall savings (Venti and Wise, 1986, 1987),
while others have argued that such incentives may only result in portfolio re-allocation
from liquid to illiquid assets (Gale and Scholz, 1994; Attanasio and DeLeire, 2002). In
addition, a growing literature argues that tax benefits to housing may distort household
portfolio allocations, resulting in increased accumulation of housing wealth at the expense
of reduced accumulation of non-housing assets.27 Yet none of these papers consider the
effect of making commitment more affordable, which could be an important channel
through which governments may stimulate household saving.
    Using our calibrated model, we evaluate the effect of housing subsidies on both port-
folio allocation and overall wealth accumulation. We focus on two large subsides to
homeownership which are present in the United States: the mortgage interest tax deduc-
tion and the tax exemption of capital gains on owner-occupied housing. We compare our
baseline model, where both tax benefits exist, to a counterfactual model, where both tax
benefits are eliminated.
   Figure 9 shows the life-cycle profiles of wealth accumulation in the baseline model
with housing subsidies (the solid blue line) relative to the counterfactual model without
housing subsidies (the dashed pink line). We find evidence of some portfolio re-balancing
from liquid to illiquid assets, however, this is not a one-to-one effect. As a result, overall
wealth accumulation is increased due to the presence of housing subsidies.
    The first two panels of Figure 9 show the life-cycle profiles of net housing wealth and
liquid wealth in the models with and without housing subsidies. We find that housing
subsidies increase housing wealth accumulation at the cost of reduced liquid wealth ac-
cumulation. Every additional dollar of housing wealth reduces liquid assets by roughly
33 cents by the time of retirement.
   The third panel of Figure 9 shows the share of hand-to-mouth homeowners in the
two different models. We see that the share of hand-to-mouth homeowners is reduced
only slightly by eliminating the tax benefits to housing. This is an important finding
which differs substantially from a traditional model. In a model where wealthy hand-
to-mouth households are generated by the assumption that illiquid assets deliver excess
absent in a traditional model. Kovacs and Moran (2020) study the implications of this trade-off as it
relates to financial liberalization which has given households greater access to home equity withdrawal.
  27
     See for instance Rosen (1985), Poterba (1992), Gervais (2002), Chambers, Garriga, and Schlagenhauf
(2009), Floetotto, Kirker, and Stroebel (2016), and Nakajima (2020).

                                                  35
                                            Figure 9: Effect of Housing Subsidies

                              Housing Wealth                                                       Liquid Wealth
                    Baseline: Subsidy                                                   Baseline
          150k      Counterfactual: No Subsidy                                   150k   Counterfactual
 Wealth




                                                              Wealth
          100k                                                                   100k


           50k                                                                   50k


           0k                                                                     0k
                      30             40          50     60                                30             40         50   60


                    Hand-to-Mouth Homeowners                                                     Change in Wealth
           0.5
                    Baseline                                                            Housing Wealth
                                                                                 50k
                    Counterfactual                                                      Liquid Wealth




                                                              Change in Wealth
           0.4
                                                                                        Net Wealth
                                                                                 25k
           0.3
   Share




                                                                                  0k
           0.2


           0.1                                                                   -25k


           0.0                                                                   -50k
                      30             40          50     60                                30             40         50   60
                                          Age                                                                 Age


returns relative liquid assets, such as Kaplan and Violante (2014), we would expect that
a reduction in tax benefits to illiquid assets would have a large effect on the share of
hand-to-mouth households, since it reduces the gap in returns between illiquid and liquid
assets. In contrast, in our model, hand-to-mouth homeowners exist not due to excess
returns on housing, but rather due to a desire to lock away wealth in illiquid form.
    Finally, the fourth panel of Figure 9 shows the difference in wealth accumulation
in the model with housing subsidies relative to the model without housing subsidies.
We find that overall wealth accumulation is increased by roughly 7% by the time of
retirement when there are tax-benefits to housing. This demonstrates that although tax-
benefits to housing do result in distortion, as households accumulate more housing and
less liquid assets, these subsidies also increase overall wealth accumulation by making the
commitment device more affordable.28

6.3              Mandatory Amortization, Housing Subsidies, and MPCs

    Finally, our calibrated model allows us to analyze the effect of these two policies on
households' responsiveness to income shocks. This is an important consideration, as there
is concern that mandatory amortization policies might reduce households' resilience to
income shocks by encouraging illiquid wealth accumulation at the expense of reduced
  28
    In future work, it may be interesting to evaluate other ways that governments can make commitment
devices more accessible to households. For instance, home buyer tax credits targeted towards low-income
households may be an attractive way to help households onto the housing ladder (giving the benefit of
commitment) without the regressive tax implications of the mortgage interest tax deduction. It would
be straightforward to extend our model to study such a policy.

                                                             36
liquid wealth accumulation (Svensson, 2019, 2020). If true, this would substantially
undermine the macroprudential motives for which mandatory amortization policies were
implemented. Similarly, if housing subsides result in portfolio re-balancing from liquid
to illiquid assets, then policy makers may be concerned that such policies could reduce
households' resilience to income shocks and therefore such subsidies should be eliminated
for macroprudential reasons.
    To evaluate the effect of mandatory amortization and housing subsidies on household
resilience, we compute the average MPC in response to a transitory income shock un-
der three different policy regimes. Table 5 presents our results. The first row presents
the average annual MPC in the baseline model. The second row presents the average
MPC in the counterfactual model without mandatory amortization. We find that the
average MPC is slightly lower without mandatory amortization, however, the difference
is small and therefore unlikely to be economically meaningful. For instance, in response
to a $1,000 income shock, the MPC is 0.43 in the baseline model versus 0.41 in the
counterfactual model without mandatory amortization.
                 Table 5: Average MPC under Different Policy Regimes

                                                                 SHOCK SIZE
                                                       $1, 000      $5, 000    $10, 000

      MPC in Baseline Model                              0.43        0.37        0.29
      MPC in Model without Mandatory Amortization        0.41        0.36        0.27
      MPC in Model without Housing Subsidies             0.42        0.37        0.29

    Note: Each coefficient represents the average annual MPC in our calibrated model. The
    procedure used to compute MPCs is described in Appendix A.5.

   The final row of Table 5 presents the average MPC in the model without housing
subsidies. We find an average MPC of 0.42 in response to a $1,000 income shock, only
1 percentage point lower than in the baseline model with large and realistic housing
subsides as in the United States. The difference is even smaller in response to larger
income shocks. These results are in line with the previous finding that housing subsidies
are not an important determinant of wealthy hand-to-mouth behavior and therefore do
not have an economically meaningful effect on the average MPC.
    While many policy makers might be interested in policies that can be used to reduce
households' responsiveness to income shocks, we find that mandatory amortization and
housing subsidies have very little effect on the average MPC. This is because households'
desire from illiquidity does not come simply from a desire to exploit better interest rates on
different types of assets, but instead comes from a fundamental difficulty to accumulate
wealth in liquid form, which thus generates a desire for illiquidity. For this reason,
policy makers might want to focus on policies that provide temporary liquidity relief to

                                             37
households who have experienced income loss, such as the mortgage forbearance policy
studied by Boar, Gorea, and Midrigan (2020).


7    Conclusion
    In this paper, we integrate the idea of temptation preferences, proposed by Gul and
Pesendorfer (2001), into a life-cycle model with incomplete markets. We show that this
model is able to explain the existence of the wealthy hand-to-mouth by emphasizing the
role of illiquid housing as a savings commitment device. We document the model's ability
to generate consumption, saving and portfolio behaviour that are in line with observed
choices. Specifically, our model is able to match the large share of the wealthy hand-to-
mouth despite the fact that housing deliver higher returns than equities, which is hard to
reconcile with traditional life-cycle models. Moreover, the model rationalizes households'
overwhelming preference for illiquidity.
    Using the Method of Simulated Moments, we internally calibrate the preference pa-
rameters of our model once with temptation and once when we shut down temptation.
Parameters are pinned down by the life-cycle patterns of households consumption and
portfolio compositions. Crucially, we target the observed large fraction of wealthy hand-
to-mouth households. The model without temptation is not to able to explain the ex-
istence of the wealthy hand-to-mouth, even though it has great flexibility that allows
it to have different types of housing taste (direct and indirect via consumption), utility
cost of housing adjustment, risk attitude and impatience. In contrast, the model with
temptation generates the observed life-cycle profiles, including the share of households
who own housing wealth but no liquid wealth.
    Households' illiquidity has important consequences for aggregate consumption and
saving behavior, which in turn crucially affects the design of fiscal policies. We use our
model to analyse the impacts of three important policies: the targeting fiscal stimulus,
the mandatory amortization of mortgages and the tax deductability of mortgage inter-
est payments. We find that targeted fiscal stimulus is more powerful than previously
believed: targeting households at the bottom of the income distribution results in the
largest aggregate consumption response. This result is largely driven by the finding that
the average MPC declines slowly with shock size. While this is consistent with a number
of recent empirical studies (Fagereng, Holm, and Natvik (2019), Bunn et al. (2018), and
Kueng (2018)), there exist relatively few empirical papers that study the consumption
response to large income shocks and it would therefore be interesting to see additional
empirical research in this direction.
   We also find that the mandatory amortization policies as well as subsidies to home
ownership stimulate total savings of households. Mandatory amortization policies in-

                                           38
crease overall wealth accumulation by around 10% by the time of retirement, while
tax deductability of mortgage interest payments increase overall wealth accumulation
by around 7% by the time of retirement. These results stem from the existence of temp-
tation and the resulting demand for commitment in our model: mandatory amortization
helps households to stick to their future savings plans, while subsidies to home ownership
incentivize households to lock away their wealth from temptation by making housing
more attractive.
    The view of illiquidity that we highlight in this paper helps us better understand a
number of features of the data, as well as design policies to stimulate household saving.
For instance, our model is consistent with a desire for illiquidity in saving accounts which
has been documented in a number of experimental studies (Thaler and Benartzi, 2004;
Ashraf, Karlan, and Yin, 2006; Beshears et al., 2020) and that households have difficulty
saving in advance of predictable declines in income (Ganong and Noel, 2019). In the case
of housing, our model is consistent with empirical evidence showing that homeownership
plays an important role in household wealth accumulation (Di, Belsky, and Liu, 2007;
Turner and Luea, 2009; LeBlanc and Schmidt, 2017; Kaas, Kocharkov, and Preugschat,
2019). Moreover, the view of illiquidity that we highlight is consistent with evidence
that households have limited demand for mortgage flexibility (Vihri¨     al¨
                                                                           a, 2019) and that
mortgage amortization boosts overall wealth accumulation (Bernstein and Koudijs, 2020).
These findings may have important implications for the regulation of financial products
that give households greater access to credit (Kovacs and Moran, 2020).




                                            39
A       Appendix

A.1          Model Parameters

                                  Table A.1: External Parameter Values

    Parameter    Definition                                                                    Value

                 Timing
       T         number of years as adult                                                         59
       W         number of years as worker                                                        44

                 Utility Parameters
                 temptation parameter                                                           0.28

                 Asset Returns, Prices
        r        stock return                                                                  0.054
       rH        housing return                                                                0.021
       rM        mortgage interest rate                                                        0.040
                 rental scale                                                                   0.03
       F         fixed cost of moving                                                           0.05
                 down-payment requirement                                                       0.10
      pmax
       1         initial house price                                                        $250,000

                 Income Process
                 stochastic process: income persistence                                         0.90
       2
                 stochastic process: std. dev. income shock                                     0.05
       2
       0         stochastic process: std. dev. initial income                                 0.184
        g0       deterministic process: constant                                               6.391
        g1       deterministic process: age                                                   0.256
        g2       deterministic process: age2                                                  -0.045
        g3       deterministic process:   age3                                                 0.002

                 Taxes and Social Security
        1        income tax function: constant                                                -4.034
        2        income tax function: progressivity                                           1.226
        d        income tax function: deduction                                              $6,116
                 social security: income floor                                               $10,9981
                 social security: PIA bend points                                      [$816, $4,917]
                 social security: wage base                                                $118,500

  1
      Supplemental Security Income is $8,796 for individuals and $13,200 for couples. From the 2015
      Bureau of Labor Statistics Report we know that about half of the population is married (50.2%)
      and the other half is single, therefore average households get $10,998 as SS income.


A.2          Asset Returns
   In this section, we calculate the real risk-adjusted returns of housing and publicly
traded equitites. We start with the consumption-based pricing equation, which expresses
asset returns in terms of prices and dividends:

                                                          40
                                                pt+1 + dt+1 - pt
                                       rt+1 =                                                 (A.1)
                                                       pt

    where rt+1 is the net return on the asset between periods t and t + 1, pt is the price
of the asset in period t, while dt+1 is the dividend in period t + 1. We use this pricing
formula to calculate the return on housing. Households who invest in housing in period
t enjoy housing service flows between periods t and t + 1, but also pay the costs related
to home ownership over the same period. More explicitly, we can write the return on
housing similarly to equation (A.1) as


                              h        pt+1 + st+1 - cm      i
                                                      t+1 - ct+1 - pt
                             rt +1   =                                                        (A.2)
                                                     pt

    with pt is the price of the house in period t, while st+1 and and ct+1 are the housing
service flow and the costs that arise between periods t and t + 1. Maintenance cost is
denoted by cm , and the cost of home insurance by ci . Note that we implicitly assume
that depreciation is roughly equal to the maintenance cost.
    In what follows we measure aggregate house prices by the Case-Shiller house price
index,29 while we use data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) to calculate the
average housing service flow. We follow the approach of Kaplan and Violante (2014) to
calibrate the size of different ownership-related costs. Housing service flow and related
costs are all proportional to the value of the house. Given that these costs are relatively
constant over time in terms of the value of the house, in the rest of the paper we use
constant fractions of changing house value in order to calculate these variables. Under
these conditions equation (A.2) can be rewritten as

                                h        ph           m   i     h
                                          t+1 + (s - c - c - 1)pt
                               rt +1 =                                                        (A.3)
                                                     ph
                                                      t


where s, cm and ci are the housing service flows and different costs relative to the value
of the house.
    We compute imputed rents using the balance sheet approach, following Piazzesi,
Schneider, and Tuzel (2007) and Kaplan and Violante (2014), among others. We use
housing gross value added at current dollars from the BEA to approximate the housing
service flow and use residential fixed assets at current dollars to approximate the housing
stock.30 The average of gross housing value added over residential fixed assets between

  29
    The Case-Shiller house price index is available at http://www.econ.yale.edu/~shiller/data.htm.
  30
    Gross value added can be found in Table 7.4.5, "Housing Sector Output, Gross Value Added and Net
Value Added" in National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) of the BEA. Residential fixed assets
can be found in Table 1.1, "Current-Cost Net Stock of Fixed Assets and Consumer Durable Goods" of
the Fixed Asset Tables of the BEA.

                                                   41
                20
                15
                10
                5
                0
                -5




                     1940                  1960                   1980         2000       2020

                                                  Stock Return           Housing Return

                     10-year Moving Average, two sided. Annual Data



                                             Figure A.1: Real Returns


1950 and 2016 is around 8%.
    Following Kaplan and Violante (2014), we set the maintenance cost at 1% and the
insurance cost at 0.35% of the value of housing. In Figure A.1 we plot the calculated real
return on housing together with the returns on the S&P 500 between 1950 and 2016. The
most important thing to notice is that stock returns are in general much higher than the
return on housing. There was only a short period of time in the seventies and a couple
of years in the early twenties when stocks underperformed housing.
    A part of these return differences can obviously be interpreted as reflecting differences
in the riskiness of these assets. To allow for this, we calculate the risk-adjusted returns.
Following Kaplan and Violante (2014) in order to calculate the risk-adjusted returns on
the three assets, we subtract the variance of the return from the expected return of the
asset.
                                    i
                                   radj = E (ri ) - var(ri )                            (A.4)

where superscript i refers to the type of the asset, i.e. 3 Months T-Bill31 , S&P500 and
housing. Since we are using the variance as a measure of riskiness, we cannot generate
a similar graph of risk-adjusted returns as in Figure A.1. Instead, we have the average,
risk-adjusted real returns over the period between 1950 and 2016, which is 0.69% for the
T-bill, 5.40% for the stocks, while 2.10% for the housing asset as seen in Table A.2.
   Table A.2 presents our results. We find that stock deliver substantially higher returns
than housing, even when accounting for imputed rents and differential volatility in re-

  31
    The 3 Month T-Bill times series is downloaded from the database of the Federal Reserve Bank of
St. Louis (Fred).

                                                                 42
                               Table A.2: Real Asset Returns

                                                          Mean    St.Dev.    Risk-adj. Mean

 Treasury Bill                                             0.74     2.12           0.69
 Stock                                                     8.24    16.82           5.40
 Housing (Capital Gains)                                   0.70     5.06           0.01
 Housing (Capital Gains + Imputed Rents)                   2.34     5.06           2.10

Note: This table shows our baseline return calculations. Stock returns include both
capital gains and dividend income from the S&P. Housing capital gains come from the
Case-Shiller index. Imputed rents include the imputed rental income net of
maintenance costs and home insurance, as described in Equation A.3.


turns. In our baseline results, we find that stock have delivered a risk-adjusted real return
of 5.40% per year, while housing has delivered a risk-adjusted real return of 2.10%. It is
important to note that most of the real return in housing comes from imputed rents. This
is consistent with Shiller (2015), who notes that there has been essentially no real growth
in house prices during the 20th century. That said, even when accounting for imputed
rents, we find that housing has delivered substantially lower returns than equities.
    For robustness, we also compute the Sharpe ratios for stocks and housing. The Sharpe
ratio measures the expected value of the excess return of the asset relative to the standard
deviation of the excess return. The higher the Sharpe ratio, the more attractive the asset,
as it delivers better excess returns relative to its riskiness. We find a Sharpe ratio of 0.45
for stock and 0.30 for housing, including both capital gains and imputed rents. This
leads further credibility to the result that housing yields a lower risk-adjusted return
than stocks.

A.2.1    Sensitivity to Imputed Rents

    We compute imputed rents using the above described balance sheet approach, follow-
ing Piazzesi, Schneider, and Tuzel (2007) among others. Our results are consistent with
a wide body of empirical literature including Flavin and Yamashita (2002), Goetzmann
and Spiegel (2002), and Piazzesi, Schneider, and Tuzel (2007) who show that housing
delivers worse risk-adjusted returns than stock, even when accounting for imputed rents
and other benefits to homeownership. That said, Jord`   a et al. (2019) develop an alter-
native method to compute imputed rents. In this subsection, we explore sensitivity to
alternative imputed rent calculations.
   Using the data provided by Jord`
                                  a et al. (2019), we calculated average risk-adjusted re-

                                             43
turns to housing and equities in the United States.32 For comparability with our previous
return calculations, we focus on the sample period between 1950 and 2016.
    Table A.3 presents our results using data from Jord`
                                                       a et al. (2019). We find that stock
deliver risk-adjusted returns that are very similar to housing. The risk-adjusted return
to stock is 5.98% whereas the risk-adjusted return to housing (including both capital
gains and imputed rents) 5.80%. This result is driven by the measure of imputed rents
constructed by Jord` a et al. (2019). When we look at just the capital gains to housing,
we find a risk-adjusted real return of 0.65%, only slightly larger than our results when
using the Case-Shiller index.

                Table A.3: Real Asset Returns ­ Sensitivity to Alternative Data

                                                             Mean    St.Dev.    Risk-adj. Mean

 Stock                                                        9.03     17.47          5.98
 Housing (Capital Gains)                                      0.78     3.52           0.65
 Housing (Capital Gains + Imputed Rents)                      5.93     3.60           5.80

Note: This table shows alternative return calculations for the United States between
1950 and 2016. Data on stock, housing, and imputed rents come from Jord`  a et al.
(2019).



    Based on our reading of the literature, where the vast majority of studies find that
stock deliver higher risk-adjusted returns than housing, we decide to adopt that result in
our baseline calibration. That said, even if stock and housing delivered roughly similar
risk-adjusted returns, this would still pose a challenge for the traditional returns-based
explanation of wealthy hand-to-mouth behavior, as put forward by Kaplan and Violante
(2014). If liquid and illiquid assets delivered equivalent risk-adjusted returns in their
model, then the wealthy hand-to-mouth would disappear. For this reason, in Appendix
A.7.1 we evaluate the sensitivity of our model calibration to the assumption that r = rH
and find that it has little effect on our core results.


A.3       Data: Sample and Definitions

   We calibrate our model using the Panel Study of Income Dynamics waves 1999 to
2015. While the PSID has collected information on income and demographics since 1968,
the survey received a large overhaul in 1999 with the addition of detailed questions on
household expenditure. We therefore use the modern PSID, which to the best of our
 32
      We thank the authors for providing their data at http://www.macrohistory.net/data/.

                                                44
knowledge is the only large scale U.S. panel to contain information on income, consump-
tion, and wealth accumulation.
    Sample Selection. We focus on households with a head between 25 and 65 years old
with non-missing information on age, education, and state. We do not select our sample
based on the working status of the household head or spouse. We include households from
both the core sample of the PSID as well as households from the Survey of Economic
Opportunity. To reduce the influence of measurement error, we drop observations with
extremely high assets, for instance, observations with a total net worth higher than $20
million, following the criteria of Blundell, Pistaferri, and Saporta-Eksten (2016). In
addition, we drop the top 5% of households by income due to evidence that the PSID
performs well at measuring the wealth holdings of the bottom 95%, but not the top 5%
of the distribution (Bosworth, Anders et al., 2008; Pfeffer et al., 2016).33
    Consumption. We compute real nondurable consumption following the classification
in Blundell, Pistaferri, and Saporta-Eksten (2016). Prior to 1999, the PSID collected data
on very few components of consumption, namely food, rent, and child care. The coverage
was greatly increased starting in 1999 to include many other components of nondurable
consumption and services including transportation, utilities, gasoline, car maintenance,
health expenditures, education, and childcare. In total, this allows the PSID to cover
approximately 70 percent of consumption expenditure on nondurable goods and services.
While additional categories such as clothing and entertainment were added to the survey
in 2005, we exclude these categories to keep the consumption series consistent over time.
    Assets. We compute liquid assets as the sum of bank account deposits and directly
held stock. We believe that publicly traded stock are essentially liquid because there
are very low transaction costs on these assets, thus it would be easy for households to
sell their stock position for consumption smoothing purposes. We measure net housing
wealth as the reported value of the household's main residency minus all mortgage debt
on this home. We exclude net wealth from other real estate, net business wealth, and
IRA/annuity wealth, as we want to focus our analysis on owner-occupied housing. We
also exclude credit cards debt from our analysis, as the PSID did not collect information
on this variable for the full period of our sample.
   Movers. We target the average share of homeowners that move for non-work reasons
each year. This is computed using detailed information on the timing and reasons for
moving homes, collected by the PSID. We include all moves due to consumptive reasons
(expansion of housing, contraction of housing, better neighborhood, better school, etc.)
and ambiguous reasons (desire to save money, neighbors moving away, unknown). We

  33
    As a result, the share of the wealthy hand-to-mouth in our sample is slightly higher than in the
Survey of Consumer Finances. In our sample, the share of such households reach a peak of 25% at age
45, whereas in the Survey of Consumer Finances this number is 22% at age 45.

                                                45
exclude moves for work reasons (to take another job, to get nearer to work) since these
are outside the scope of our model.

A.4     Model Fit

   Table A.4 presents the model fit of the average homeownership rate and share of
homeowners moving each year. Both the model with temptation and the model without
temptation obtain a good fit of both targeted moments.

                          Table A.4: Additional Targeted Moments

                                                        Temptation            No Temptation
                                        PSID
                                                          Model                   Model

    Homeownership rate                   0.57                 0.50                  0.53
                                        (0.006)
    Share of movers                      0.068                0.070                 0.056
                                        (0.004)

    Note: This table shows fit of the average homeownership rate and share of movers each period.
    The average homeownership rate in our sample is 57%, slightly lower than the homeownership rate
    observed in the SCF. This is driven by two factors. First, our sample includes only working age
    households, who have less homeownership than retirees. Second, the PSID oversamples low income
    households.



A.5     MPC Caclulations

    To calculate the consumption response to an unanticipated and transitory income
shock of size x, we first generate N households, each with a different series of randomly
drawn income shocks and initial heterogeneity. We simulate the behavior of each house-
hold, producing the state variable i,t and consumption behavior ci,t (shock = 0, i,t ) for
each household and each time period. Next, we simulate counterfactual consumption be-
havior in response to an unanticipated and transitory income shock at time t conditional
on state i,t , producing ci,t (shock = x, i,t ) for all households and all time periods. We
set the size of the transitory income shock x to be $1,000 in our baseline simulation,
though we also show results for shock of $5,000 and $10,000 respectively. The annual
marginal propensity to consume is computed as follows:

                                  ci,t (shock = x, i,t ) - ci,t (shock = 0, i,t )
                  MPCi,t (x) =                                                               (A.5)
                                                         x

                                                   N   W
                                      1 1
                             MPC(x) =                        MPCi,t (x)                      (A.6)
                                      NW           i=1 t=1


                                                  46
A.6     MPC Heterogeneity: The Importance of Liquidity

    To evaluate the relationship between wealth and consumption behavior, we group
simulated households into quartiles based on net wealth and cash-on-hand. We then
estimate the average MPC in each of these categories. This is performed in a regression
framework, allowing us to control for age, similar to Jappelli and Pistaferri (2014):

                         4                       4                         65
       MPCi,t = 0 +            j CashQj
                                      i,t   +          j WealthQj
                                                                i,t   +           j Agej
                                                                                       i,t +   i,t   (A.7)
                        j =2                    j =2                      j =23



    If low wealth is important in generating large MPCs, then we would expect to see
a rapid decline of MPCs as we move from the lowest to the highest wealth quartiles.
In contrast, if low cash-on-hand is more important in generating large MPCs, we would
expect to see a rapid decline of MPCs as we move from the lowest to the highest quartile
of cash-on-hand.
    The results are presented in Table A.5. We find that the average MPC declines very
quickly with cash-on-hand. Households in the lowest quartile of cash-on-hand have the
highest average MPC. Households in the second quartile have an average MPC that is
0.18 lower. This is even more pronounced in the third and fourth quartiles. In short, low
liquidity is an important determinant of high MPCs.

                    Table A.5: MPC Heterogeneity by Household Type

                                                                      MPC
                                                        Coefficient         Standard Error


             CASH-ON-HAND
             Quartile
                                        2nd                 -0.181                  (0.006)
                                        3rd                 -0.368                  (0.006)
                                        4th                 -0.595                  (0.007)
             NET WEALTH
             Quartile
                                        2nd                 -0.062                  (0.005)
                                        3rd                 -0.093                  (0.007)
                                        4th                 -0.055                  (0.008)
             Constant                                       0.821                   (0.012)

            Note: MPCs are based on a $1,000 transitory income shock. We control
            for age using Equation A.7.  p < 0.01,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.1.


                                                       47
     In contrast, once we have controlled for cash-on-hand, net wealth has very little effect
on the average MPC. The average MPC is only 0.06 smaller when moving from the lowest
to second lowest net wealth quartile. Moreover, we see that even the richest households
still have a large average MPC: households in the top wealth quartile have an MPC that
is just as large as households in the bottom quartile, once we control for cash-on-hand.
    These results are consistent with a wide body of empirical evidence that finds that the
average MPC declines only slowly, if at all, with net wealth, while it declines quickly with
cash-on-hand. Jappelli and Pistaferri (2014) show that households in the top quintile
of cash-on-hand have an avereage MPC that is 0.44 lower than that of households in
the bottom quintile, affirming the importance of cash-on-hand for MPCs.34 Similarly,
Fagereng, Holm, and Natvik (2019) find that net wealth is unimportant in explaining
MPC heterogeneity, once controlling for liquid wealth.35
    The reason behind these empirical observations is that households might have sub-
stantial wealth, but if it is kept in illiquid form, it cannot be used easily for consumption-
smoothing purposes. As a result, wealth is a less important determinant of MPCs than
cash-on-hand. This reaffirms the importance of modeling household illiquidity (using a
two asset model) in order to study consumption behavior in response to transitory income
shocks. In this regard, our model delivers similar results to Kaplan and Violante (2014)
who also find that liquid wealth is more important than total wealth in explaining MPC
heterogeneity. In contrast, these empirical results are almost impossible to justify using
a traditional heterogeneous agent model with only one asset. For instance, Jappelli and
Pistaferri (2014) study whether an Ayiagari model with heterogeneous households and a
standard calibration is able to replicate the slow decline of MPCs by wealth. They find
that this requires implausibly impatient households:  has to be 0.6 or lower.

A.7      Sensitivity

    In this section we evaluate the sensitivity of our results presented in Sections 4 and
5. We consider two modification to our baseline model. First, we change the return
structure in the model by assuming that housing and equities provide equivalent risk-
adjusted returns (r = rH ). Second, we modify the asset structure of households by
assuming that they receive annuitized disbursements from individual retirement accounts
after retirement. Our core findings are robust to these modifications: both the calibrated
parameters of the model and the MPC results are similar to our baseline results.
  34
     Jappelli and Pistaferri (2014) use Italian survey data to study the consumption response to un-
expected transitory income shocks. They exploit the survey question from the 2010 Italian Survey of
Household Income and Wealth, which asks households how much of an unexpected transitory income
change they would spend.
  35
     Fagereng, Holm, and Natvik (2019) study the consumption response to winning the lottery in Norway.
This study is unique in the quality of its data: the authors use administrative tax data from Norway,
which contains rich information on household income and asset holdings.

                                                  48
A.7.1      Asset Returns

   First we consider a model where the two assets give equivalent risk-adjusted returns
(r = rH ). It is important to note that this return structure would pose a challenge for
the traditional returns-based explanation of wealthy hand-to-mouth behavior. If liquid
and illiquid assets delivered equivalent returns in a model of the type proposed by Kaplan
and Violante (2014), then the wealthy hand-to-mouth would disappear.
    In contrast, we find that the model with temptation and commitment doesn't require
excess return on housing to explain the existence of wealthy hand-to-mouth households.
Figure A.2 shows the model fit when we re-calibrate the preference parameters of the
model. We find that the model with equal returns obtains a good fit of the large share of
wealthy hand-to-mouth households, as well as the other targeted moments, despite the
fact that housing and liquid assets deliver equivalent returns.

                               Figure A.2: Model Fit with Equal Returns

                Nondurable Consumption                                             Liquid Assets
  40k                                                         150k
                                                                                                              PSID
                                                                                                              Model
  30k
                                                              100k

  20k

                                                               50k
  10k


   0k                                                           0k
           30           40           50          60                     30          40           50           60

                  Net Housing Wealth                                         Hand-to-Mouth Homeowners
 250k
                                                              60%

 200k                                                         50%

                                                              40%
 150k
                                                              30%
 100k
                                                              20%
  50k
                                                              10%

   0k                                                          0%
           30           40           50          60                     30          40           50           60
                             Age                                                          Age
Note: This figure shows the life-cycle moments from our model with equal returns (solid blue line) and the PSID (black
dotted line). The moments from the PSID are shown with bands of 1.96 standard deviations around the mean.


    The calibrated parameter results are reported in Table A.6. When the asset returns
are equal (column 2), we find that that households are more patient and more risk averse
relative to the baseline calibration (column 1). More specifically,  and  are slightly
higher than in our baseline calibration.
    In addition, the alternative return structure has little impact on the main MPC results.
Table A.7 shows the MPC by shock size. The average MPC in response to a $1,000 shock
is 0.40 in the model with equal returns (the second row), which is only slightly lower

                                                         49
             Table A.6: Model Parameters ­ Alternative Modeling Assumptions

        PARAMETER         Baseline    Equal Returns (r = rH )       Retirement Accounts

                            0.959                0.970                      0.955
                            2.415                2.795                      2.596
        µ                   0.291                0.317                      0.455
                            0.160                0.267                      0.295
                            0.437                0.552                      0.869

     Note: This table shows our calibrated model parameters under alternative modeling as-
     sumptions. In the model with equal returns, we set r = rH = 0.021. In the model with
     retirement accounts, we add retirement accounts as defined in Section A.7.2. The tempta-
     tion parameter is set at  = 0.28 following Kovacs, Low, and Moran (2020).



than in our baseline model (the first row). In addition, we find that the average MPC
declines only gradually with respect to shock size. The average consumption response to
a $10,000 shock is 0.27, only slightly lower than our baseline result of 0.29.

              Table A.7: MPC Heterogeneity ­ Alternative Modeling Assumptions

                                                                   SHOCK SIZE
         MPC                                             $1, 000      $5, 000       $10, 000

         MPC in Baseline Model                             0.43         0.37          0.29
         MPC in Model with Equal Returns                   0.40         0.33          0.27
         MPC in Model with Retirement Accounts             0.43         0.38          0.28

        Note: This table shows the average MPC in the temptation model. In the model with
        equal returns, we set r = rH = 0.021. In the model with retirement accounts, we add
        retirement accounts as detailed in Section A.7.2.


A.7.2       Individual Retirement Accounts

   In order to evaluate sensitivity to alternative modeling assumptions about the re-
sources that are available to save for retirement, we extend our model by assuming that
households have an individual retirement accounts (IRAs) from which they then receive
annuitized disbursements after retirement. We make the simplifying assumption that
households have no choice over the size of their retirement account or the timing at
which they withdraw from their retirement account, i.e. retirement contributions are
mandatory and must be converted to an annuity at the age of retirement (W ). This
assumption implies that households suffer zero temptation to consume their retirement
account.

                                                50
    We require all households to purchase an annuity in the first year of retirement using
the entirety of their retirement account. This ensures equal payments throughout the
remainder of their life. During each year of retirement, households receive annuitized
disbursements that depend on the replacement rate 1 and the size of their IRA at
retirement:


                                   IRA
                                  yi,t = 1  IRA(yi,W )                               (A.8)

We assume that the size of the retirement account is a linear function of last working
period income. This simplifying assumption allows us to include retirement accounts
without the introduction of an additional state variable. The size of the retirement
account is given by the following formula:


                              log[IRA(yi,W )] = 2  log(yi,W )                        (A.9)

The relationship between last period income and the size of the retirement account (2 )
is estimated using the PSID. Estimation is performed on a sample of households where
the head is age 60 to 65 and currently employed. We find a value of  ^2 = 0.99.

   Finally, the annuity is priced equal to its discounted value, giving the following re-
placement rate during retirement:

                                        T                 -1
                                                 st
                                1 =                                                 (A.10)
                                       t=W
                                             (1 + r)t-W

    We then re-calibrate the preference parameters of the model, under the assumption
that households have individual retirement accounts as just described. The third column
of Table A.6 shows the parameter results. We find that the impatience parameter ( ) and
the risk aversion ( ) hardly change, compared to the baseline model. On the other hand,
modifying the asset structure of households increases the housing preference parameters
significantly (µ, , ).
   The third row of Table A.7 shows the MPC by shock size for our alternative model
with IRAs. We find that the average MPCs are almost identical in this alternative model,
and there still exists a sizable consumption response to large income shocks. For instance,
we find an MPC of 0.28 in response to a $10,000 shock, only slightly smaller than the
MPC of 0.29 in our baseline model.




                                             51
References

Aguiar, Mark A., Mark Bils, and Corina Boar. 2020. "Who Are the Hand-to-Mouth?"
  NBER Working Paper (26643).

Aladangady, Aditya, Shifrah Aron-Dine, David Cashin, Wendy Dunn, Laura Feiveson,
  Paul Lengermann, Katherine Richard, and Claudia Sahm. 2018. "High-frequency
  Spending Responses to the Earned Income Tax Credit." FEDS Notes. Board of Gov-
  ernors of the Federal Reserve, Washington, DC .

Altonji, Joseph G. and Lewis M. Segal. 1996. "Small-Sample Bias in GMM Estimation of
  Covariance Structures." Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 14 (3):353­366.

Amador, Manuel, Iv´ an Werning, and George-Marios Angeletos. 2006. "Commitment vs.
 flexibility." Econometrica 74 (2):365­396.

Amromin, Gene, Jennifer Huang, Clemens Sialm, and Edward Zhong. 2018. "Complex
 mortgages." Review of Finance 22 (6):1975­2007.

Angeletos, George-Marios, David Laibson, Andrea Repetto, Jeremy Tobacman, and
 Stephen Weinberg. 2001. "The Hyperbolic Buffer Stock Model: Calibration, Simu-
 lation, and Empirical Evaluation." Journal of Economic Perspectives 15 (3):47­68.

Ashraf, Nava, Dean Karlan, and Wesley Yin. 2006. "Tying Odysseus to the mast: Evi-
  dence from a commitment savings product in the Philippines." The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 121 (2):635­672.

Attanasio, Orazio P., Renata Bottazzi, Hamish Low, Lars Neisham, and Matt Wakefield.
  2012. "Modeling the Demand for Housing over the Lifecycle." Review of Economic
  Dynamics 15 (1):10­53.

Attanasio, Orazio P. and Thomas DeLeire. 2002. "The Effect Of Individual Retire-
  ment Accounts On Household Consumption And National Saving." Economic Journal
  112 (6):504­538.

Auclert, Adrien, Matthew Rognlie, and Ludwig Straub. 2018. "The Intertemporal Key-
 nesian Cross." Mimeo .

Bayer, Christian, Ralph Luetticke, Lien Pham-Dao, and Volker Tjaden. 2019. "Precau-
  tionary Savings, Illiquid Assets, and the Aggregate Consequences of Shocks to House-
  hold Income Risk." Econometrica 87 (1):255­290. URL https://onlinelibrary.
  wiley.com/doi/abs/10.3982/ECTA13601.

                                         52
Bernstein, Asaf and Peter Koudijs. 2020. "Mortgage Amortization and Wealth Accumu-
  lation." mimeo .

Beshears, John, James J Choi, Christopher Harris, David Laibson, Brigitte C Madrian,
  and Jung Sakong. 2020. "Which early withdrawal penalty attracts the most deposits
  to a commitment savings account?" Journal of Public Economics 183:104144.

Blundell, Richard, Luigi Pistaferri, and Itay Saporta-Eksten. 2016. "Consumption In-
  equality and Familiy Labor Supply." American Economic Review 106 (2):387­435.

Boar, Corina, Denis Gorea, and Virgiliu Midrigan. 2020. "Liquidity constraints in the
  US housing market."

Bosworth, Barry, Sarah Anders et al. 2008. "Saving and Wealth Accumulation in the
  PSID, 1984-2005." .

Bunn, Philip, Jeanne Roux, Kate Reinold, and Paolo Surico. 2018. "The Consumption
  Response to Positive and Negative Income Shocks." Journal of Monetary Economics
  96:1­15.

Carroll, Christopher, Jiri Slacalek, Kiichi Tokuoka, and Matthew N. White. 2017. "The
  Distribution of Wealth and the Marginal Propensity to Consume." Forthcoming, Quan-
  titative Economics .

Chambers, Matthew, Carlos Garriga, and Don E Schlagenhauf. 2009. "Housing policy and
 the progressivity of income taxation." Journal of Monetary Economics 56 (8):1116­
 1134.

Charles, Kerwin Kofi and Erik Hurst. 2002. "The Transition To Home Ownership And
 The Black-White Wealth Gap." The Review of Economics and Statistics 84 (2):281­
 297.

Choukhmane, Taha. 2019. "Default Options and Retirement Saving Dynamics." mimeo
 .

DeFusco, Anthony and John Mondragon. 2018. "No job, no money, no refi: Frictions to
  refinancing in a recession." No Money, No Refi: Frictions to Refinancing in a Recession
  (August 2018) .

Di, Zhu Xiao, Eric Belsky, and Xiaodong Liu. 2007. "Do Homeowners Achieve More
  Household Wealth In The Long Run?" Journal of Housing Economics 16:274­290.

Fagereng, Andreas, MArtin B. Holm, and Gisle J. Natvik. 2019. "MPC Heterogeneity
  and Household Balance Sheets." CESifo Working Paper (7134).

                                           53
Fang, Hanming and Dan Silverman. 2009. "Time-inconsistency and welfare program
  participation: Evidence from the NLSY." International Economic Review 50 (4):1043­
  1077.

Flavin, Marjorie and Takashi Yamashita. 2002. "Owner-Occupied Housing and the Com-
  position of the Household Portfolio." American Economic Review 92:345­362.

Floetotto, Max, Michael Kirker, and Johannes Stroebel. 2016. "Government intervention
  in the housing market: Who wins, who loses?" Journal of Monetary Economics
  80:106­123.

Fuster, Andreas, Greg Kaplan, and Basit Zafar. 2018. "What Would You Do with
  $500? Spending Responses to Gains, Losses, News and Loans." NBER Working Paper
  (24386).

Gale, William G and John Karl Scholz. 1994. "IRAs and household saving." The Amer-
 ican Economic Review :1233­1260.

Ganong, Peter and Pascal Noel. 2019. "Consumer spending during unemployment: Pos-
 itive and normative implications." American Economic Review 109 (7):2383­2424.

Gervais, Martin. 2002. "Housing taxation and capital accumulation." Journal of Mone-
 tary Economics 49 (7):1461­1489.

Goetzmann, William N and Matthew Spiegel. 2002. "Policy implications of portfolio
 choice in underserved mortgage markets." Low-income homeownership: Examining the
 unexamined goal :257­274.

Greenwald, Daniel and Adam Guren. 2019. "Do credit conditions move house prices?" .

Gul, Faruk and Wolfgang Pesendorfer. 2001. "Temptation and Self-Control." Economet-
 rica 69 (6):1403­1435.

------. 2004. "Self Control, Revealed Preference, and Consumption Choice." Review of
  Economic Dynamics 7:243­264.

Harris, Christopher and David Laibson. 2001. "Dynamic Choices of Hyperbolic Con-
  sumers." Econometrica 69:935­957.

Haurin, Donald R, Patric H Hendershott, and Susan M Wachter. 1997. "Borrowing
  Constraints and the Tenure Choice of Young Households." Journal of Housing Research
  8 (2):137.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai. 2003. "Do Consumers React to Anticipated Income Changes? Evi-
  dence from the Alaska Permanent Fun." American Economic Review 93:397­405.

                                         54
Jappelli, Tullio and Luigi Pistaferri. 2014. "Fiscal Policy and MPC Heterogeneity."
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 6 (4):107­136.

Johnson, David S., Johnathan A. Parker, and Nicholas S. Souleles. 2006. "Household
  Expenditure and the Income Tax Rebates of 2001." American Economic Review
  96 (5):1589­1610.

Jord`   `
    a, Oscar, Katharina Knoll, Dmitry Kuvshinov, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M Tay-
  lor. 2019. "The Rate of Return on Everything, 1870­2015*." The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 134 (3):1225­1298. URL https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjz012.

Kaas, Leo, Georgi Kocharkov, and Edgar Preugschat. 2019. "Wealth Inequality and
 Homeownership in Europe." Annals of Economics and Statistics .

Kaplan, Greg, Benjamin Moll, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2018. "Monetary Policy Ac-
 cording to HANK." American Economic Review 108 (3):697­743.

Kaplan, Greg and Giovanni L. Violante. 2014. "A Model of the Consumption Response
 to Fiscal Stimulus Payments." Econometrica 82 (4):1199­1239.

Kaplan, Greg, Giovanni L. Violante, and Justion Weidner. 2014. "The Wealthy Hand-
 to-Mouth." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity .

Keane, Michael P. and Nada Wasi. 2016. "Labor Supply: The Roles of Human Capital
  and the Extensive Margin." The Economic Journal 126 (592):578­617.

Kovacs, Agnes, Hamish Low, and Patrick Moran. 2020. "Estimating Temptation and
 Commitment Over the Life-Cycle." International Economic Review forthcoming.

Kovacs, Agnes and Patrick Moran. 2018. "Temptation, Commitment, and Hand-to-
 Mouth Consumers." mimeo .

------. 2020. "Breaking the Commitment Device: The Effect of Home Equity With-
  drawal on Consumption, Saving, and Welfare." .

Krusell, Per, Burhanettin Kuruscu, and Anthony A. Smith. 2010. "Temptation and
  Taxation." Econometrica 78 (6):2063­2084.

Kueng, Lorenz. 2018. "Excess Sensitivity of High-Income Consumers." The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics 133 (4):1693­1751.

Laibson, David. 1997. "Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting." Quarterly Journal of
  Economics :443­477.

LeBlanc, Julia and Tobias Schmidt. 2017. "Do Homeowners Save More? Evidence From
  the Panel on Household Finances (PHF)." mimeo .

                                        55
  Luetticke, Ralph. 2018. "Transmission of Monetary Policy with Heterogeneity in House-
    hold Portfolios." Discussion Papers 1819, Centre for Macroeconomics (CFM). URL
    https://ideas.repec.org/p/cfm/wpaper/1819.html.

  Misra, Kanishka and Paolo Surico. 2014. "Consumption, Income Changes, and Hetero-
   geneity: Evidence from Two Fiscal Stimulus Programs." American Economic Journal:
   Macroeconomics 6 (4):84­106.

  Nakajima, Makoto. 2012. "Rising Indebtedness and Temptation: A Welfare Analysis."
    Quantitative Economics 3 (2):257­288.

  ------. 2020. "Capital income taxation with housing." Journal of Economic Dynamics
    and Control 115:103883. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
    pii/S016518892030052X.

  Nakajima, Makoto and Irina A. Telyukova. 2020. "Home Equity in Retirement." Inter-
    national Economic Review 61 (2):573­616.

  OECD. 2011. "Housing and the Economy: Policies for Renovation." Economic Policy
   Reforms 2011: Going for Growth .

  Parker, Johnathan A., Nicholas S. Souleles, David S. Johnson, and Robert McClelland.
    2013. "Consumer Spending and the Economic Stimulus Payments of 2008." American
    Economic Review 103 (6).

  Parker, Jonathan A. 2017. "Why Don't Households Smooth Consumption? Evidence
    from a 25M illionExperiment. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics9 (4) :
    153 - -83.

Pfeffer, Fabian, Robert F. Schoeni, Arthur Kinnickell, and Patricia Anderski. 2016. "Mea-
  suring Wealth and Wealth Inequality." Journal of Economic and Social Measurement
  41 (2):103­120.

Phelps, Edmund and Robert A. Pollak. 1968. "On Second-Best National Saving and Game-
  Equilibrium Growth." The Review of Economic Studies 35:185­199.

Piazzesi, Monika, Martin Schneider, and Selale Tuzel. 2007. "Housing, Consumption and
  Asset Pricing." Journal of Financial Economics 83(3):531­569.

Poterba, James M. 1992. "Taxation and housing: Old questions, new answers." Tech. rep.,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Rosen, Harvey S. 1985. "Housing subsidies: Effects on housing decisions, efficiency, and
  equity." In Handbook of public economics, vol. 1. Elsevier, 375­420.

                                            56
Schlafmann, Kathrin. 2020. "Housing, Mortgages, and Self-Control." The Review of Fi-
  nancial Studies URL https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhaa096. Hhaa096.

Shapiro, Matthew D. and Joel Slemrod. 2003. "Consumer REsponse to Tax Rebates."
  American Economic Review 93 (1):381­396.

------. 2009. "Did the 2008 Tax Rebates Stimulate Spending?"            American Economic
  Review: Papers and Proceedings 99 (2):374­379.

Shiller, Robert J. 2014. CNN Money .

Shiller, Robert J. 2015. Irrational exuberance: Revised and expanded third edition. Princeton
  university press.

Strotz, Robert H. 1956. "Myopia and Inconsistency in Dynamic Utility Maximization."
  The Review of Economic Studies 23:165­180.

Svensson, Lars EO. 2019. "Amortization requirements, distortions, and household resilience:
  Problems of macroprudential policy II." Tech. rep., Working Paper, Stockholm School of
  Economics.

------. 2020. "Macroprudential policy and household debt: What is wrong with Swedish
  macroprudential policy?" .

Thaler, Richard H. and Shlomo Benartzi. 2004. "Save More Tomorrow: Using Behavioral
 Economics to Increase Employee Saving." Journal of Political Economy 102:S164­S187.

Toussaert, S´
            everine. 2018. "Eliciting Temptation and Self-Control Through Menu Choices:
  A Lab Experiment." Econometrica 86 (3):859­889.

Turner, Tracy M and Heather Luea. 2009. "Homeownership, wealth accumulation and
  income status." Journal of Housing Economics 18 (2):104­114.

Venti, Steven F and David A Wise. 1986. "Tax-deferred accounts, constrained choice and
  estimation of individual saving." The Review of Economic Studies 53 (4):579­601.

------. 1987. "IRAs and saving." In The effects of taxation on capital accumulation.
  University of Chicago Press, 7­52.

Vihri¨
     al¨
       a, Erkki. 2019. "Limited demand for flexibility­commitment, inertia and inattention
  in debt repayment." Tech. rep.

Wiedemer, J.P. and J.K. Baker. 2012. Real Estate Finance, 9th ed. Cengage Learning.




                                              57
