                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  HAS THE STOCK MARKET BECOME LESS REPRESENTATIVE OF THE ECONOMY?

                                   Frederik P. Schlingemann
                                        René M. Stulz

                                      Working Paper 27942
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27942


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2020




We thank Leandro Sanz for excellent research assistance. We are grateful for comments from
Harry DeAngelo, Craig Doidge, Andrei Gonçalves, and seminar participants at the Ohio State
University and Tulane University. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Frederik P. Schlingemann and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Has the Stock Market Become Less Representative of the Economy?
Frederik P. Schlingemann and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 27942
October 2020
JEL No. E44,G23,G32,K22,L16

                                         ABSTRACT

The firms listed on the stock market in aggregate as well as the top market capitalization firm
contribute less to total non-farm employment and GDP now than in the 1970s. A major reason for
this development is the decline of manufacturing and the growth of the service economy as firms
providing services are less likely to be listed on exchanges. We develop quantitative measures of
representativeness showing how firms' market capitalizations differ from their contribution to
employment and GDP. Representativeness is worst when the market is most highly valued and
worsens over time for employment, but not for value added.


Frederik P. Schlingemann
Katz Graduate School of Business
University of Pittsburgh
372 Mervis Hall
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
schlinge@katz.pitt.edu

René M. Stulz
The Ohio State University
Fisher College of Business
806A Fisher Hall
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz@cob.osu.edu
1. Introduction.

    In the summer of 2020, with the US economy bearing the impact of the COVID pandemic, the

unemployment rate is as high as it has been any time since 1948 and the NASDAQ and the S&P 500 indices

reach their highest value ever. This dramatic difference in trajectories between unemployment and the stock

market raises the question of how much the stock market reflects the health of the American economy and

whether in recent years it does so less than it used to. Firms listed on national exchanges as well as indices

that reflect the market capitalization of these firms receive huge amounts of attention from the public at

large, policymakers, and finance academics. Most academic finance research focuses on listed firms, but if

these firms or their indices have become less representative of the economy, their signals may be misleading

about the economy as a whole. We explore this issue from 1950 to 2019 for a subset of our data and from

1973 to 2019 for most of our data. We investigate how the direct contribution of listed firms to employment

and GDP evolves. We find that listed firms contribute less to employment and GDP in the 2010s than in

the 1970s.

    In 1953, Charles Wilson, the president of GM, the firm with the largest market capitalization, uttered

the sentence for which he is famous: "for years I thought what was good for our country was good for

General Motors, and vice versa. The difference does not exist."1 Could it be that the firm with the largest

market capitalization is more representative of the economy then than it is now? Charles Wilson added in

his response to a senator that "Our company is too big. It goes with the welfare of the country. Our

contribution to the Nation is quite considerable." In this paper, we measure the extent to which a firm's

market capitalization reflects its concurrent contribution to the economy. We show a strong downward trend

in the extent to which a firm's market capitalization reflects its concurrent contribution to employment.

With value added, market capitalizations are least instructive about a firms' contemporaneous contribution

to GDP around 2000, but market capitalizations appear to be as instructive about firms' contribution to

GDP in the 1970s as in the 2010s.


1
 Hearings before the Committee on Armed Services, United States Senate, Eighty-Third Congress, First Session on
Nominee Designates, Government Printing Office, 1953, p. 26.

                                                       1
    There is no compelling theoretical reason for the stock market to be highly representative of the

economy and there are many reasons for why it would not be. Firms that are listed are firms for which a

listing is valuable. Not all firms find it valuable to be listed and these unlisted firms differ from listed firms.

Further, market capitalization reflects the value of a firm for its shareholders, but this value need not be

correlated with a firm's contribution to employment or GDP. This lack of correlation can be for good

reasons or bad reasons. For example, a firm might contribute little to the economy now but be expected to

contribute much more in the future and hence have a high market capitalization because it reflects its future

contribution. Another example is that a firm's market capitalization could increase even though its

contribution to employment or to GDP does not change if it finds a way to pay its workers less without

affecting their performance. Because of these considerations, how much the stock market reflects the

economy is an empirical question.

    Employment is a reliable benchmark for the state of the economy. Employment data for the whole

economy is available for our sample period, does not depend on accounting rules, and is collected by the

Federal government irrespective of whether a firm is public or not. For public corporations, employment is

available for most corporations annually since the early 1970s. We find that, from 1973 to 2019, the

percentage of employees working for public firms is highest at the start of the sample period and falls

sharply in the 1980s. At the beginning of that period, more than 41.4 percent of non-farm workers in the

private sector work for public firms, but in 2019, that percentage is 29.0 percent. In 2019, the percentage

of non-farm workers in the private sector working for public firms is the lowest for our sample period for

industrial firms and for all firms, including financial firms, it is the lowest except for 1989 and 1990.

    We create a measure of unrepresentativeness to capture how poorly market capitalization proxies for a

firm's contribution to employment over time. For each firm, we measure the absolute value of the difference

between the firm's market capitalization as a share of the market capitalization of the stock market and the

firm's employment share among public firms defined as the firm's employment divided by the employment

of all stock market firms. The measure of unrepresentativeness is proportional to the sum of these

differences. Intuitively, it is the difference between a portfolio that holds the stock market and a portfolio

                                                        2
with weights equal to the employment weights of firms. 2 The unrepresentativeness measure increases as

the two portfolios differ more. We call this measure our employment unrepresentativeness measure. This

measure follows a w-shape, with its lowest values in the 1980s and 1990s and its highest values in the

1970s, around 2000, and in the recent past. The stock market is more unrepresentative at the end of our

sample period with respect to employment than at any time except around the year 2000. Another way to

show that market capitalizations are not instructive about firms' contribution to employment is to estimate

how much of the variation in market capitalizations can be explained by variation in employment. We find

that from 1973 to 2019 a firm's employment never explains as little of its market capitalization as in 2019.

In most years in the 1970s and early 1980s, firm employment explains more than 50% of the variation in

market capitalization. In each of the last four sample years but one, firm employment explains less than

20% of the variation in market capitalization.

    Assessing a firm's contribution to GDP is more fraught with difficulties. A firm's value added depends

on the total compensation it pays to its employees. However, most firms do not disclose how much they

pay to their employees separately. It is therefore necessary to make approximations. We follow the existing

literature in making these approximations (Donangelo, Gourio, Kehrig, and Palacios, 2019; Hartman-

Glaser, Lustig, and Xiaolan, 2019; Bennett, Stulz, and Wang, 2020). With these approximations, we find

that the contribution of public firms to GDP is higher in the 1970s than in the 2000s. This result is insensitive

to the approximations we make. Using the same approach to measure unrepresentativeness as with

employment, we construct a measure of unrepresentativeness for value added. The stock market's

unrepresentativeness for value added follows a w-shape with unrepresentativeness high early in the sample

period, around 2000, and late in the sample period. In contrast to employment, the unrepresentativeness at

the end of the sample period is less than at the beginning of the sample period. Lastly, we examine how

well cross-sectional variation in market capitalizations can be explained with our measure of firm value-

added. We find that variation in value-added best explains the variation in market capitalization in the late


2
 This measure follows the approach used by Cremers and Petajisto (2009) to measure the active share of a portfolio,
where they compare the active portfolio's weights to the weights of a benchmark portfolio.

                                                        3
1970s and early 1980s. While employment explains less of the variation in market capitalization in the

2010s than in the 1970s, the same is not the case for value added. The variation in value-added explains the

variation in market capitalization less well at the end of the sample period than in a number of years, but it

explains it better than in the period from 1988 (1991 for industrial firms) to 2003.

    The w-shape pattern for our unrepresentativeness measures is such that the highest values of these

measures occur when the market is most highly valued. We show this by regressing our

unrepresentativeness measures on the Shiller CAPE ratio (Shiller, 2000) and the square of the ratio to

capture a possible non-linearity in the relation. We generally find that unrepresentativeness increases with

the square of the ratio, so that it is high when valuations are very high or very low. Such a result occurs

because extreme market valuation levels affect some sectors more than others and hence distort valuations

relative to concurrent employment or value added.

    The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) publishes employment data for broad industry categories,

referred to as supersectors. We use these data to show that there is a straightforward explanation for the

decline in the employment contribution of public firms. A stock market listing is generally more valuable

for manufacturing firms than for firms that provide services. Manufacturing firms have to raise capital to

finance plants and equipment. Manufacturing firms that are successful become large with many

shareholders. Service firms often have small funding needs for plant and equipment. Perhaps more

importantly, they typically have few employees and their most important assets, their employees, walk out

of the door at the end of every business day. During no time in our sample period is the percentage of

employees working for listed manufacturing firms less than 60 percent of employees working for listed and

unlisted manufacturing firms combined. In 1973, manufacturing is the supersector with the most employees

in the US economy, but over the period 1973-2019 its number of employees declines by more than 30

percent even though the size of the economy increases substantially. The supersector with the highest

employee growth over this period is education and health services. In 1973, the workforce of this

supersector is 27% of the workforce of manufacturing. In 2019, its number of employees is 2.4 times the

number of employees of the manufacturing supersector. Education and health services has 3.6% of

                                                      4
employees working for listed firms in 2019 in contrast to the manufacturing supersector, which has 79.6%

of employees working for listed firms. Had manufacturing employment grown like the employment of

education and health services, the share of total employment represented by listed firms would be as high

in 2019 as in the 1970s.

    Manufacturing is the supersector with the largest stock market capitalization. Despite the fact that the

market capitalization share of the manufacturing supersector falls over time, it is the largest market

capitalization supersector throughout the sample period. We examine how representative the employment

distribution of listed firms across supersectors is of the distribution of non-farm payroll employment across

supersectors. Using a measure of unrepresentativeness, we find that this measure increases sharply over our

sample period. Such an outcome is not surprising since the fastest growing supersectors are those where

listed firms contribute the smallest fraction to employment in that supersector.

    Next, we investigate the contributions of the largest market capitalization firm and of the top-three

market capitalization firms to the economy. The share of the stock market capitalization of the top market

capitalization firm is consistently much higher before 1980. Fogel, Morck, and Yeung (2008) show that

turnover among the largest firms is associated with higher economic growth. Strikingly, from 1950 to 2019,

only seven distinct firms have the top market capitalization in at least one year. Only two of these firms,

General Motors and AT&T, ever have the largest number of employees in the US. The percentage of US

non-farm payrolls represented by the largest market capitalization firm declines steadily over time, so that

it is at its lowest in the 2000s. The percentage of US GDP represented by the largest market capitalization

firm is also lower in the 2000s than before 1980. The contribution of the top market capitalization firm to

the economy in 2019 is a fraction of GM's contribution in 1953.

    Two important caveats are in order. First, the data for public corporations is comprehensive data in that

it includes both domestic and foreign activities. Consequently, the employment of a company is the

company's worldwide employment. Companies sometimes disclose separately domestic and foreign

employment, but they do not do that with enough consistency for us to attempt to use only domestic

employment. It follows that we measure the total economic contribution of the listed firms rather than only

                                                     5
their contribution within the US. This means that our estimates of the contribution of listed firms to the US

economy are upper bounds of their actual domestic contribution to the economy. Because international

activities of firms have increased, the domestic contribution of listed firms to the economy decreases more

than the total contribution of listed firms. Second, we focus on the direct contribution of listed firms to the

economy, which means that we focus on the employment and the value added of these firms in a given

year. We do not capture indirect contributions of these firms. For instance, because these firms are public,

their stock price is freely observable by everybody. The stock price may contain information that is valuable

to other firms (e.g., Foucault and Frésard, 2014). Our study does not capture these indirect information

spillover effects.

      Our paper relates and contributes to several literatures. To start, there is an extensive literature that

examines whether the stock market forecasts future economic growth. The most famous contribution to this

literature is Samuelson's quip that the stock market has predicted nine of the last five recessions. 3 A recent

study by Ritter (2012) using data from 1900 to 2011 for 19 countries, concludes that there is a negative

cross-sectional correlation between stock market returns and economic growth. In other words, countries

with greater growth experience poorer stock market performance. Levine and Zervos (1998) find evidence

that stock market capitalization predicts long-run economic growth, but also find that this effect is

subsumed by market turnover. Fischer and Merton (1984) argue that "the stock market is a good predictor

of the business cycle" and Harvey (1987) finds that bond market data is much more useful than stock market

data to predict future economic growth from 1953 to 1989. Stock and Watson (2003) review the literature

on forecasting output with asset prices and produce their own evidence. They conclude that the relation

between asset prices and output is unstable. We show that the stock market firms' contribution to the

economy has fallen, which would suggest that the stock market may have become less valuable as a proxy

for the level of economic activity. We also show that stock market valuations are particularly disconnected

from firms' contributions to the economy when the stock market as a whole is particularly highly valued.



3
    "Science and stocks," by Paul A. Samuelson, Newsweek, September 19, 1966.

                                                        6
    A second literature examines whether, instead of predicting future growth, the stock market contributes

to economic growth. In particular, this literature considers the impact of non-fundamental changes in stock

market valuations. Morck, Shleifer, Vishny (1990) find little evidence of an independent effect of the stock

market on fundamentals. Baker, Stein, and Wurgler (2003) find evidence that non-fundamental stock price

movements affect investment of firms that are equity-dependent, in that they need equity financing to

finance their investments. To the extent that stock market firms have a smaller contribution to the economy,

non-fundamental changes in the level of the stock market are likely to have a smaller impact on the economy

as well.

    A more recent literature investigates how the composition of the stock market is related to growth. In

particular, Fogel, Morck, and Yeung (2009) show that countries grow less when the top market

capitalization firms change less frequently. Relatedly, Bae, Bailey, and Kang (2020) examine the

implications of stock market concentration. By market concentration, they mean the fraction of a stock

market's capitalization accounted for by the top market capitalization firms. They find that greater

concentration in a stock market predicts lower growth. Finally, Bae, Elkahmi, and Simutin (2019) show

that the stock market firms are a poor vehicle to acquire exposure to developing country economies because

in many developing countries listed firms correspond to a small part of the economy.

    Our analysis of how firm market capitalizations relate to the contribution of firms to the economy adds

to the considerable firm valuation literature. The most closely related paper from that literature is Belo,

Gala, Salomao, and Vitorino (2019). That paper estimates how labor, physical capital, and intangible capital

contribute to firm value over time. The authors do not relate firm value to firm value added, but they find

that in their decomposition labor accounts for 14% to 22% of a firm's market value. We show that firm

labor force explains much less of the cross-sectional variation of firm market value in recent years than it

did earlier in our sample period.

    Finally, this paper also relates to the literature on the listing gap (Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz, 2017).

This literature shows that listings on US exchanges peak in 1996 and that the US has fewer listings than

predicted by cross-sectional regressions that explain the number of listings per capita across countries. This

                                                      7
literature demonstrates that the number of listings depends on a number of factors that can change over

time, including regulations and the composition of firm balance sheets (Stulz, 2020). Hence, we would

expect the number of firms listed to change over time. Doidge et al. (2017) and Kahle and Stulz (2017) find

that the size of listed firms increases after 1997 while the number of listed firms falls. Consequently, the

listing gap by itself does not imply that the contribution of listed firms to the economy, which is the topic

we focus on in this paper, falls after 1997.

    The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we discuss when the stock market is likely to be

representative of the economy. In Section 3, we investigate how listed firms as a whole contribute to

employment and GDP. In Section 4, we explain why the contribution of listed firms to employment and

GDP falls like it does. Section 5 assesses how well a firm's market capitalization corresponds to its

concurrent contribution to employment and GDP. We investigate how the top industry in market

capitalization contributes to employment and market capitalization and how it does so relative to other

industries in Section 6. In Section 7, we examine the top three firms by market capitalization over time,

their importance in the market, and their contribution to the economy. We conclude in Section 8.



2. When is the stock market representative of the economy?

    There are two fundamental forces that affect how representative the stock market is of the economy.

First, there is a selection effect: firms are listed on an exchange when they are better off to be listed than

not. Second, market capitalization by definition measures the value of a firm for its shareholders, which

may differ from that firm's concurrent contribution to the economy. We address these issues in turn.



2.1. Public versus private firms.

    In the US, a firm listed on an exchange has to be a public firm in that it files regular reports with the

SEC. As a result, most public firms are listed firms and most unlisted firms are not public firms. In the

following, we make no distinction between public and listed firms. If a firm meets an exchange's listing

requirements, acquiring a listing on that exchange is a choice. By far, most firms are private. For instance,

                                                      8
in 2016, which is the most recent year for which the finalized data on the number of firms are available

from the Census Bureau, the US has 5,954,684 firms, but only 3,618 listed firms. 4 However, as shown by

Doidge et al. (2017), even among firms that appear to employ as many employees as listed firms, relatively

few firms are listed.

    To decide whether to be listed or not, firms compare the benefits of a listing to the costs. Both the

benefits and costs change over time (Stulz, 2020). Because unlisted firms are firms that do not find it

advantageous to be listed, the listed firms necessarily differ from other firms. The main advantages of being

listed include a greater ability to raise funds, the ability to use stock as a merger currency, the liquidity

benefits for shareholders, and the information about the firm generated by public markets (see, e.g., Pagano,

Panetta, and Zingales, 1998). The costs of being listed include disclosure requirements, greater attention

paid to the firm and management, and fixed and variable costs of listing. The balance of benefits and costs

is such that tiny firms rarely list and that larger firms are much more likely to be listed than smaller firms.

If the benefits of an exchange listing decrease, everything else equal, fewer firms will be listed. As a result,

differences between listed and unlisted firms increase. For example, Doidge et al. (2017) assume that the

benefits of listing increase with firm size. Consequently, a decrease in the benefits of listing that leaves the

costs unchanged results in an increase in the size of listed firms. Hence, following such a decrease in the

benefits, the listed firms become larger relative to the population of firms. Everything else equal, we would

expect a larger firm to have a larger contribution to the economy, so that it is unclear whether fewer listings

implies a lower contribution to the economy of listed firms compared to unlisted firms.

    Firms with large funding needs are firms that are more likely to be listed on an exchange. Typically,

such firms cannot rely exclusively on debt financing and have to raise equity as well to avoid having

excessively high leverage. Equity investors want to make sure that they earn a return on their investment

and want the listed firm to have mechanisms in place that assure them a return (Shleifer and Vishny, 1997).



4
The total number of firms is from the 2016 SUSB Annual Data Tables by Establishment Industry, United States
Census Bureau, for total number of firms. The number of listed firms is from CRSP and follows the approach of
Doidge et al. (2017).

                                                       9
In general, investors are more willing to fund tangible assets than intangible assets. With intangible assets,

investors are concerned about potential expropriation of the assets (see, e.g., Haskel and Westlake, 2017).

In particular, it can be difficult to assert property rights on intangible assets in development. Because of

these considerations, firms for which tangible assets are important or firms with intangible assets that have

well-defined property rights are more likely to be listed than firms with intangible assets mostly in

development. Among firms with these properties are firms that engage in the production of goods. These

firms need funding to scale their operations. Firms in service industries often do not have much in the way

of hard assets and do not have much in the way of intangible assets with well-defined property rights. For

instance, a law firm is nothing without its lawyers, but these lawyers can change firms. Law firms do not

go public. Also, most firms in the service sector do not scale in such a way that it would make sense for

them to be listed. Importantly, agency costs differ across industries. As a result, the agency costs of the

separation of ownership and control that are intrinsic to an exchange listing may be higher in some

industries than others and hence affect the propensity of firms to list in an industry (Fama and Jensen, 1983).

It follows from this that the industry composition affects the economic importance of the firms listed on

exchanges.



2.2. Market capitalization versus concurrent economic contribution.

    A firm's market capitalization does not directly reflect its concurrent contribution to the economy. It

reflects its value to its shareholders. Specifically, the market capitalization of a firm is the present value of

the cash flows that the shareholders will receive from that firm:



                                                        =
                                                = =  (, ) [ ()]                                             (1)



where  is the value of the equity of firm i at time t and equals the discounted sum of expected future cash

flows to equity. Di (t, j) is the discount factor that applies to a cash flow to equity that accrues at date j to


                                                       10
firm i when discounted back to date t.  denotes the expectation formed at time t. Ci (j) is the cash flow to

equity at date j.

    Two important properties of the relation between a firm's market capitalization and its contribution to

the economy follow from the valuation formula. First, because the value of equity is the present value of

all future cash flows to equity, it is possible for the value of equity to vary considerably across firms that

have the same contribution to the economy in year t. For instance, compare two firms that have the same

expected cash flow to equity in year t, but for firm A the cash flow is expected to grow sharply over time

while for firm B the cash flow is expected to fall. Firm A will be worth much more than firm B. Second,

most of the value of a firm comes from future cash flows to equity. Large changes in a firm's cash flows to

equity this period have little impact on the value of the firm if they do not affect the market's expectation

of future cash flows from the same firm. A simple example is the following. Suppose that a firm will live

10 years and discount rates are zero for simplicity. Its cash flow to equity is 10 each year. In this case, the

value of the firm is 100. If the cash flow to equity falls by half this year but future cash flows are unaffected,

the value of the firm is lower by 5%. However, if all future cash flows fall by half as well, the value of the

firm falls by half.

    The firm's cash flow to equity this period does not have a monotonic relation with the firm's

contribution to GDP and employment. To understand how the cash flow to equity relates to a firm's

contribution to the economy, consider the typical case where firm i produces output worth Yi (t) in period t

using Li (t) units of labor paid wi (t) per unit, and intermediate goods Ii (t) paid qi (t) per unit. With this

notation, the value added of firm i in period t is:



                                   Value added of firm i in period t = Yi (t) ­ qi (t) Ii (t)                (2)



This value added is produced by labor and capital and represents the contribution of firm i to GDP. If the

firm is financed with equity only and equity owns the capital, then the equity-share of valued added is

defined as:

                                                        11
                 Equity share of value added by firm i in period t = Yi (t) ­ qi (t) Ii (t) ­ wi (t) Li (t)   (3)



If firm i were to distribute the equity share of value added to shareholders, the equity share of value added

would be the shareholders' cash flow in period t. If the firm retains some of the equity share and reinvests

it, it will lead to future cash flows to equity.

    A well-known valuation model in finance is the Gordon growth model (Gordon, 1962). With this

model, it is assumed that dividends will grow at a constant rate and are discounted at a constant discount

rate. Let ri be the required discount rate for future dividends and i the growth rate. If Ci corresponds to the

cash flow to equity of firm i over the next period, the market capitalization of the firm with the Gordon

growth model is:
                                                              
                                                      =                                                       (4)
                                                               -




    With this model, the value of equity increases with cash flows to shareholders, falls with the discount

rate and increases with the rate of growth. We can relate Ci to value added as follows. Let i be the fraction

of value added that accrues to shareholders at firm i. With this, i (Yi (t) ­ qi (t) Ii (t)) is the cash flow that

can be used to pay dividends. Let i be the fraction of the cash flow i (Yi (t) ­ qi (t) Ii (t)) paid out to

shareholders. In this case, the market capitalization of firm i is:



                                                     [ ()- () ()]
                                             =                                                                (5)
                                                         -




    With this approach, a firm's market capitalization can increase because shareholders receive a larger

fraction of value added. Two firms with identical value added can have very different market capitalizations

because of differences in expected growth, in the discount rate, or in the equity share of value added. For

instance, suppose that a firm has value added of 100, that 20% of the value added is received by

                                                         12
shareholders, and that half the value added captured by shareholders is paid out. With a discount rate of

10% and an expected growth rate of 5%, the market capitalization of the firm is 200. If the equity share

doubles, the market capitalization doubles assuming the growth rate is unchanged. So, two firms with

identical contributions to GDP can be valued very differently. Going back to the base case, suppose that a

firm has expected growth of zero. In this case, firm value becomes 100. In all these examples, the

contribution of the dividend paid this year to the firm's market capitalization is small. In our base case, the

dividend paid this year is 10 and the value of the firm is 200, so that the dividend paid this year makes up

5% of firm market capitalization.

    As the equity share of value added for a firm increases, so does its market capitalizations. However, a

firm's equity share of value added can increase while at the same time its value added falls. In other words,

the shareholders can gain while the firm's contribution to the economy falls. A firm can increase equity

cash flows by becoming more productive. In this case, it produces more units of goods with fewer inputs.

Alternatively, a firm can increase equity cash flows by exploiting an increase in market power over its

employees. In this case, the firm would pay its workers less or charge more for its products while producing

less. It is therefore perfectly possible for the market capitalization to increase while the firm contributes

less value added to the economy and employs fewer workers.

    Two firms that have the same production function could have a very different equity share of value

added because they are funded differently. Suppose that a firm has a balance sheet with a high leverage

ratio and the other has no debt. Without debt, all the firm's value added in excess of employment costs

accrues to equity holders either as payouts today or as future payouts. In contrast, with the highly leveraged

firm, only the value added left after paying the debt holders accrues to the equity holders.

    When would increases in market capitalization indicate that the economy is doing well in the sense that

employment and GDP are increasing as well? Equation (5) provides a roadmap for the answer. If i, i, ri,

and i stay constant, then a firm's market capitalization increases with its value added. Both value added

and employment increase if the firm's scale increases, if the price of inputs falls without being accompanied

by substitution of inputs for labor, or if technical progress is Hicksian neutral (Hicks, 1932). With Equation

                                                      13
(5), firms' relative market capitalizations are proportional to their relative value added when all the

parameters are the same across firms but their scale. Relative market capitalizations would then be equal to

relative employment contributions if employment at the firm level is a constant fraction of value-added.



3. How important are listed firms for the economy?

    In this section, we examine the evolution of the direct concurrent contribution of listed firms to the

economy. We use two measures of contribution: employment and value added. With these measures, we

investigate how listed firms as a whole contribute to the economy's employment level and to GDP. By

direct contribution, we mean that we compute the level of employment of a firm and its value added. Firms

also impact the economy through their demand for goods and the provision of goods. For instance, if a firm

expands, it will likely cause its suppliers to expand. Though consideration of these indirect effects would

be interesting, it goes beyond the scope of this study. In this study, we are interested in employment and

value added that are directly under the control of public firms. We first consider the contribution of public

firms to employment and then turn to their contribution to GDP.

    Though we have data for some public corporations in the 1950s and 1960s, employment data is not

available for as large a fraction of public corporations during these years as it is later. To study a period

where employment data is available for most public firms, we start our analysis in this section in 1973.

From 1973 onward, each year firms representing at least 93% of the market capitalization of US listed firms

have employment data available on Compustat. In some cases, a firm does not have employment data in a

given year but has it the year before and the year after. Such a situation can arise because of an ongoing

merger. In these cases, we interpolate linearly between the two years for which data is available. To make

sure that our sample firms are listed on national exchanges, we only include firms domiciled in the US for

which accounting data is available from Compustat and stock price information is available from the Center

for Research in Securities Prices (CRSP). We compute the percentage of non-farm payroll employment

represented by employees of public firms. Non-farm payroll employment is reported by the Bureau of Labor

Statistics (BLS) and includes all payroll employees from the private sector excluding farm workers, private

                                                     14
household employees, and non-profit organization employees. We use the non-seasonally adjusted measure

at the end of each year. A potential source of discrepancy between the two measures is that employment is

reported yearly by listed firms, but not necessarily on a calendar-year basis. However, most firms report on

a calendar year basis, so that most of our data for listed firms should be data at the end of the calendar year.

    Figure 1, Panel A, shows the evolution of the percentage of total non-farm payroll employment

represented by employees of listed firms. We show data for all public firms as well as for industrial firms.

We see that the percentage of non-farm employment represented by public firms falls sharply to reach a

low in the early 1990s. It then increases in the second half of the 1990s, before falling again with some

interruptions. Employment by all public firms or all industrial public firms represents more than 40% of

the non-farm payroll employment at the start of our sample period and less than 30% at the end of our

sample period. Most of the decrease in that percentage takes place in the 1980s. As a percentage of the non-

farm payroll employment, the employment by public industrial firms never represents a lower percentage

of non-farm payrolls than at the end of our sample period. When we include financial firms, the percentage

of the non-farm payroll employment corresponding to employment by public companies is lower in 1989

and 1990 than in 2019, but otherwise is always higher. The percentage of non-farm payroll employment

represented by public firms falls by 12.4 percentage points from 1973 to 2019, or by 30.0%.

    We now turn to value added. Unlike employment, public corporations do not report value added. As

discussed in Section 2, value added is a firm's revenue minus the cost of intermediate goods used in

production. An approximation frequently used in the literature is operating income before depreciation

(OIBDP) plus labor costs. We use this approximation as well but, unfortunately, less than 15% of

Compustat firms disclose labor costs. Therefore, we have to approximate labor costs at the firm level.

    The literature proposes different approaches to approximate labor costs. For example, Bennett, Stulz,

and Wang (2020) use the average labor cost per employee within an industry and then multiply employment

by that average cost per employee using the Fama-French classification with 12 industries (FF 12

industries). Donangelo, Gourio, Kehrig, and Placios (2019) add the inventory change to OIDP and compute

the average wage using the Fama-French classification with 17 industries (FF 17) when available and

                                                      15
otherwise use the average ratio from the 2-digit SIC industry. Lastly, Hartman-Glaser, Lustig, and Xiaolan

(2019) implement the approach of Donangelo et al. (2019) with two differences. First, they do not include

the inventory change. Second, they sort the firms within the FF 17 industries into 20 size groups based on

total assets. They then compute the average labor cost per employee for each size group within each

industry.

    We estimate value added using all three approaches. With each of these approaches, the authors

winsorize variables in various ways. With our study, we are interested in the total value added of listed

firms. With our dataset, winsorization has the effect of severely reducing the value added of the largest

firms. We therefore focus on results without winsorization to make sure we do not understate the economic

significance of listed firms. We also estimate value added with winsorization. Doing so has the effect of

reducing the contribution of public firms. Each of the three cited studies excludes the financial industry

from the sample. We report results for industrial firms, but also compute value added for the whole sample

of public firms. In total, we implement fourteen different approaches of computing a firm's value-added

that differ in whether and how we winsorize and in how employment compensation is derived when it is

not reported on Compustat for a firm. Among all these approaches, we highlight the results using the

Donangelo et al. (2019) approach without winsorization, but we compute labor costs using the industry

median instead of the mean. This measure, Value Added, is highly correlated with the measures using the

alternative approaches. Specifically, the correlation between that approach and any of the other approaches

is at least 92% when we do not use winsorization.

    For the economy as a whole, the sum of the value added by all firms is GDP. We therefore compute

the percentage of GDP represented by industrial public firms. We show that percentage in Figure 1, Panel

B. The time-series pattern for Value Added is similar to the one we document for employment in the early

years but differs in the second half of the sample period. The contribution of industrial public firms to GDP

is highest in the 1970s and then falls. It reaches a low of 20.1% in 1993. The average following that low is

20.8% to the end of the sample period. The contribution of industrial public firms to GDP in the last year

of the sample period is the same as the average.

                                                     16
    We also estimate the contribution to GDP of all listed firms including financial firms. As expected, the

sample that includes all public firms contributes more to GDP in every year. The contribution of all public

firms to GDP evolves similarly to the contribution of industrial firms except that the gap between the two

contributions increases over time and especially during the late 1990s. In the 1970s, the contribution to

GDP of listed financial firms is always less than 10% of the contribution of industrial firms. After 1995,

there is only one year where the contribution of listed financial firms to GDP is less than 20% of the

contribution of industrial firms, 2008. The largest contribution of listed financial firms to GDP is 39.2% of

the contribution of industrial firms in 2006.

    We implement approaches more similar to the one proposed in Hartman-Glaser et al. (2019) using a

variety of iterations of size portfolios and winsorization. We report the results for Value Added (HLX),

which employs no winsorization and five instead of twenty size bins. Value Added (HLX) has the highest

share for industrial listed firms among all the iterations of measures in the spirit of Hartman-Glaser et al.

(2019) we consider. We see that the contribution of public firms to GDP is slightly higher with Value Added

(HLX) than with Value Added, but the two measures evolve similarly. Appendix A provides a detailed

definition of Value Added and Value Added (HLX).

    Whether we consider employment or value added, we find that the public firms contribute directly to

the economy much more in the 1970s than in recent years. Since then, their contribution falls. For

employment, it reaches a low at the end of our sample period. For value added, it reaches a low in the early

1990s, but the contribution of public firms to GDP is only slightly higher at the end of our sample period

than in the early 1990s. In percentage terms, the contribution of industrial (all) listed firms to employment

falls by 30.0% (35.3%) from 1970 to 2019. Using the same approach, the contribution to GDP of industrial

(all) listed firms drops by 28.6% (14.5%). Similar to employment, the bulk of the drop in the contribution

of value added to the economy of listed firms takes place in the 1980s.

    The analysis so far in this section does not distinguish between purely domestic firms and

multinationals. Multinationals are firms with foreign affiliates and hence firms that employ workers both

in the US and abroad. The employment and operating income data we use are consolidated data at the firm

                                                     17
level. This means that for a multinational company the employment data includes workers employed abroad

and the operating income data includes income earned abroad. 5 Ideally, we would separate domestic from

foreign employment. As reported by Beatty and Liao (2012), disclosure of foreign employment by a

company is voluntary and most firms do not report foreign employment. Without foreign employment, we

cannot compute a firm's value added from foreign affiliates. It follows from this that our measures of the

contribution of listed firms to domestic employment and GDP are upper bounds. If foreign activities of

listed firms have become more important over time, the domestic contribution to economic activity of listed

firms falls more than we show.

    We take two approaches that help understand the importance of international activities. First, the

Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) reports yearly data on the activities of US multinational companies.

The first release of the data is in 1982 and the most recent is in 2018. Unfortunately, the data is for all US

multinational companies and it does not distinguish between listed and unlisted firms. The 2019 BEA

release shows that roughly 75% of the employees of US multinationals work in the US in 1999. For 2018,

it is 66.5% with US multinationals employing 28.6 million workers domestically and 14.4 million abroad.

The workers employed abroad by US multinationals correspond to 9.1% of the total domestic non-farm

employment. In 1982, workers employed abroad represent 6.8% of US non-farm employment and 65% of

them are employed by firms in the manufacturing supersector. The percentage employed in the

manufacturing sector falls to 38% in 2018. Yet, during that time, while domestic employment in

manufacturing falls sharply, foreign employment in manufacturing by US firms increases by 22%. Though

the 1982 release of the BEA does not report value added data, the more recent ones do. In 2018, for example,

US multinationals have worldwide value added of $5.7 trillion. Of that amount, value added by foreign

affiliates is $1.5 trillion or 23% of worldwide value added.

    With the BEA data, we cannot adjust the employment of listed firms to exclude workers employed

abroad by these firms. Instead, we adjust the total non-farm employment to include employment by US


5
 Note that multinationals during our sample period have incentives to not repatriate foreign income for tax reasons.
However, the foreign income is still included in consolidated accounts.

                                                         18
multinationals abroad to obtain worldwide employment by US firms. We can then measure the fraction of

worldwide employment by US firms accounted for by listed firms for the period for which the BEA data is

available. As can be seen in Figure 1A, with this adjustment, the fraction of worldwide employment by US

firms accounted for by listed firms falls over time and is at its lowest at the end of 2019. We proceed in the

same way for Figure 1B. Taking into account foreign value added of multinationals does not change our

inferences in a significant way.

    Second, we use Compustat to measure the share of pre-tax income attributable to foreign operations.

Figure 2 shows the evolution of the share of foreign pre-tax income to all pre-tax income. The graph plots

the percentage for industrial firms (excluding utilities). Note that widespread coverage of foreign and

domestic income on Compustat starts in 1984. We find that the share of foreign pre-tax income increases

sharply from 2000 to 2010. The takeaway from both approaches is that the contribution of listed firms to

domestic employment and GDP, if anything, falls more than we can show directly with the data available

to us.

    As discussed in Kahle and Stulz (2017), investments in intangible capital have become more important

for listed firms. These investments are often expensed under GAAP. As a result, they decrease operating

income before depreciation (OIBDP) that we use to estimate value added, which leads to an understatement

of value added. At the same time, however, the employment expenses used in the computation of value

added should be employment expenses for workers used in production. Some employees work on

investment projects rather than production. For instance, R&D typically requires the work of researchers.

To compute value added, we would like to remove from our measure the expenses of workers engaged in

investment projects. Doing so would decrease value added. While it is possible to adjust OIBDP for

investment in intangibles, firms do not disclose the number of employees used in investment projects as

opposed to production, which means we cannot adjust the number of employees. Consequently, an

adjustment to OIBDP without an adjustment to the number of employees would overstate value added.

Nevertheless, to assess whether our conclusions depend on the accounting treatment of intangible

investments, we adjust OIBDP following the approach and variable definitions of Peters and Taylor (2017).

                                                     19
This approach adds R&D expenditures and 30% of SG&A back to OIBDP. In unreported analyses, we find

that the adjusted relative to the unadjusted aggregate value added increases throughout the period from

1973 to 2019, with a difference of approximately 12% until 1980, which then increases and levels off at

23% in 2000. Hence, the importance of intangible investments increases mostly from 1980 to 2000.

However, our main conclusion about the evolution of the contribution of listed firms to GDP, as shown in

Figure 1B, does not change when we use the adjusted value added. To conserve space we do not reproduce

this figure, but the contribution of listed firms to GDP continues to be much lower in the 2000s than in the

1970s.



4. Why has the contribution of listed firms to the economy fallen?

    In Section 2, we explain why some industries are better suited for firms to list on exchanges compared

to others. In this section, we show that over our sample period the industries that are well represented in the

stock market shrink while the sectors that are poorly represented grow sharply. To show this, we have to

use what BLS refers to as NAICS supersectors as this is the data for the whole economy available over the

period 1973-2019. These supersectors are not granular. The ten supersectors correspond roughly to SIC

one-digit codes. 6 Compustat has NAICS codes for the majority of firms that exist after 1985. For firms that

delist before 1985, NAICS codes are frequently missing. For these firms, we follow the procedure outlined

in Covarrubias, Gutiérrez, and Philippon (2019). This procedure maps these firms to the most common

NAICS-4 industry among firms with same SIC and non-missing NAICS. As discussed in Section 3, the

employment data for listed firms is their worldwide employment. In contrast, the BLS supersector data is

domestic employment. As a result of this discrepancy, it is possible for a supersector to have more than

100% of BLS employment by listed firms. We find that to be the case in some years for the information

sector.




6
   We exclude the Government supersector. A detailed description of supersectors is available at
https://www.bls.gov/sae/additional-resources/naics-supersectors-for-ces-program.htm.

                                                      20
    The percentage of the employment in a supersector represented by the employment of listed firms

differs considerably across supersectors. Figure 3 shows for each supersector the percentage of employees

in that industry employed by listed firms. The supersectors that have on average across the sample years

the highest fraction of total employment by listed firms are Mining and Logging, Information, and

Manufacturing. In 2019, these industries together employ 16.4 million employees, corresponding to 10%

of non-farm payrolls. Listed firms employ 84.6% of employees in those industries. In no other industry do

listed firms employ more than 50% of the employees. In Education and Health Services, the percentage of

employees that work for listed firms is a minuscule 3.6% in 2019. The industries that have less than 20%

employees working for public firms in 2019 employ 46% of the private nonfarm employment.

Manufacturing is the industry with the highest level of employment among listed firms every sample year

until 2008 and since then it is the industry with the highest level of employment among listed firms six

years. Over the last four sample years, the Trade, Transportation, and Utilities industry has more

employment by listed firms than Manufacturing.

    Figure 3 also shows the percentage of non-farm payroll employment accounted for by each supersector.

Employment across NAICS super sectors changes considerably during our sample period. In 1973,

Manufacturing is the industry that employs the most people in the economy (30%). In 1982, Trade,

Transportation, and Utilities becomes the sector with the largest employment (25%), followed by

Manufacturing (24%), and remains the industry with the most employment for the remainder of the sample

period. At the end of our sample period, four industries have more employment than Manufacturing: Trade,

Transportation and Utilities, Education and Health Services, Professional Business Services, and Leisure

and Hospitality. From 1973 to 2019, employment in Manufacturing falls by 30.9%. In contrast, employment

in Education and Health Services, Professional Business Services, and Leisure and Hospitality increases by

374.8%, 267.8%, and 210.5%, respectively.

    Our analysis shows that the largest industries in terms of employment in 2019 are poorly represented

on the stock market. For example, the largest industry in 2019, Trade, Transportation, and Utilities, has

27.7 million employees. Listed firms in that industry have 11.3 million employees or 41.1% of all the

                                                   21
employees in the industry. The next largest industry, Education and Health services, employs 24.1 million

employees in 2019, but listed firms in that industry employ only 862,000 employees or 3.6% of all the

employees in that industry. The third largest industry is Business Services with 21.3 million employees.

Only 11.6% of these employees work for public firms.

    To see how much the decline of manufacturing and the growth of service industries contribute to the

decrease in the economic importance of stock market firms, it is useful to note that Manufacturing

employment by stock market firms declines from 1973 to 2019 by 2.2 million employees. Though

employment in Education and Health Services increases from 1973 to 2019 by 19 million employees, the

increase in employment in that industry by stock market firms is only 813,840 employees. If Education and

Health Services had the same percentage of employees from listed firms as Manufacturing in 2019, listed

firms would have 19.3 million more employees in 2019. Instead of listed firms representing 29% of non-

farm payrolls in 2019, they would represent 42.9% under this hypothetical scenario.

    These results might seem surprising given all the attention paid to tech stocks. One might think that the

growth of the tech industry leads to an increase in the economic importance of listed firms. However, this

is not the case. Unfortunately, the tech industry is not a supersector, which prevents us from making a direct

comparison between the employment of tech listed firms and all tech firms in the economy. Tech firms

belong in some manufacturing industries, such as Computer Hardware and Electronics, telecommunication

industries, such as Communication Services, and in the service industries, such as Software. 7 Listed

manufacturing tech firms have become a more important contributor to manufacturing employment and to

manufacturing value added. In contrast, listed non-manufacturing tech firms have become a less important



7
  The finance literature typically follows Loughran and Ritter (2004) and classifies as tech industries the industries
with the following SIC codes: SIC codes 3571, 3572, 3575, 3577, 3578 (computer hardware), 3661, 3663, 3669
(communications equipment), 3671, 3672, 3674, 3675, 3677, 3678, 3679 (electronics), 3812 (navigation equipment),
3823, 3825, 3826, 3827, 3829 (measuring and controlling devices), 3841, 3845 (medical instruments), 4812, 4813
(telephone equipment), 4899 (communications services), and 7371, 7372, 7373, 7374, 7375, 7378, and 7379
(software). We modify the classification by including SIC 7370, which includes both Alphabet (Google) and
Facebook. SIC 7370 includes computer programming and data processing. When we also include Amazon and Netflix
in our tech industry classification, the employment, value added, and market capitalization percentages for 2019 are
18.6%, 23.0%, and 36.3%, respectively.


                                                         22
contributor to non-manufacturing employment and value added. The employment of all listed tech firms,

whether in manufacturing or not, as a percentage of the employment of all listed firms increases over our

sample period. In 1973, tech firms account for 10.7% of the employment of listed firms. By the end of our

sample period, that percentage is 16.3%. The percentage of value added of listed firms accounted for by the

tech industry increases from 12.0% to 22.1% over our sample period. Tech firms' share of the market

capitalization of the stock market almost doubles from 16.7% in 1973 to 32.8% in 2019. Consequently, the

share of the market capitalization of tech firms in the total market capitalization of listed firms increases

much more than their share of the contribution to the economy of listed firms.

      Doidge et al. (2017) show that there is a large decrease in the propensity to list after 1996. A decrease

in the propensity to list could decrease the economic contribution of stock market firms if the remaining

listed firms do not change. However, as Doidge et al. (2017) show, a major reason the number of listed

firms falls is that public firms merge. If two public firms merge, the resulting firm is larger and contributes

more to the economy. With a merger that creates synergies, one would expect that the merged firm

contributes more to the economy than the two merged firms did before they were combined. It is therefore

important to assess how much of the decrease in the contribution of listed firms to the economy can be

attributed to the decrease in the percentage of non-farm payroll employment represented by manufacturing

versus how much can be attributed by a change in the percentage of manufacturing employment represented

by public firms. In Table 1, Panel A, we decompose the change in the percentage of employment of listed

firms represented by each supersector in a share effect (the change in the industry's share of employment)

and a shift effect (the change in the percentage of the industry's employment represented by listed firms). 8

The decomposition shows that the percentage of non-farm payroll employees working for listed firms falls

by 12.81 percentage points from 1973 to 2019. This decrease is due to a negative share effect of 16.51

percentage points and a positive shift effect of 3.70 percentage points. The biggest shift effect is a 2.30

percentage point increase for the industry composed of Trade, Transportation, and Utilities. The biggest



8
    Our implementation of the shift-share decomposition follows Elsby, Hoijn, and Sahin (2013).

                                                          23
share effect is a negative effect of 16.04 percentage points for Manufacturing. Manufacturing explains

almost all of the share effect. Without manufacturing, the story of the shift-share analysis would be that

employment by listed firms relative to their industry increases.

    Panel B of Table 1 conducts the same shift-share analysis for the number of listed firms. As Doidge et

al. (2017), we eliminate firms with fewer than 20 employees, so that we consider only firms that are large

enough in terms of employment that they could plausibly be listed. Note that the data for this analysis is

available only from 1977 to 2014 and the industry classifications are based on SIC codes. We see that the

number of manufacturing firms as a percentage of all firms falls from 1977 to 2014 and the number of

service firms increases. All industries experience a decrease in the percentage of firms listed. The share

effect is the part of the decrease in the percentage of firms from an industry listed that is due to a change in

the percentage of firms from that industry in the economy. The shift effect is the part of the decrease in the

percentage of firms from an industry that is due to a decrease in the listing propensity. We find that the

share effect (­0.27 percentage points) explains half of the decrease in the percent of firms (­0.55 percentage

points) listed since 1977. The share effect for the Manufacturing supersector is actually slightly larger than

the total effect. The shift effect for Manufacturing is the largest in absolute value among all industries. The

interpretation of the shift effect is that, had the fraction of manufacturing firms in the economy stayed the

same, the percentage of listed manufacturing firms would have decreased by 0.07 percentage points because

of the decrease in the listing propensity. It follows that the shrinkage of the manufacturing industry plays

an important role in the decrease in the percentage of listed firms that are from manufacturing from 1977

to 2014.



5. How well does a firm's market capitalization measure a firm's contribution to the economy?

    In this section, we investigate how closely market capitalizations are related to firms' contribution to

the economy. For that purpose, we construct a yearly unrepresentativeness measure (U). The measure is

inspired by the active share measure used in the investment literature (Cremers and Petajisto, 2009). The

active share measure assesses how much a portfolio departs from a benchmark by comparing portfolio

                                                      24
weights to the weights of the index. Another way to put this is that the active share measure compares

differences in portfolio weights of two portfolios. The measure is computed yearly, but we omit the time

subscript in the following for simplicity. Here, we compare how firms' market capitalization weights differ

from their direct economic contribution weights in the universe of listed firms. This is equivalent to

comparing two sets of portfolio weights as is done with the active share measure since both the market

capitalization weights and the direct economic contribution weights have to sum to one.

    Specifically, consider firm i. Firm i has a market capitalization weight wi measured as the ratio of the

market capitalization of firm i to the sum of the market capitalizations of all listed firms. Similarly, we can

compute firm i's relative contribution to employment (E) of all listed firms. Let Li be the contribution to

employment of listed firms of firm i, which is the ratio of employment of firm i divided by the total

employment of listed firms. For our purpose, however, the sign of the difference in the weights is irrelevant.

We are concerned about the magnitude of the departure of the employment weights of firms from their

capitalization weights. Consequently, we use the absolute value of the percentage absolute differences. Our

measure U(E) is therefore the employment unrepresentativeness of listed firms, measured as the equally

weighted average percentage absolute difference across all n listed firms:



                                                   1
                                          ( ) = =1| -  | × 100%                                            (6)
                                                   2




U(E) increases linearly with the average of the absolute value of the percentage differences. With this

approach, the market is perfectly representative for employment if U(E) is zero. It is 0% if every firm's

percentage of total market capitalization is the same as its percentage of total employment of listed firms.

The highest value U(E) can take is 100%. We construct a similar measure for value added, which we denote

as U(VA).

    Figure 4 shows the evolution of the unrepresentativeness measures for employment. Panel A shows the

employment unrepresentativeness for industrial firms and for all firms. Panel B shows value added


                                                       25
measures. Both unrepresentativeness measures have their lowest value in the early 1980s and their highest

value in 1999. The lowest values for U(E) is 36.3% for industrial firms and 34.9% for all listed firms in

1984 and the highest values are 57.2% and 53.8%, respectively, in 1999. This measure shows how

disconnected firm valuations are from their employment contributions at the peak of the so-called internet

bubble. The U(E) at the end of our sample period is the highest except for the years surrounding 2000. For

both measures, the level of the unrepresentativeness is higher when we exclude financial firms.

     We estimate the linear trend line for the unrepresentativeness measures for industrial firms only and for

all public firms, including financials. We show the results in Panel A of Table 2. We find that the trend line

is significantly positive for the employment unrepresentativeness measures. Since the values for 1999-2000

are so large, we also estimate the trend line without 1999 and 2000. When we do that, the trend has more

explanatory power. We also estimate a non-parametric Kendall's b correlation coefficient between the year

and the unrepresentativeness measure. This non-parametric correlation is significant every year and

corroborates the positive trend.

     We then turn to the evolution of the unrepresentativeness measures for value added. In Figure 4, Panel

B, we show results for Value Added, but results for Value Added (HLX) are similar. We find a w-shape

pattern similar to the one we find for employment, with unrepresentativeness being the lowest in the early

1980s and highest in 2000. However, whereas employment unrepresentativeness is higher in 2019 than in

the 1970s, this is not the case with the measures for value added even though the unrepresentativeness

measure in 2019 is elevated. With value added, unrepresentativeness is lower in 2019 than the highest value

in the 1970s by 3.8 percentage points for industrial firms and 7.3 percentage points for all public firms. We

also estimate trends for the unrepresentativeness measures for value added. There are no significant trends

in the parametric estimation for either industrial firms or for all listed firm, but the non-parametric

correlations are positive and significant for industrial firms. These results are reported in Panel B of Table

2.




                                                      26
      It is striking that unrepresentativeness is high when valuations are especially high, namely around 2000

and at the end of the sample period. Such an outcome is not possible if all valuations increase

proportionately, but it is the expected outcome of an increase in valuations that favors a subset of firms.

Shiller (2000) introduces the cyclically adjusted price/earnings ratio (CAPE) as a measure of valuation.

Specifically, it measures the price-earnings ratio where, for the S&P 500, the price is the index and the

earnings component is the ten-year moving average of inflation-adjusted earnings. With this measure,

stocks are most expensive during the sample period in 2000 and 2019 and least expensive in 1981. On his

website, Professor Shiller has two updated versions of CAPE. 9 One version is the original version. The

second version accounts for the increased prevalence of repurchases over dividends in more recent times.

We denote the former measure by CAPE1 and the latter by CAPE2. Note that CAPE2 has data available

only until 2018 instead of 2019 for CAPE1.

      We use the CAPE ratio as a measure of valuation and estimate robust regressions of the employment

unrepresentativeness indices on a constant, CAPE, and CAPE squared. We report the results in Table 3 in

Panel A. Models (1) to (4) show results for U(E) for the sample of industrial firms and models (5) to (8)

show results for the whole sample. In the regressions, whether we use CAPE1 or CAPE2, the coefficient is

always positive and significant. The coefficients on the squared values of CAPE1 and CAPE2 are never

significant. To assess economic significance, note that an increase of one standard deviation in CAPE1 in

model (1) of Table 2, Panel A, corresponding to an increase of CAPE of 11.32% relative to its mean of

19.72, is associated with an increase in employment unrepresentativeness of 2.58% relative to its mean of

48.83%.

      In Table 3, Panel B, we present the results for the same regressions as reported in Panel A using the

measures of unrepresentativeness for value added, U(VA), as the dependent variable. When CAPE enters

the regression only linearly, it has a positive significant coefficient. When CAPE enters linearly and

quadratically, the linear term has a significant negative coefficient and the quadratic term has a positive



9
    http://www.econ.yale.edu/~shiller/data.htm

                                                      27
significant coefficient. An increase of one standard deviation in CAPE1 in model (1) of Panel B of Table 3

is associated with an increase in unrepresentativeness of 0.77%.

    An alternative approach to understand how market capitalizations relate to employment and value

added is to assess how useful employment and value added are to explain the cross-sectional variation in

market capitalizations. For example, if firm capitalizations were a constant times employment for all firms,

then we would know a firm's market capitalization if we knew its employment. In this case, a regression

of firm capitalization on firm employment would have an R2 statistic of 1. In contrast to our

unrepresentativeness measure, such a regression will be much more affected by the largest firms. Each

year, we estimate a cross-sectional regression of firm market capitalization on employment and, similarly,

a regression of market capitalization on value added. Figure 5, Panel A, plots the time-series of the R2

statistics from the employment regressions. We see a dramatic decrease in how well the cross-sectional

variation in employment explains the variation in firm market capitalization. The ability of employment to

predict market capitalization is at its lowest at the end of the sample period and at its highest in the 1970s

and 1980s. The R2 of the regression exceeds 50% a number of years in the 1970s and during the first half

of the 1980s, so that employment variation across firms could explain more than half of the variation in

market capitalization across firms. At the end of the sample period, the R2 statistics have declined to just

15%.

    In Panel B of Figure 5, we plot the R2 statistics for regressions of market capitalization on value added.

The time-series plot of the R2 statistics for regressions of market capitalization on value added looks quite

different from the plot of the R2 statistics for regressions of market capitalization on employment. With

employment, the R2 statistics mostly fall throughout the sample period. With value added, the R2 statistics

follow an inverted w pattern, where they increase initially, then fall to reach their lowest value shortly

before 2000. From there they increase again to reach values as high as their highest values before 2000, and

then, finally, fall sharply in the 2010s. However, from Figure 5 it is obvious that variation in value added

explains much more of the variation in market capitalization than variation in employment does. In some

years, value added explains more than 70% of the variation in market capitalization. The lowest R2

                                                     28
coefficient for Value Added is slightly more than 38%. Our conclusions remain largely unchanged again

when we replace Value Added with our alternative measure of value added, Value Added (SP).

    It follows from the results presented in this section that unrepresentativeness is worse in 2019 than in

the 1970s and increases over time. In contrast, though unrepresentativeness is high in 2019 for value added,

it is lower than in the 1970s and it does not increase over time. We also find that the ability of employment

to explain market capitalization worsens dramatically during our sample period, but the same is not true for

value added.



6. Is the stock market representative of the contribution of industries to the economy?

    As discussed earlier, the data we use to compare employment by listed firms in an industry to total

employment of that industry is the data for NAICS supersectors made available by the BLS over our whole

sample period. For data for listed firms only, we can use much more granular industry definitions. One

widely used classification is the Fama and French (1997) classification that divides US firms into 48

industries (FF 48 industries).

    When we consider supersectors, the Manufacturing NAICS supersector is the most highly capitalized

supersector in the stock market every year from 1973 to 2019. This is the case despite the fact that the

manufacturing sector has shrunk during our sample period, as discussed in Section 4. Specifically, the

market capitalization of the Manufacturing supersector is almost 40% of the market capitalization of the

whole stock market in 1973 and falls to about 26% in 2019. We compute a measure of unrepresentativeness

of the stock market firms for the supersectors as follows. We sum the absolute difference between an

industry's share of total employment by stock market firms and that industry's share of payroll non-farm

employment. With this measure (not tabulated), the stock market becomes much less representative over

time. This result is consistent with our evidence of Section 4 that the industries that expanded the most are

the industries where firms are the least suited for stock market listing.

    We know turn to the FF 48 classification. In Table 4, we show data for the most capitalized industry

each year. During our sample period, there is considerable persistence in the most highly capitalized

                                                      29
industry. In 2019, the most highly capitalized FF 48 industry is Business Services. That industry is the most

highly capitalized consistently since 2012 and also in 2009 and 2001 for a total of ten sample years. The

industry that is most often the most highly capitalized industry is the Oil industry, which has the top rank

16 years during the sample period. Banks have the top rank 10 years, followed by the Telecommunication

industry, which has the top rank 7 years. The top industry generally has a higher share of stock market

capitalization than either of labor employment or value added. However, the business services industry is

the one with shares of labor employment and value added that are closest to its share of market

capitalization. In contrast, the oil industry and banks have low shares of employment compared to their

market capitalization shares.

    Table 4 also shows for each year the industry concentration for market capitalization, employees, and

value added. As our measure of concentration, we use the Herfindahl index. With this index, the highest

value of 10,000 would occur if there is just one firm in an industry. Starting with market capitalization, we

see that concentration is highest in 2019 since the early 1980s. However, the highest value for concentration

in the sample period is almost twice the concentration in 2019. Though employment concentration is never

as high as at the end of the sample period, valued added concentration is higher than at the end of the sample

period for five years in the early 2000s and in 1980. There does not seem to be a pattern of secular increase

in these concentration measures. Such a result may not be surprising as concentration varies across

industries as well as over time.

    Next, we compute the unrepresentativeness measures for the FF48 industries but do not tabulate the

results. For these unrepresentativeness measures, we use industry data instead of firm data, so that we use

an industry's market capitalization share of the stock market and either its employment share or its value

added share. We find that the unrepresentativeness measures for the FF 48 industries have the same w-

shape pattern that we see with the measures for individual stocks. There is a significant upward trend in the

unrepresentativeness measure for employment but not in the measure for value added. We can compare the

levels of the measures of unrepresentativeness for firms and for industries. The stock market is more

representative for industries than it is for firms. For instance, the unrepresentativeness for employment for

                                                     30
industrial firms does not fall below 35%; in contrast, the unrepresentativeness for employment for industries

falls below 25%.



7. How representative of the economy are the firms with the largest market capitalization?

    In this section, we evaluate how the largest (top-1) and top-3 capitalization firms in a given year

contribute to the economy and whether that contribution has changed over time. As discussed earlier, there

are issues with the data before 1973. In particular, a much larger proportion of listed firms is missing

employment data. Nevertheless, for some analyses, the data available for the years before 1973 can be used

and we do so. In particular, we can identify each year the firms with top market capitalization since 1950.

With our data, we can identify the top market capitalization firm using CRSP data or Compustat data. These

two sources always agree on the most highly capitalized firm. In five years, one firm within the top three

firms differs between Compustat and CRSP. We report the results based on CRSP, but arrive at similar

overall conclusions based on market capitalization based on year-end prices from Compustat.

    Using data starting in 1950, it is striking how few distinct firms have been the most highly capitalized

firms in the stock market. Figure 6 shows the top three most highly capitalized firms since 1950 for every

year. From 1950 to 2019, only seven distinct firms are the most highly capitalized firms. Starting with 1950,

AT&T is the top firm for sixteen years. In the 1950s, GM is the top capitalized firm for three years and

AT&T is the top firm for the other years. AT&T is the top firm every year from 1957 to 1966. IBM is then

the top firm from 1967 to 1990 with three one-year interruptions ­ twice AT&T is the top firm and once

Exxon Mobil Corp. is the top firm. GE is then the top firm for a total of ten years, but during the GE period

Microsoft is the top firm for three years. The GE period is followed by Exxon Mobil being the top firm for

seven consecutive years. During most recent years in our sample period, Apple is the firm with the highest

market capitalization, but in one year it is replaced at the top by Microsoft.

    Figure 7 plots the market capitalization of the largest market capitalization firm for each year since

1950, where the market capitalization is calculated in 2019 constant dollars from the year-end price times

the number of shares outstanding on CRSP. Since the 1950s, the market capitalization of the firm with the

                                                      31
top market capitalization in 2019 dollars has increased dramatically. The market capitalization of the top

firm is fairly stable from the 1960s to the middle of the 1990s. However, as can be seen in Figure 7, it

explodes in the second half of the 1990s. After the collapse of the internet bubble, the market capitalization

of the top firm does not fall back to its pre-bubble level. Instead, after having increased by roughly a factor

of five from 1995, it stays between two and three times its 1995 value until the mid-2010s when it explodes

again. As a result, the market capitalization of the largest market capitalization firm in 2019, Apple, is more

than six times in constant dollars the market capitalization of the largest market capitalization firm in 1995.

In contrast, the market capitalization of the largest firm in 1995 is roughly at the average of the market

capitalization from 1960 to 1995. From 1960 to 1995, the market capitalization of the largest firm never

exceeds the market capitalization of the largest market capitalization firm in 1995 by more than 50% and

is never noticeably lower.

    It would be reasonable to infer from our discussion of the level of the market capitalization of the largest

market capitalization firm that the firm with the largest market capitalization represents a much higher

fraction of the market after 1995 than before. In Figure 8, we plot the market value of the top-1 and top-3

firms as a percentage of the stock market capitalization each year. It is clear that in the 2000s the top-1 or

top-3 firms together represent a relatively low, but recently increasing proportion of the total stock market

capitalization, when compared to the earlier years in the sample. This can be explained through the sharp

increase in the market capitalization of the overall market in the second half of the 1990s. Table 5 shows

that the fraction of the market represented by the largest firm reaches a peak of 12.6% in 1960 and drops

after that, though not monotonically, to reach a minimum in 1992 of 1.9%. After 1992, the market share of

the firm with the largest market capitalization is always higher. In 2019, however, that market share is

higher than any time since 1984, but is only slightly higher than in 2000.

    How does the contribution of the top market capitalization firm to employment evolve? For 1953, GM

is the top firm in market capitalization. It employs 1.39% of non-farm employees. In 2019, Apple's

employment contribution is 0.11% (or less than one twelfth GM's employment contribution in 1953). There

are even fewer firms that are top employers from 1973 to 2019 than there are firms that have the highest

                                                      32
market capitalization. Only three firms have the largest number of employees from 1950 to 2019: AT&T,

General Motors, and Walmart Inc. As discussed earlier, AT&T and GM are the only firms with the highest

market capitalization from 1950 until the late 1960s. This means that the firms that are the most highly

capitalized in those years are also the firms with the highest employment. In the 2000s, none of the firms

that are among the top three market capitalization firms are among the top three employers except for

Walmart Inc., which is among the top three market capitalization firms for five years, and Amazon Inc.,

which is among the top three market capitalization firms for three years. Amazon Inc. is the second firm in

terms of employment in the last three years of our sample period. Not surprisingly, when a large employer

enters or exits the top three market capitalization firms it leads to large changes in the employment of the

top three firms. However, the number of employees of the firm with the top stock market share or of the

top three stock market share firms was much higher before the 1980s than recently. The last time the top

employer is also the most highly capitalized firm is in the 1960s. This obviously would change if Amazon

Inc. becomes the top market capitalization firm.

    We also compute the share of non-farm payroll employment represented by the largest market

capitalization firm. That share is never as consistently low as it is after the Global Financial Crisis. The

share of employment of the top three market capitalization firms has never been as low as it is in the 2010s

before Amazon Inc. becomes one of the top three firms in market capitalization. However, even with

Amazon Inc., the top three firms in market capitalization employ a smaller fraction of the non-farm payroll

employment than at any time before the late 1980s.

    In 1953, GM's value added is 1.2% of GDP. In contrast, Apple's contribution is 0.42% in 2019. We

also estimate the value added of the top market capitalization firm and of the top three market capitalization

firms since 1973. For the top three firms as well as for the top firm, the contribution to GDP is much lower

since the 1980s than before, but the contribution in 2019 is not abnormally low. The contribution to GDP

of the top firm and of the top three firms reaches a minimum in the second half of the 1990s. Table 5 also

reports the rank of the top market capitalization firm in employment and value added since 1973. It is

notable that the top market capitalization firm is always in the top ten value-added firms except for three

                                                     33
years, where Microsoft is ranked 42nd, 32nd, and 27th in 1998, 1999, and 2002, respectively. In 2018

Microsoft has again the largest market capitalization with the 9th highest value added. In contrast, the top

market capitalization firm is always in the top ten employment firms until 1988, but is almost never in the

top ten since then. The last time the top market capitalization firm is in the top ten firms in terms of

employment is in 2005 with GE. Apple is the firm with the 40th highest employment level in 2019. In

contrast, GM in 1953 has the second highest employment level. AT&T which is the firm most frequently

the top market capitalized firm in the 1950s is always the top employer.



8. Conclusion.

    In this paper, we examine how listed firms contribute to the economy over time and how their market

capitalization is related to their contribution to the economy. We find that stock market firms as a group

contribute less to employment and to GDP than in the 1970s. Since 1973, industrial stock market firms

never contribute as little to employment as they do in 2019 and all firms on the stock market contribute less

than in 2019 only two years. Though the contribution to GDP of stock market firms is less in recent years

than in the 1970s, the decline in contribution to GDP is less than the decline in contribution to employment.

    Our estimates for the contribution of listed firms to GDP come with some important caveats. Listed

firms generally do not disclose their employment expenses, so that we have to approximate them using

approaches developed in the recent literature. Further, though listed firms disclose employment, they do

not generally disclose separately domestic and foreign employment. As a result, our estimates of

employment and value added for listed firms are estimates for worldwide employment and worldwide value

added of these firms. To the extent that foreign activities of firms increase over time, our estimates likely

understate the decrease in the contribution of listed firms to the US economy. It is well-known that the

relative importance of investments in intangible capital has increased over time. These investments are

mostly expensed under GAAP. Though we can adjust firm income for investment in intangible capital, we

cannot adjust employment for employees who work on projects that increase invested capital. If we adjust



                                                     34
income for investment in intangible capital, our conclusions about the evolution of the contribution of value

added of listed firms to GDP are unchanged.

    We measure how representative the market capitalization of firms is of their contribution to the

economy. We find that our measure of unrepresentativeness follows a w shape for both employment and

value added: the measure is high in the 1970s, around 2000, and at the end of the sample period. For labor,

unrepresentativeness increases over time, but not for value added. We also find that the relation between

firm market capitalization and firm employment collapses during our sample period. In the 1970s,

employment explains 50.7% on average of the variation in market capitalization across firms. In the 2010s,

it explains 21.8% on average. A firm's value added explains much more its market capitalization than its

employment. This is true throughout our sample period. Strikingly, there is no consistent degradation in the

ability of value added to explain the variation in market capitalization across firms. In the 1970s, value-

added explains 68.2% of the variation in market capitalization in average. In the 2010s, it explains 67.7%.

    Perhaps not surprisingly, the top market capitalization firm evolves in the same way as the market as a

whole. In the 1950s, the top market capitalization firm was the top employer in the country. In the 2010s,

it is the 40th. However, the top market capitalization firm is in the top ten of firms by value added in the

2010s as in the 1970s.

    The evolution we document is largely the result of the decline of manufacturing in the US. Not all firms

are equally suited to be public firms. Small firms and service firms are much less likely to be listed on stock

exchanges. Over our sample period, employment by the manufacturing industry falls sharply in importance

while employment by the service industries grows dramatically in importance. A large fraction of the

employees of manufacturing firms work for public firms. A small fraction of employees of service firms

work for public firms. As a result, the fraction of employees working for public firms falls.




                                                      35
References

Bae, J.W., R. Elkamhi, and M. Simutin, 2019. The best of both worlds: Accessing emerging economies via
   developed markets. The Journal of Finance 74, 2579-2616.
Bae, K.H., W. Bailey, and J. Kang, 2020. Why is stock market concentration bad for the Economy? Journal
   of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Baker, M., J.C. Stein, and J. Wurgler, 2003. When does the market matter? Stock prices and the investment
   of equity-dependent firms. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 969-1005.
Beatty, A., and S. Liao, 2012. What do multinationals' disclosures of the number of U.S. versus foreign
   employees tell us. Unpublished working paper.
Belo, F., V.D. Gala, J. Salomao, and M.A. Vitorino, 2019. Decomposing firm value. Unpublished working
   paper.
Bennett, B., R.M. Stulz, and Z. Wang, 2020. Does the stock market make firms more productive? Journal
   of Financial Economics 136, 281-306.
Covarrubias, M., G. Gutiérrez, and T. Philippon, 2020. From Good to Bad Concentration? US Industries
   over the past 30 years. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 34, 1-46.
Cremers, K.J., and A. Petajisto, 2009. How active is your fund manager? A new measure that predicts
   performance. Review of Financial Studies 22, 3329-3365.
Doidge, C.G., Karolyi, G.A., and Stulz R.M., 2017. The U.S. listing gap. Journal of Financial Economics
   123, 464-487.
Donangelo, A., F. Gourio, M. Kehrig, and M. Palacios, 2019. The cross-section of labor leverage and equity
   returns. Journal of Financial Economics 132, 497-518.
Elsby, M.W.L., B. Hobijn, and A. Sahin, 2013. The decline of the U.S. labor share. Brookings Papers on
    Economic Activity, 1-63.
Fama, E.F., and K.R. French, 1997. Industry costs of equity. Journal of Financial Economics 43, 153-193.
Fama, E.F., and M.C. Jensen, 1983. Separation of ownership and control. The Journal of Law and
   Economics 26, 301-325.
Fischer, S., and R.C. Merton, 1984. Macroeconomics and finance: The role of the stock market. NBER
    working paper, NBER, Cambridge, MA.
Fogel, K., R. Morck, and B. Yeung, 2008. Big business stability and economic growth: Is what's good for
   General Motors good for America? Journal of Financial Economics 89, 83-108.
Foucault, T., and L. Frésard, 2014. Learning from peers' stock prices and corporate investment. Journal of
   Financial Economics 111, 554-577.
Gordon, M., 1962. The savings, investment and valuation of a corporation. Review of Economics and
   Statistics 45, 37-51.
Hartman-Glaser, B., H. Lustig, and M.Z. Xiaolan, 2019. Capital share dynamics when firms insure workers.
   The Journal of Finance 74, 1707-1751.

                                                   36
Harvey, C., 1989. Forecasts of economic growth from the bond and stock markets. Financial Analysts
   Journal, 38-45.
Haskel, J., and S. Westlake, 2017. Capitalism without capital. Princeton University Press.
Hicks, J.R., 1932. The theory of wages. St. Martin's Press.
Kahle, K.M., and Stulz, R.M., 2017. Is the public corporation in trouble? Journal of Economic Perspectives
   31 (3), 67-88.
Levine, R. and S. Zervos, 1998. Stock Markets, Banks, and Economic Growth. The American Economic
   Review 88(3), 537-558.
Loughran, T., and J. Ritter, 2004. Why has IPO underpricing changed over time? Financial Management
   33, 5-37.
Morck, R., A. Shleifer, R. W. Vishny, 1990. The stock market and investment: is the market a
   sideshow? Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 157-215.
Pagano, M., F. Panetta, and L. Zingales, 1998. Why do companies go public? An empirical analysis. The
Journal of Finance 53, 27-64.
Peters, R.H., and L.A. Taylor, 2017. Intangible capital and the investment-q relation. Journal of Financial
Economics 123, 251-272.
Ritter, J., 2012. Is economic growth good for investors? Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 24, 8-18.
Shiller, R., 2000. Irrational exuberance. Princeton University Press.
Shleifer, A., and R. W. Vishny, 1997. A survey of corporate governance. The Journal of Finance 52, 737-
    783.
Stock, J.H., and M.W. Watson, 2003. Forecasting output and inflation: The role of asset prices. Journal of
    Economic Literature 56, 788-829
Stulz, R., 2020. Public versus private equity. Oxford Review of Economic Policy 36, 275-290.




                                                     37
Appendix: Methodology for Value Added measures
    Our two main measures for value added follow the methodologies of Donangelo et al. (2019) and

Hartman-Glaser et al. (2019). We make several adjustments dictated by our research question. For both

Value Added and Value Added (HLX) we define value added as the sum of operating income before

depreciation (OIBDP) and labor expenses, referred to as staff expenses in Compustat (XLR).

    Since the data item labor expenses is frequently missing in Compustat, we apply different replacement

strategies, that are similar to the methods applied in the literature, but feature some important distinctions.

First, we follow the literature and substitute missing observations for XLR with the imputed value based

on the industry median of the ratio of XLR/Employees. We multiply this ratio with the number of employees

listed for the firm in a given year in order to derive the extended XLR measure as a replacement for the

missing firm-level XLR in Compustat.

    Following the literature, we define industries initially as the Fama-French 17 industries. However, we

require a minimum of 20 observations to exist in a year in order to calculate the median of the

XLR/Employees ratio to calculate the extended XLR. When this condition is not met, we repeat the process

using the Fama-French 12 industry classification, and, if needed, the two-digit based industry code

classification. Given the prevalent situation of missing observations for XLR in Compustat, this still leaves

6.8% of observations where we have fewer than 20 industry peer observations within the 2-digit SIC code

classification. For these cases, we rely on the median of the ratio from the supersector.

    For Value Added (HLX) we sort firms in five size portfolios within their industry classifications instead

of the 20 portfolios used in Hartman-Glaser et al. (2019). We also do not apply any additional winsorization

given that we rely on medians as opposed to means and sort into larger benchmark bins. In unreported

analyses, we vary these sorting, matching and winsorization conditions and end up with 14 different

measures, where we both include and exclude financial firms. The correlations among these measures are

very high with a minimum of 92%, but these conditions have large impacts for the largest market

capitalization firms on which we focus in this study. The approaches we use lead to a higher contribution

to the economy of listed firms than approaches that use extensive winsorization.

                                                      38
Panel A: Employees as a percentage total non-farm payroll employment (1973-2019)




                        45
                        40
                       35
                       %
                        30
                        25




                             1973     1980           1990             2000             2010        2019
                                                Calendar year of the fiscal period end
                                       Industrial Firms to US Non-Farm Employment
                                       Industrial Firms US to Non-Farm & Foreign Affiliates Employment
                                       Public Firms to US Non-Farm Employment
                                       Public Firms to US Non-Farm & Foreign Affiliates Employment




Panel B. Value-added as a percentage of US nominal GDP (1973-2019)
                  35
                  30
                  25
                  %
                  20
                  15




                       1973         1980           1990               2000             2010             2019
                                              Calendar year of the fiscal period end
                                    Value Added Industrial Firms to US GDP
                                    Value Added Industrial Firms to US & Foreign Affiliates GDP
                                    Value Added (HLX) Industrial Firms to US GDP
                                    Value Added (HLX) Industrial Firms to US & Foreign Affiliates GDP
                                    Value Added Public Firms to US GDP
                                    Value Added Public Firms to US & Foreign Affiliates GDP
                                    Value Added (HLX) Public Firms to US GDP
                                    Value Added (HLX) Public Firms to US & Foreign Affiliates GDP


Figure 1.
In Panel A, the graph plots the evolution of the percentage of total non-farm payroll employment
represented by employees of listed firms for 1973-2019. Firm-level employment data is from Compustat
and US non-farm payroll employment is from the US Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). In Panel B, the
graph plots the evolution of the percentage contribution of the aggregate value added measures, Value
Added and Value Added (HLX) for industrial and listed firms to the US Gross Domestic Product for 1973-
2019. Value added and Valued add (HLX) are defined in the data appendix. Public firms are industrial firms
plus financial firms. Employment and GDP for foreign affiliates of US multinational enterprises are from
the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) and available for years 1997­2018.



                                                              39
                                      100
                   % of Foreign to Total Pre-Tax Income
                       25           500          75




                                                          1984   1990               2000                    2010   2019
                                                                        Calendar year of the fiscal period end



Figure 2.
The graph plots the evolution of the percentage of foreign pre-tax income to the total of domestic and
foreign pre-tax income. The pre-tax income data is from Compustat items PIFO and PIDOM, which exclude
financial firms and utilities. Widespread data coverage on Compustat starts in 1984.




                                                                                      40
                                             Construction                        Mining and Logging




                             100
                             75
                             50
                        %
                             25
                             0




                                   1980     1990   2000     2010   2020   1980     1990   2000    2010       2020



                                            Manufacturing                 Trade, Transportation, Utilities
                            100
                            75
                            50
                       %
                            25
                            0




                                   1980     1990   2000     2010   2020   1980    1990    2000     2010      2020

                                          Listed Firms to US Non-Farm Employment in Supersector (%)
                                          Contribution of Supersector to Non-Farm Employment (%)




Figure 3.
Each graph plots (in blue) the contribution of total employment of public firms in a supersector as a
percentage of US non-farm employment in the same supersector. Each graph plots (in red) the contribution
of total employment in a supersector as a percentage of total US non-farm employment. Each plot runs
from 1973-2019. Firm-level employment is from Compustat and US non-farm employment and
supersector definitions are from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.




                                                                   41
Figure 3 ­ Continued

                                        Financial Activities                       Information




                           100
                           75
                           50
                       %
                           25
                           0




                                 1980    1990     2000     2010   2020   1980    1990    2000     2010     2020



                                 Education and Health Services.          Professional Business Services.
                           100
                           75
                           50
                       %
                           25
                           0




                                 1980     1990    2000     2010   2020   1980    1990    2000     2010     2020



                                     Leisure and Hospitality                     Other Services
                           100
                           75
                           50
                       %
                           25
                           0




                                 1980     1990    2000     2010   2020   1980    1990    2000     2010     2020

                                        Listed Firms to US Non-Farm Employment in Supersector (%)
                                        Contribution of Supersector to Non-Farm Employment (%)




                                                                  42
Panel A: Employment unrepresentativeness (1973-2019)

                                  Industrial Firms                                                                 Public Firms
        60




                                                                                     55
        55




                                                                                     50
        50
    %




                                                                                    45
                                                                                    %
        45




                                                                                     40
        40




                                                                                     35
        35




             1970   1980          1990             2000           2010      2020          1970   1980          1990             2000           2010      2020
                           Calendar year of the fiscal period end                                       Calendar year of the fiscal period end
                     Fitted values       Employment Unrepresentativeness                           Fitted values      Employment Unrepresentativeness




Panel B: Value added unrepresentativeness (1973-2019)

                                  Industrial Firms                                                                 Public Firms
                                                                                     45
        45




                                                                                     40
     35 40




                                                                                     35
    %




                                                                                    %
        30




                                                                                     30
        25




                                                                                     25




             1970   1980          1990             2000           2010      2020          1970   1980          1990             2000           2010      2020
                           Calendar year of the fiscal period end                                       Calendar year of the fiscal period end
                      Fitted values      Value Added Unrepresentativeness                         Fitted values       Value Added Unrepresentativeness




Figure 4.
The dots in Panel A plot the evolution of the employment unrepresentativeness, U(E), measure for industrial
firms (left) and public firms (right) for 1973-2019. The dots in Panel B plot the evolution of the value added
unrepresentativeness, U(VA), measure for industrial firms (left) and all public firms (right) for 1973-2019.
U(E) and U(VA) are defined as the average percentage absolute difference between a firm's market
capitalization weight and its, respectively, employment and value added weight across of all listed firms as
formulated in Equation (6). The straight line represents the fitted linear time trend. Public firms are
industrial firms plus financial firms.




                                                                               43
Panel A: R-squared statistics from cross-sectional regressions of Market Capitalization on Employment




                         .6
                         .5 .4
                    R-squared
                    .3   .2
                         .1




                                 1973   1980        1990               2000           2010   2019
                                               Calendar year of the fiscal period end
                                                 Industrial Firms            Public Firms




Panel B: R-squared statistics from cross-sectional regressions of Market Capitalization on Value Added
                         .8
                         .7 .6
                    R-squared
                    .5   .4
                         .3




                                 1973   1980        1990               2000           2010   2019
                                               Calendar year of the fiscal period end
                                                 Industrial Firms            Public Firms


Figure 5.
The graph plots R-square statistics from yearly cross-sectional regressions, where the dependent variable
is the firm's market capitalization regressed on a constant and a single independent variable for 1973-2019.
In Panel A the independent variable is the firm's employment. In Panel B, the dependent variable is Value
Added for the firm. Public firms are industrial firms plus financial firms.




                                                            44
                                       WALMART
                                         P&G CO
                                   MICROSOFT
                                          INTEL
                                            IBM
                                              GM
                                              GE
                              EXXON MOBIL
                     EASTMAN KODAK
                                   COCA-COLA
                       CISCO SYSYEMS
                                           AT&T
                                          APPLE
                              AMAZON COM
                            ALTRIA GROUP
                                       ALPHABET

                                                   1950     1960      1970      1980     1990     2000   2010   2019
                                                                                   calyear

                                                                       #1 Market Capitalization Firms
                                                                       #2 Market Capitalization Firms
                                                                       #3 Market Capitalization Firms


Figure 6.
The graph plots the firms with the largest (#1), second largest (#2), and third largest (#3) market for each
of the sample years (1950-2019). The market capitalization of a firm is measured by the number of shares
times the year-end stock price from CRSP.
                            15001000
                   Biilions ($ 2019)
                   500      0




                                       1950          1960      1970          1980      1990     2000     2010   2019
                                                                                Calyear
                                                               AT&T                    Exxon Mobil
                                                               General Electric        General Motors
                                                               IBM                     Microsoft
                                                               Apple


Figure 7.
The graph plots the market capitalization for the largest market capitalization firms each year in billions of
dollars (2019 CPI adjusted). The market capitalization is measured as the number of shares times the year-
end stock price from CRSP for the sample period 1950-2019.




                                                                               45
                                   30
                    % of US Market Capitalization
                          10       0  20




                                                    1950   1960   1970      1980         1990       2000    2010   2019
                                                                  Calendar year of the fiscal period end

                                                                        Top-1 Market Capitalization Firm
                                                                        Top-3 Market Capitalization Firms



Figure 8.
The graph plots the market capitalization of Top-1 and Top-3 firms as a percentage of the market
capitalization of all listed firms (1950-2019). The market capitalization of a firm is measured by the number
of shares times the year-end stock price from CRSP.




                                                                               46
Table 1.
Industry shift-share analysis 1973 ­ 2019
Columns 1, 2, and 3 in Panel A tabulate the proportion of employment of all firms (private and public) for
each supersectors for 1973, 2019, and the change from 1973 to 2019, respectively. Columns 4, 5, and 6
tabulate these proportions for public firms. Columns 7 and 8 tabulate the change in the percentage of the
industry's employment represented by public firms (Shift) and the change in the industry's share of
employment (Share) for each supersector for 1973 and 2019. Panel B tabulates the same columns as in
Panel A, but based on the relative number of firms for each industry, where industries are organized in ten
major industries based on 2-digit SIC code ranges, following the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA).

Panel A: Change in the percentage of employment of listed firms represented by inudstry supersectors (NAICS)
                                               All Firms                      Public Firms           Shift-share analysis
Industries (NAICS Supersectors)        1973      2019    Change       1973       2019      Change     Shift       Share
Nonfarm business sector                  100        100       0       40.59      27.79     -12.81       3.70     -16.51
Mining and Logging                      1.10       0.57   -0.53       64.23      55.80      -8.43      -0.07       -0.32
Construction                            6.61       5.84   -0.77        5.96        4.42     -1.54      -0.10       -0.04
Manufacturing                          29.48     10.00   -19.48       85.12      79.63      -5.49      -1.08     -16.04
Trade, Transportation, and Utilities   24.31     21.59    -2.72       30.97      40.98      10.01       2.30       -0.98
Information                             3.39       2.23   -1.16       73.06     114.64      41.58       1.17       -1.09
Financial Activities                    6.22       6.81    0.60       36.41      47.96      11.54       0.75        0.25
Professional Business Services          9.19     16.61     7.41        9.36      11.32       1.96       0.25        0.77
Education and Health Services           8.08     18.84    10.76        2.16        3.71      1.55       0.21        0.32
Leisure and Hospitality                 8.47     12.92     4.45       11.32      14.75       3.43       0.37        0.58
Other Services                          3.16       4.59    1.44        4.48        1.97     -2.50      -0.10        0.05
Panel B: Change in the Percentage of number of listed firms represented by major industry sectors (SIC)

                                               All Firms                      Public Firms           Shift-share analysis
Major Industries (SIC-based)           1977      2014    Change       1977       2014      Change     Shift       Share
Nonfarm business sector                 100       100       0         1.11       0.56       -0.55     -0.27       -0.27
Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing          0.44     1.51      1.07       1.13       0.08       -1.05     -0.01       0.01
Mining                                  1.08     0.66     -0.42       4.63       3.66       -0.96     -0.01       -0.02
Construction                            7.58     6.40     -1.18       0.22       0.13       -0.09     -0.01       0.00
Manufacturing                          20.74     9.89    -10.85       2.79       2.32       -0.47     -0.07       -0.28
Transportation and Public Utilities     4.50     4.21     -0.29       2.17       1.01       -1.16     -0.05       0.00
Wholesale Trade                        11.58     7.53     -4.04       0.39       0.21       -0.18     -0.02       -0.01
Retail Trade                           22.92    23.19      0.27       0.39       0.15       -0.24     -0.06       0.00
Finance, Insurance, Real Estate         6.11     5.38     -0.73       2.31       2.03       -0.28     -0.02       -0.02
Services                               25.06    41.23    16.17        0.35       0.23       -0.11     -0.04       0.05




                                                           47
Table 2.
Trend analysis for unrepresentativeness measures (1973-2019)
In Panel A, Columns 4, 5, and 6 tabulate the slope coefficients, p-values, and adjusted R-squares for a linear
fit estimation of the time trend of the employment unrepresentativeness over the sample period (1973-
2019). Columns 7 and 8 tabulate the non-parametric Kendall Tau correlation coefficient and its p-value.
Panel B repeats the same columns for value added unrepresentativeness. Unrepresentativeness is defined
in Equation (6). *, **, *** denote statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% level. Public firms are
industrial firms plus financial firms.
Panel A: Employment unrepresentativeness
                                              Parametric                            Non-parametric
                  Exclude         Slope                                      Kendall Tau
                                                                   2
Sample           1999-2001      Coefficient    p -value      Adj-R            Correlation     p -value
Industrial Firms    No          0.295***         < 0.001     0.555           0.532***              < 0.001
Industrial Firms    Yes         0.285***         < 0.001     0.634           0.581***              < 0.001
Public Firms        No          0.258***         < 0.001     0.522           0.506***              < 0.001
Public Firms        Yes         0.248***         < 0.001     0.594           0.552***              < 0.001
Panel B: Value added unrepresentativeness
                                              Parametric                            Non-parametric
                  Exclude         Slope                                      Kendall Tau
                                                                   2
Sample           1999-2001      Coefficient    p -value      Adj-R            Correlation     p -value
Industrial Firms    No            0.082         0.121         0.032          0.204**                0.043
Industrial Firms    Yes           0.064         0.104         0.039          0.211**                0.043
Public Firms        No            0.040         0.365        -0.004          0.138                  0.172
Public Firms        Yes           0.026         0.436        -0.009          0.135                  0.195




                                                     48
Table 3.
Time-series regression of employment unrepresentativeness on Shiller (CAPE) index
The table reports coefficients and p-vales in parentheses for robust OLS regressions. In Panel A, the
dependent variable is the measure for employment unrepresentativeness, U(E). Models (1) ­ (4) are
estimated on industrial firms and models (5) ­ (8) for all listed firms. In Panel B, the dependent variable is
the measure for value added unrepresentativeness, U(VA). The independent variables are the Shiller (2000)
cyclically adjusted price/earnings ratio (CAPE1) and an updated version (CAPE2) from 2018. The data for
both indices are available from http://www.econ.yale.edu/~shiller/data.htm. Each even-numbered
specification includes squared terms of the relevant index. *, **, and *** denotes statistical significance at
the 1, 5, and 10% level. Public firms are industrial firms plus financial firms.
Panel A: Unemployment unrepresentativeness U(E)

                               Industrial Firms                                 Public Firms
                   (1)          (2)         (3)       (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)        (8)
CAPE1           0.495***    0.650***                            0.431***    0.504***
                 (0.000)     (0.001)                             (0.000)     (0.006)
            2
(CAPE1)                      -0.003                                          -0.002
                             (0.338)                                         (0.641)
CAPE2                                    0.450***
                                              0.543***                                 0.391***0.407**
                                          (0.000)
                                               (0.009)                                  (0.000)(0.037)
            2
(CAPE2)                                         -0.002                                          -0.000
                                               (0.603)                                         (0.923)
Intercept       36.034*** 34.592*** 35.629*** 34.633***         35.079*** 34.407*** 34.782*** 34.605***
                 (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)           (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)

n                  47          47          46         46            47         47          46         46
Adjusted-R2       0.703      0.707       0.654       0.655        0.661       0.662      0.604       0.604
Panel B: Value added unrepresentativeness U(VA)

                               Industrial Firms                               Public Firms
                   (1)          (2)         (3)       (4)          (5)       (6)         (7)      (8)
CAPE1           0.344***    -0.465**                            0.243*** -0.537***
                 (0.000)     (0.019)                             (0.002)   (0.003)
            2
(CAPE1)                     0.018***                                     0.017***
                             (0.000)                                       (0.000)
CAPE2                                    0.316***   -0.530**                         0.223*** -0.590***
                                          (0.000)    (0.010)                          (0.005)   (0.002)
            2
(CAPE2)                                       0.017***                                        0.016***
                                               (0.000)                                         (0.000)
Intercept       22.867*** 30.378*** 22.535*** 31.677***         23.900*** 31.147*** 23.688*** 32.466***
                 (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)           (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)

n                  47          47          46         46            47         47          46         46
          2
Adjusted-R        0.413      0.537       0.381       0.515        0.295       0.459      0.268       0.444




                                                      49
Table 4.
Market capitalization, employment, and value added for top-1 Fama-French 48 industries by market capitalization (1973-2019)
The table tabulates for each sample year in columns 2 to 4 the Herfindahl index based on the market capitalization, employees, and value added,
respectively, for the top-1 Fama-French 48 industry by market capitalization. Columns 5 and 6 list the name of the top-1 industry and its percentage
market capitalization relative to the overall market capitalization. Columns 7 and 8 list percentage of employees for the top-1 industry and its
employee-based rank relative to the whole market. Columns 9 and 10 list the percentage of value added and its rank relative to the whole market.
                                                               Herfindahl Index                          Employees                       Value-added
            Top-1 Industry      Market          Market
   Year       Mkt Cap      Capitalization (%) Capitalization     Employees        Value-added   Industry (%)   Industry (Rank)   Industry (%)   Industry (Rank)
   1973          Oil             14.58          212.58             19.78            103.30          4.45               5            10.16              2
   1974          Oil             15.02          225.54             21.02            168.93          4.58               4            13.00              1
   1975          Oil             14.04          197.08             23.20            146.44          4.82               4            12.10              1
   1976          Oil             14.63          213.89             27.14            135.89          5.21               4            11.66              1
   1977          Oil             14.60          213.29             26.22            127.21          5.12               4            11.28              1
   1978          Oil             14.34          205.59             26.54            122.80          5.15               4            11.08              1
   1979          Oil             18.66          348.27             27.68            166.78          5.26               4            12.91              1
   1980          Oil             23.94          572.89             30.04            207.34          5.48               3            14.40              1
   1981          Oil             18.71          350.14             31.65            166.49          5.63               3            12.90              1
   1982          Oil             12.44          154.67             27.45            148.37          5.24               4            12.18              1
   1983          Oil             11.69          136.73             22.65            147.58          4.76               5            12.15              1
   1984          Oil             10.48          109.83             17.34             98.66          4.16               7             9.93              1
   1985          Util             9.16           83.84             9.76              59.37          3.12              11             7.70              4
   1986          Util             9.30           80.27             41.57             77.43          3.18              10             7.95              3
   1987        Telcm              9.35           87.33             42.16             71.11          6.49               3             8.43              2
   1988        Telcm              9.86           97.32             46.71             71.03          6.83               3             8.43              2
   1989        Telcm             12.48          155.71             48.40             74.91          6.96               3             8.66              2
   1990        Telcm             10.70          114.47             45.75             72.92          6.76               3             8.54              1
   1991        Drugs             10.11          102.16             5.37              9.90           2.32              17             3.15              12
   1992        Telcm              9.55           91.11             39.62             69.99          6.29               3             8.37              2
   1993        Telcm             10.32          106.54             36.75             67.90          6.06               3             8.24              2
   1994        Telcm             10.05          100.93             35.95             65.89          6.00               3             8.12              3
   1995        Banks             10.13          102.61             26.35            102.31          5.13               5            10.11              1
   1996        Banks             11.51          132.40             25.18            114.62          5.02               4            10.71              1
   1997        Banks             13.18          173.61             23.90            118.21          4.89               4            10.87              1
   1998        Banks             11.92          142.07             23.22            124.60          4.82               5            11.16              1
   1999        BusSv             14.91          222.18             60.55             69.31          7.78               2             8.33              2




                                                                                  50
Table 4 ­ Continued
                                                              Herfindahl Index                          Employees                       Value-added
           Top-1 Industry      Market          Market
   Year      Mkt Cap      Capitalization (%) Capitalization     Employees        Value-added   Industry (%)   Industry (Rank)   Industry (%)   Industry (Rank)
   2000       Drugs           11.5993          106.40             52.79             61.88          2.03              18             3.00              13
   2001       BusSv           11.5983          134.52             51.70             64.08          7.19               2             8.01              2
   2002       Banks           12.2928          151.11             33.86            208.71          5.82               4            14.45              1
   2003       Banks           13.7466          188.97             36.26            273.87          6.02               4            16.55              2
   2004       Banks           13.3787          178.99             35.04            235.77          5.92               4            15.35              2
   2005       Banks           11.5672          133.80             33.15            237.71          5.76               4            15.42              2
   2006       Banks           11.9461          142.71             34.34            226.89          5.86               4            15.06              2
   2007         Oil            10.198          104.00             2.84              61.15          1.68              18             7.82              5
   2008         Oil           10.5687          111.70             3.29              59.70          1.81              18             7.73              4
   2009       BusSv            9.7917           95.88             62.05            110.40          7.88               2            10.51              3
   2010         Oil            9.8529           97.08             3.08              53.02          1.76              18             7.28              4
   2011         Oil           10.1064           97.77             67.17             97.07          1.74              18             8.59              4
   2012       BusSv            9.9002           98.01             73.53            116.71          8.57               2            10.80              3
   2013       BusSv           10.7261          115.05             79.78            113.54          8.93               2            10.66              3
   2014       BusSv           10.7393          115.33             86.81            118.67          9.32               2            10.89              2
   2015       BusSv           12.6255          159.40             93.34            141.06          9.66               2            11.88              2
   2016       BusSv           12.3613          152.80             94.53            140.91          9.72               2            11.87              2
   2017       BusSv           13.7438          188.89            110.17            155.87         10.50               2            12.48              1
   2018       BusSv           15.9583          254.67            116.69            177.26         10.80               2            13.31              1
   2019       BusSv           17.4156          303.30            115.71            156.24         10.76               2            12.50              1




                                                                                 51
Table 5.
Top-1 market capitalization firms, employment ranks, and value added ranks
Columns 1 and 2 list the sample year and name of the largest (top-1) market capitalization firms in the
sample. Columns 3 and 4 tabulate for each year the market capitalization in millions of 2019 CPI-adjusted
dollars and as a percentage of the overall market capitalization. Columns 5 and 6 tabulate employment and
value added ranking relative to the overall market. Value-added data has been collected back to 1973.
                                                  Market Capitalization        Employment Value added
  Year              Name                   $ (million 2019)          %            Rank       Rank
  1950            AT&T CORP                      45,844.20         9.639           1           .
  1951             AT&T CORP                     50,975.58         8.915           1           .
  1952             AT&T CORP                     59,717.28         9.734           1           .
  1953             AT&T CORP                     62,983.08        10.475           1           .
  1954        GENERAL MOTORS CO                  81,400.77         9.661           2           .
  1955        GENERAL MOTORS CO                 121,817.03        11.115           2           .
  1956        GENERAL MOTORS CO                 114,749.06         9.366           2           .
  1957             AT&T CORP                     98,535.86         9.456           1           .
  1958             AT&T CORP                    140,437.03         9.791           1           .
  1959             AT&T CORP                    149,888.73         9.457           1           .
  1960             AT&T CORP                    206,843.73        12.598           2           .
  1961             AT&T CORP                    274,649.47        11.628           1           .
  1962             AT&T CORP                    239,514.46         9.332           2           .
  1963             AT&T CORP                    284,767.18         9.504           2           .
  1964             AT&T CORP                    294,081.84         8.478           2           .
  1965             AT&T CORP                    261,285.00         6.709           2           .
  1966             AT&T CORP                    233,419.05         6.702           2           .
  1967      INTL BUSINESS MACHINES              269,353.75         6.463           7           .
  1968      INTL BUSINESS MACHINES              261,467.36         5.653           7           .
  1969      INTL BUSINESS MACHINES              288,796.16         7.093           7           .
  1970      INTL BUSINESS MACHINES              238,686.83         6.133           7           .
  1971      INTL BUSINESS MACHINES              244,311.27         5.699           7           .
  1972      INTL BUSINESS MACHINES              285,678.94         5.275           7           .
  1973      INTL BUSINESS MACHINES              206,354.25         4.742           7           5
  1974             AT&T CORP                    129,557.21         4.724           1           1
  1975      INTL BUSINESS MACHINES              158,216.70         4.933           6           4
  1976      INTL BUSINESS MACHINES              188,737.61         4.908           6           5
  1977      INTL BUSINESS MACHINES              170,185.31         4.966           7           5
  1978      INTL BUSINESS MACHINES              170,692.63          5.22           7           5
  1979      INTL BUSINESS MACHINES              132,319.21         3.876           7           5
  1980      INTL BUSINESS MACHINES              122,965.32         3.189           6           4
  1981             AT&T CORP                    134,706.91         4.095           1           1
  1982      INTL BUSINESS MACHINES              153,636.16         4.338           6           3
  1983      INTL BUSINESS MACHINES              191,283.24          4.53           5           2
  1984      INTL BUSINESS MACHINES              185,651.89         4.591           3           2
  1985      INTL BUSINESS MACHINES              227,200.27         4.813           3           2
  1986      INTL BUSINESS MACHINES              169,636.33         3.181           3           3
  1987      INTL BUSINESS MACHINES              157,146.02         3.061           3           3
  1988      INTL BUSINESS MACHINES              155,982.36         2.946           3           3
  1989         EXXON MOBIL CORP                 129,049.32         2.114          34.5         5



                                                   52
Table 5 ­ Continued
                                       Market Capitalization    Employment Value added
  Year                Name              $ million         %        Rank       Rank
  1990     INTL BUSINESS MACHINES     126,243.78        2.361        3          4
  1991        EXXON MOBIL CORP        142,029.93        2.136       38          6
  1992        EXXON MOBIL CORP        138,301.12        1.893      40.5         7
  1993       GENERAL ELECTRIC CO      158,289.02        1.941        9          3
  1994       GENERAL ELECTRIC CO      150,439.70        1.889        9          3
  1995       GENERAL ELECTRIC CO      201,774.48        1.971       10          3
  1996       GENERAL ELECTRIC CO      265,298.73        2.179        9          3
  1997       GENERAL ELECTRIC CO      382,572.24        2.483        6          3
  1998         MICROSOFT CORP         537,374.92        2.934      250         42
  1999         MICROSOFT CORP         924,622.43        4.075      219         32
  2000       GENERAL ELECTRIC CO      705,332.85        3.357        8          3
  2001       GENERAL ELECTRIC CO      574,790.44        3.214       8.5         2
  2002         MICROSOFT CORP         393,187.90        2.768      139         27
  2003       GENERAL ELECTRIC CO      432,280.08        2.483        8          1
  2004       GENERAL ELECTRIC CO      522,341.16        2.734        8          1
  2005       GENERAL ELECTRIC CO      484,879.66        2.505        7          2
  2006        EXXON MOBIL CORP        566,882.26        2.735       71          2
  2007        EXXON MOBIL CORP        631,401.54        3.085       71          5
  2008        EXXON MOBIL CORP        482,263.74        3.901       69          1
  2009        EXXON MOBIL CORP        384,644.49        2.624       65         10
  2010        EXXON MOBIL CORP        432,276.95        2.534       71          4
  2011        EXXON MOBIL CORP        461,911.22        2.826       74          3
  2012            APPLE INC           556,499.42         3.14       79          6
  2013            APPLE INC           549,459.39        2.422       73          7
  2014            APPLE INC           694,743.61        2.806       69          4
  2015            APPLE INC           629,661.48         2.64      60.5         1
  2016            APPLE INC           648,796.40        2.567       52          2
  2017            APPLE INC           898,113.61         3.13       51          2
  2018         MICROSOFT CORP         794,658.07        3.135       47          9
  2019            APPLE INC         1,304,764.74        4.223       40          3




                                        53
