                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          BOTTOM-UP MARKUP FLUCTUATIONS

                                         Ariel Burstein
                                       Vasco M. Carvalho
                                         Basile Grassi

                                      Working Paper 27958
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27958


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2020




We thank David Baqaee, Mark Bils, Hal Cole, Giancarlo Corsetti, Emmanuel Farhi, Jesus
Fernandez-Villaverde, Xavier Gabaix, Jean Imbs, Jennifer La'O, Simon Mongey, and Dmitry
Mukhin for very useful comments. We thank Isabelle Mejean for help with the FICUS-FARE
data. Maarten de Ridder provided superb research assistance. We thank seminar audiences at
Amsterdam, Bocconi, Brown, Bank of Portugal, Cambridge, Chicago Booth, Columbia GSB,
Cornell, ECB, Einaudi EIEF, IIES, Kent, Oxford, Penn, Richmond Fed, Saint-Gallen, UCLA, UC
Riverside, UTDT, and Yale. We also thank participants and organizers of the New Frontier in
Business Cycle Research Conference, Barcelona Summer Forum 2019, SED St Louis 2019, 15th
CSEF-IGIER Symposium, Oslo Macro Group 2019, EABCN Mannheim 2019, EARIE Barcelona
2019, 1st Pavia Workshop on Macroeconomics with Heterogeneous Agents, EM3C conference
Chicago 2019, Canadian Macroeconomics Study Group 2019, ASSA San Diego 2020, 1st
NYUAD Macroeconomics Workshop 2020, Junior VMACS conference 2020. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Ariel Burstein, Vasco M. Carvalho, and Basile Grassi. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Bottom-up Markup Fluctuations
Ariel Burstein, Vasco M. Carvalho, and Basile Grassi
NBER Working Paper No. 27958
October 2020
JEL No. E0

                                         ABSTRACT

We study markup cyclicality in a granular macroeconomic model with oligopolistic competition.
We characterize the comovement of firm, sectoral, and economy-wide markups with sectoral and
aggregate output following firm-level shocks. We then quantify the model's ability to reproduce
salient features of the cyclical properties of markups in French administrative firm-level data,
from the bottom (firm) level to the aggregate level. Our model helps rationalize various,
seemingly conflicting, measures of markup cyclicality in the French data.


Ariel Burstein                                 Basile Grassi
Department of Economics                        Bocconi University
Bunche Hall 8365                               Milan
Box 951477                                     Italy
UCLA                                           basile.grassi@gmail.com
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
arielb@econ.ucla.edu

Vasco M. Carvalho
University of Cambridge
Cambridge
UK
vmcarvalho.web@gmail.com
Introduction

A long tradition in the business-cycle literature evaluates models on their ability to account
for salient moments of business-cycle data, such as the relative volatility and correlation with
GDP of key macroeconomic aggregates. Although there exists a broad consensus on moments
concerning, for example, the behavior of consumption, investment, or unemployment over the
business cycle, disagreement lingers, both in terms of theory and measurement, over the cycli-
cal behaviour of markups (see, e.g., Bils et al., 2018 and Nekarda and Ramey, Forthcoming).1

In this paper, we re-examine this question, studying the cyclical properties of markups at the
firm, sector, and aggregate level, both theoretically and empirically, based on French admin-
istrative data. We consider a model of oligopolistic competition in which granular firm-level
shocks result not only in sector and economy-wide output changes, as in Gabaix (2011), but
also in markup dynamics. We characterize the model's implications for comovement between
output and markups, that is "markup cylicality", at various levels of disaggregation from the
bottom (firm) level up to the sector and aggregate levels, and show how this comovement is
mediated by market structure within and across sectors. We then assess the quantitative ability
of our granular oligopolistic setting to reproduce salient measures of the cyclical properties of
markups in the French data at the firm, sector, and aggregate levels.

To model in a tractable way the determination and aggregation of markups in an economy fea-
turing a large but finite number of sectors with a discrete number of firms, we use a nested
CES demand structure studied in Atkeson and Burstein (2008).2 Firms compete under flexible
prices, setting markups that are increasing in within-sector sales shares.3 Firm-level shocks
follow a random growth process that generates empirically plausible firm dynamics, firm-size
distributions, and granular sectoral and aggregate fluctuations (Carvalho and Grassi 2019). The
model yields predictions for the joint behavior of within-sector market shares, markups, and
output following exogenous changes in firm-level shifters. Furthermore, the model's conve-
nient equilibrium aggregation yields simple sectoral and aggregate counterparts to many of
these firm-level objects.
   1
      Other studies contributing to the active debate on the sign and magnitude of markup cyclicality include Bils
(1987), Hall (1988), Anderson et al. (2018), and Stroebel and Vavra (2019). Additionally, a growing literature provides
measures of lower-frequency trends in markups, such as De Loecker et al. (2020) and De Loecker and Eeckhout
(2018).
    2
      A similar framework has been used in a number of macro applications to quantify the welfare costs of market
power (Edmond et al., 2018 and Berger et al., 2019), trends in market power (De Loecker et al., 2018), pro-competitive
gains from trade (Edmond et al., 2015), exchange-rate pass-through (Amiti et al., 2019), and granularity in trade
(Gaubert and Itskhoki, 2018). Other prominent work featuring fluctuations in market power in macroeconomic
models include Gali (1994), Kimball (1995), Jaimovich and Floetotto (2008), and Bilbiie et al. (2012).
    3
      Much of the literature on markup cyclicality is motivated by the implications of models with nominal rigidities
(e.g., Rotemberg and Woodford (1999) for a comprehensive early survey), which depend on the nature of nominal
rigidities (prices vs. wages) and on the source of aggregate shocks (e.g., monetary vs. productivity). By contrast, we
assume prices are flexible, and focus on the implications for markup cyclicality of granular, firm-level shocks. See
Mongey (2017) and Wang and Werning (2020) for recent analyses of money non-neutrality in an oligopolistic model
like ours with price rigidities.


                                                          1
Our first theoretical contribution is to provide simple analytic expressions showing how the
sign of markup cyclicality depends on the level of aggregation, the market structure within and
across sectors, and the set of shocked firms.4 We show sectoral output and markups comove
positively in response to shocks to large firms in the sector, whereas they comove negatively in
response to shocks to small firms. In turn, the effect of such shocks on the aggregate markup
depends on the distribution of sector-level markups and sectoral expenditure shares. Under
the additional assumption that shocks are uncorrelated across firms (such that large firms drive
the cycle in each sector), we provide sufficient conditions for a positive asymptotic correlation
between markups and output at the sectoral and aggregate levels.

Second, we compare, theoretically, the implications of our model to an alternative specifica-
tion in which firm-level markups are heterogeneous but constant in response to shocks (i.e.,
complete pass-through) so that sectoral and aggregate markups only change due to between-
firm reallocation and not within-firm markup changes. We show that, although within-firm
markup changes account for half of sectoral markup fluctuations in the variable markup model,
changes in sectoral and aggregate markups can be larger or smaller than in the constant
markup model, depending on parameter values, because the extent of between-firm realloca-
tion falls with incomplete pass-through. Additionally, we provide analytical formulas for sec-
toral and aggregate output volatility, which generalize those in Gabaix (2011) to an oligopolistic
setting with variable markups, and show how the introduction of variable markups dampens
granular aggregate volatility, by acting in a similar way to a decline in the Herfindahl index. In-
tuitively, when pass-through rates are lower for larger firms, the weight of large firm shocks in
the price index is effectively reduced relative to constant markup models.

Our quantitative analysis is based on French administrative firm-level data over a 23-year pe-
riod (1994-2016) covering approximately 500,000 firms per year. We use this firm census data to
compute empirical distributions of firm market shares, sectoral output and concentration, and
aggregate output over our annual sample. Further, we use balance-sheet information to esti-
mate firm-level markups ­ following the methodologies introduced in De Loecker and Warzyn-
ski (2012) and De Loecker et al. (2016) ­ which we again also aggregate at the sectoral and ag-
gregate levels.5 We employ a rich set of empirical moments at the firm, sector, and aggregate
levels both to calibrate our model and to assess its quantitative implications for (non-targeted)
markup cyclicality.

We start by analyzing a basic mechanism in our oligopolistic setting: within a narrowly de-

   4
     Grassi (2018) studies the role of input-output linkages and endogenous markups in shaping comovement of
sector-level variables, providing an analytical characterization of the impact of microeconomic shocks on aggregate
output using an approximation with respect to the deep parameters of the model. Our analytic results make use of
a different approximation with respect to firm-level idiosyncratic shocks, similar to the one used in, for example,
Gopinath et al. (2010), Burstein and Gopinath (2014), and Amiti et al. (2019) in the context of exchange rate shocks.
   5
     Given the level of aggregation in our baseline dataset, we do not measure markups at the level of geographic
regions, as in Anderson et al. (2018), or products, as in De Loecker et al. (2016). For consideration of pricing with
multi-product firms in a similar framework to ours, see Hottman et al. (2016).


                                                         2
fined sector, a firms' market power is increasing in its market share. This relationship implies a
positive correlation between firm-level markup and firm-level market share, both in the cross
section and over time. Moreover, aggregating firm-level outcomes implies the same correlation
between sectoral markups and sectoral concentration. We find support for these predicted cor-
relations in the French census data, both at the firm and at the sector levels, in the cross section,
and over time.6

Second, we show firm-level changes in markups play a sizable role in accounting for changes in
sectoral markups. Namely, as discussed above, our model of oligopolistic competition with en-
dogenous markups predicts that within-firm markup dynamics account for half of the changes
in sectoral markups, and equilibrium reallocation accounts for the remaining half. Implement-
ing a simple within-between decomposition in the French census data, we find that, for the me-
dian sector, the within-firm term accounts for 65% of the changes in sector markups in France.
Furthermore, for half of the sectors, the contribution of the within term lies between 42% and
82%.7

Third, we examine in the model and data three measures of markup cyclicality that the liter-
ature has considered. We first consider a notion of firm-level markup cyclicality proposed by
Hong (2017). In particular, we ask whether firm markups covary systematically with respect
to sector-level output. We find this reduced-form relation is "counter-cyclical" for the average
firm in the French data, but switches sign for large firms. Relatedly, large firms are "pro-cyclical"
in that their market share increases during sectoral expansions, which is a key implication
of our granular model. We then proceed to evaluate notions of sector-level markup cyclical-
ity. Following Nekarda and Ramey (2013) (the working paper version of Nekarda and Ramey,
Forthcoming), we ask whether sector markups comove with sector output over the business
cycle. Like Nekarda and Ramey (2013) for the US, we find evidence for a positive systematic
comovement between the two measures, or "pro-cyclicality", in the French data. Finally, we
follow the recent work of Bils et al. (2018), who investigate yet another notion of cyclicality: the
extent to which sector level markups comove with aggregate output. According to this mea-
sure, we find weak (statistically insignificant) pro-cyclical point estimates. Bils et al. (2018)
document a negative correlation for the US. Note we obtain seemingly conflicting measures of
markup cyclicality across different layers of aggregation despite using a single dataset and mea-
sure of firm-level markups. This suggests that by exploiting different reduced-form measures
of markup cyclicality, two researchers may arrive at opposing conclusions even within a sin-
gle dataset. Our model can reproduce qualitatively and, with a few exceptions, quantitatively
different measures of markup cyclicality.


   6
     Relatedly, Brooks et al. (2016) and Kikkawa et al. (2019) provide evidence of a positive relation between market
shares and markups in the time series using firm-level data from China and Belgium, respectively.
   7
     Relatedly, Figure 3 in Baqaee and Farhi (2019) shows within-firm changes in markups in the US are quantitatively
important in accounting for cyclical (e.g., high frequency) movements in aggregate markup.


                                                         3
Finally, we examine the model's implications for aggregate markup and output fluctuations. In
our baseline calibration, we abstract from aggregate shocks that leave the firm-size distribu-
tion unchanged because, in our model, they do not affect markups. Our model with granular
firm-level shocks generates roughly 40% (on average, across 23-year simulated samples) of the
volatility of aggregate output in the French data. The ratio of markup volatility relative to out-
put volatility is roughly 0.5 in the data and 0.3 in the model. Note that much of the work on the
granular origin of business cycles abstracts from these movements in desired markups that can
partly offset the impact of own firm-level shocks or magnify the impact from shocks to com-
peting firms.8 , 9 Turning to aggregate markup cyclicality, our model implies a counterfactually
large and positive point estimate for the correlation between aggregate output and markups
relative to the data. However, there is large variation in point estimates across small 23-year
simulated samples. This is because, as our analytic expressions show, the sign and magni-
tude of markup cyclicality depends on the set of shocked firms, which can vary substantially
across small samples. Moreover, superimposing aggregate productivity shocks to account for
the overall aggregate volatility reduces this correlation significantly. Finally, we show the mag-
nitude and cyclicality of aggregate markups in our model is not too different when we coun-
terfactually fix markups at their initial, heterogeneous equilibrium level. Of course, rather than
exogenously fixing markups, our model provides a unified theory of both markup (level) het-
erogeneity across firms and endogenous markup changes.

The paper is organized as follows. In section 1, we present our granular oligopolistic setup and
describe the equilibrium from the bottom (firm) level to the aggregate level. In section 2, we
characterize analytically various measures of markup cyclicality at various aggregation levels.
In section 3, we discuss our French administrative firm data, the markup-estimation strategy
and model calibration. In section 4, we compare a host of markup-related moments in the data
and in model-generated data. Section 5 concludes. In the Appendix, we more fully discuss
markup estimation, provide additional results and proofs, and present robustness checks.




   8
      Gaubert and Itskhoki (2018) study the granular origins of a country's comparative advantage in an oligopolistic
framework that is similar to ours. For work on the granular origins of business-cycle fluctuations ­ but featuring
either perfect competition or constant markups ­ see Carvalho and Gabaix (2013) on the evolution of business-
cycle volatility over time and across countries and di Giovanni and Levchenko (2012) or di Giovanni et al. (2018) for
granular settings linking trade, aggregate volatility, and cross-country comovement. di Giovanni et al. (2014) provide
an empirical benchmark for the role of granularity in aggregate fluctuations. Our emphasis on the micro origins of
aggregate fluctuations is also related to the literature on production networks. See Acemoglu et al. (2012) for an
initial benchmark, and Grassi (2018) for an analysis of how market power distorts the propagation of shocks along
input linkages. Finally, Pasten et al. (2020) examine aggregate granular fluctuations in a multi-sector model allowing
for changes in markups due to nominal price rigidities.
    9
      Baqaee and Farhi (2019) provide a very general characterization of the impact of microeconomic shocks on
aggregate productivity and output in a large class of models in which productivities and wedges (e.g., markups)
are exogenous primitives. Baqaee and Farhi (2020) study the role of variable markups in shaping the aggregate
implications of changes in market size.


                                                          4
1         Model

In this section, we first describe our assumptions on preferences, technologies, and market
structure. We then characterize the equilibrium, first within a sector and then at the aggregate
level.


1.1         Preferences and technologies

Households have preferences at time t over consumption of a final composite good, Yt , and
labor, Lt , given by
                                                         1           f0     1+f -1
                                       U (Yt , Lt ) =      Yt1- -         L        ,
                                                        1-        1 + f -1 t
where   1 and f  0 are, respectively, the constant relative risk aversion and the Frisch
elasticity of labor supply. The final good aggregates output of N sectors according to a constant-
elasticity-of-substitution (CES) aggregator:
                                                                               
                                                           N      1    -1
                                                                               -1

                                                 Yt =           Ak Ykt
                                                                       
                                                                                    ,
                                                          k=1

where Ykt denotes sector k output, Ak is a demand shifter for sector k (which we assume is
constant over time, and we set it in our calibration to target the average size of each sector),
and   1 is the elasticity of substitution across sectors.

As in Atkeson and Burstein (2008), each sector k is itself a CES aggregator of the output of Nk
individual firms given by
                                                                              
                                                           Nk     1      -1
                                                                              -1

                                                 Ykt =          Akit Ykit
                                                                         
                                                                                        ,
                                                          i=1

where Ykit denotes the output of firm i in sector k , Akit is a firm-demand shock (independently
drawn across firms), and  is the elasticity of substitution between the output of firms in sector
k . We assume   , so that goods are more substitutable within sectors than across sectors.
With a finite number of sectors and a discrete number of firms per sector, firm-level shocks can
generate aggregate fluctuations as in Gabaix (2011). By contrast, with a continuum of sectors,
as in Atkeson and Burstein (2008), firm-level shocks would not generate aggregate fluctuations.

Firm i in sector k produces output according to the constant-returns-to-scale technology:

                                                        Ykit = Zkit Lkit ,                                          (1)

where Zkit denotes the productivity of firm i in sector k and Lkit is a variable input, employ-
ment, that is perfectly mobile across firms.10 Labor market clearing requires that the sum of
    10
         In appendix A.8, we provide analytic results allowing for decreasing returns to scale at the firm level.


                                                                 5
employment across all firms equals aggregate labor, Lt .

Our analytic results in section 2 on firm-level and sectoral-level outcomes are unchanged if the
variable input, Lkit , is a composite of multiple inputs (e.g., labor, intermediate goods, and cap-
ital) that is common across firms in the sector. The specific assumptions on the composition
of this variable input matter only for the aggregate response of the economy to given firm-level
shocks. When estimating markups in section 3, we assume the input Lkit is a translog com-
bination of labor, capital, materials, and services inputs with parameters that vary by sector.
We then compare measures of cyclicality of estimated markups in the data with measures of
cyclicality implied by our model.

Note we have not yet made assumptions about the stochastic process of firm-level shocks Akit
and Zkit . We introduce these assumptions in the analytic section (for our asymptotic results)
and quantitative section (in describing our model calibration).



1.2   Market structure and sector equilibrium

We now describe the equilibrium in a sector. Given the nested CES structure, firm i in sector k
faces demand Ykit = Ak Akit (Pkit )- (Pkt )- Pt Yt , where the sector k price is
                                                                        1
                                                   Nk                  1-
                                                               1-
                                        Pkt =            Akit Pkit                  ,                   (2)
                                                   i=1

and the aggregate price is
                                                                        1
                                                   N                   1-
                                                             1-
                                         Pt =            Ak Pkt                 .
                                                   k=1

The markup for firm i in sector k , which we characterize below, is defined as the ratio of price
to marginal cost,
                                                         Zkit Pkit
                                                 µkit              ,                                    (3)
                                                           Wt
where Wt is the price of the variable input (i.e., the wage). This markup determines how the
firm's revenues are split into labor payments and profits, such that

                    Lkit Wt = µ- 1
                               kit Pkit Ykit ,      and          kit = 1 - µ- 1
                                                                            kit Pkit Ykit .

                                                           Pkit Ykit
The market share of firm i in sector k , skit              Pkt Ykt ,   can be expressed in terms of markups
and firm shifters, which are defined as a composite of demand and productivity shifters, Vkit 
      -1
Akit Zkit . Specifically,
                                                               1-
                                                         Vkit µkit
                                          skit =        Nk          1-
                                                                            .                           (4)
                                                        i =1 Vki t µki t


                                                          6
One can consider two alternative market structures. Firms maximize profits by choosing price,
taking other firms' prices as given (Bertrand competition), or by choosing quantity, taking other
firms' quantities as given (Cournot competition). In both cases, firms take into account that
they are non-atomistic in their sector, and hence their choices affect sectoral output and prices.
We assume, however, that individual firms behave as if the sector they produce in is atomistic
in the aggregate economy (as in the case of a continuum of sectors).

Under these assumptions, equilibrium markups and market shares in each sector k solve the
non-linear system of equations given by (4) and

                                                                     -1
                                    
                                                     / -1
                                    
                                       -1     1-     -1       skit        under Cournot,
                                    
                           µkit =                                                                                       (5)
                                    
                                              1-( -
                                                   ) kit
                                                   
                                                    s
                                                                          under Bertrand.
                                    
                                       -1     1-(  -
                                                  -1 ) kit
                                    
                                                      s


Under both formulations, if  >  , markups are increasing in market shares,11 with lim µkit =
                                                                                 skit 0
                         
      and lim µkit =        . If  =  , markups are common across firms and constant over
-1         skit 1      -1
time as in the standard monopolistically competitive model. In our analytic and quantitative
results, we focus on the case of Cournot competition because it generates more markup varia-
tion than Bertrand and is thus better able to match the estimates of incomplete pass-through
and the markup-size relationship. In appendix A, we provide analytic results under Bertrand.

Two remarks are in order about firm shifters. First, firm-level market shares and markups in
sector k depend only on relative firm shifters across firms within this sector. This result implies
market shares and markups in sector k do not vary in response to proportional changes in
shifters to all firms in sector k (including sectoral demand shifters Ak ), shocks in other sectors,
or changes in the aggregate wage. It follows that aggregate shocks to firms in all sectors generate
fluctuations in aggregate output but not in aggregate markups. For this reason, in our baseline
quantitative analysis, we abstract from standard aggregate productivity shocks.

Second, the split of firm shifters Vkit into demand and productivity does not matter for the so-
lution of any model outcome (at the firm, sector, or aggregate level) except for firm-level quan-
tities and prices. In mapping the model to data, however, one needs to take into account that
some discrepancies may exist in how certain variables are constructed in the model and data.
For example, price deflators that are used to construct sectoral output typically do not take into
account high-frequency changes in demand or quality shifters. Therefore, in our quantitative
analysis, we only consider firm-level productivity shocks and abstract from shocks to demand
shifters.



  11
     The property is satisfied in a variety of models with variable elasticity of demand (see, e.g., the reviews in Burstein
and Gopinath (2014) and Arkolakis and Morlacco (2017))


                                                             7
1.3    Sectoral outcomes



We now describe how the model aggregates outcomes from the firm level to the sector level.
We define sectoral markup as the ratio of sectoral revenues to labor payments,

                                                           Pkt Ykt
                                                 µkt               ,                                     (6)
                                                           Wt Lkt
                                                Nk
where sectoral employment is Lkt =              i=1 Lkit .    Sectoral markups can be expressed as an har-
monic mean (weighted by market shares) of firm-level markups,

                                                     Nk                -1

                                         µkt =             µ- 1
                                                            kit skit        .                            (7)
                                                    i=1

Substituting the markup-market-share relationship (equation 5) under Cournot competition,
we can express the sectoral markup, µkt , as a simple function of the sector's Herfindahl-
                                   Nk 2 12
Hirschman index, HHIkt =           i=1 skit :

                                                                                    -1
                                                          / - 1
                               µkt =      1-                           HHIkt             .               (8)
                                       -1                 -1

Note the positive relationship between sectoral markup and HHI takes the same form as the
firm-level relationship between markup and market share in equation (5). In the same way
that a firm with a large market share charges a higher markup, a sector with a large average
market share, that is, a high HHI, has a high sectoral markup as long as  >  .13

Sectoral markups can be expressed as the standard ratio between sectoral price and marginal
cost (i.e., the ratio of wage to sectoral productivity), µkt = Pkt Zkt /Wt . Sectoral productivity,
Zkt  Ykt /Lkt , can be expressed in terms of firm-level markups and firm shifters as
                                                                          
                                                     Nk        1-         -1
                                                     i=1 Vkit µkit
                                       Zkt =              Nk        -
                                                                                .                        (9)
                                                          i=1 Vkit µkit




  12
     The HHI is an average of market shares, weighted by market shares themselves, and hence ranges between 0
and 1.
  13
     A similar mapping between sectoral markups and concentration indices can be obtained under Bertrand com-
petition (see Grassi, 2018).


                                                          8
1.4   Aggregate outcomes


We now describe how the model aggregates outcomes from the sector level to the aggregate
level. We define aggregate markup as the ratio of aggregate revenues and labor payments,

                                                        N              -1
                                     Pt Yt
                                 µt        =                skt µ-
                                                                 kt
                                                                   1
                                                                              .               (10)
                                     Wt Lt
                                                     k=1

As indicated by the second equality, aggregate markups can be expressed as a harmonic
weighted average of sectoral markups, where sectoral expenditure shares are determined by
                                                 -1
sectoral markups and sectoral shifters Vkt  Ak Zkt  ,

                                       Pkt Ykt          Vkt (µkt )1-
                               skt             =                    1- .                      (11)
                                        Pt Yt           k Vkt (µkt )

Alternatively, under Cournot, we can express the aggregate markup as a simple function of
average sectoral HHI (weighted by sectoral expenditure shares) that mirrors the expressions
for firm-level and sector-level markups in equations (5) and (8), respectively:

                                                              N                      -1
                                             / - 1
                         µt =    1-                                 skt HHIkt             .
                              -1             -1
                                                              k=1

The weighted average of sectoral HHIs is equal to the average market share across firms
weighted by firms' expenditure share in the whole economy. When this weighted-average mar-
ket share in the economy is high, the aggregate markup is high.

Aggregate markups can also be expressed as the standard ratio between aggregate price and
aggregate marginal cost, µt = Pt Zt /Wt , where aggregate productivity, Zt  Yt /Lt , can be ex-
pressed in terms of sectoral markups and sectoral shifters as
                                                                     
                                                 N        1-         -1
                                                 k=1 Vkt µkt
                                   Zt =                                   .                   (12)
                                                   N        -
                                                   k=1 Vkt µkt


Finally, aggregate output and labor are given by

                                          1+ 1
                                + 1    Z f                                    Yt
                              Yt f    = t               and         Lt =         ,            (13)
                                        f0 µt                                 Zt

where the aggregate markup, µt , distorts the leisure/consumption choice relative to the optimal
allocation.

In sum, our model aggregates outcomes in a very parsimonious manner from the firm level to
the sector level, and from the sector level to the aggregate level. In appendix A, we summarize

                                                    9
how to solve for prices and quantities at every time period as a function of the realized shocks
to firm shifters.

In the following section, we use a first-order approximation to characterize the equilibrium
response to firm-level shocks at the firm, sectoral, and aggregate levels.




2         Analytic results

In this section, we characterize, up to a first-order approximation, the equilibrium response of
markups, prices, and output to firm-level shocks at the firm, sectoral, and aggregate levels.14

We first introduce a first-order approximation to solve for changes in firm-level markups and
market shares in a sector. We then develop expressions for changes in prices, markups, and
output in response to firm-level shocks, first at the sector level and then at the aggregate level.
We provide expressions for asymptotic covariances between markup and output changes at
different aggregation levels under the additional assumption that firm-level shocks are i.i.d.
                                                   2  Var V
and equally distributed across firms with variance v        kit . We focus on the case of
Cournot competition, and present results under Bertrand in the appendix. We highlight the
role of variable markups versus constant markups in shaping markup cyclicality, as well as the
impact of variable markups on aggregate output volatility. We return to these formulas in our
quantitative analysis in section 4.4.




2.1         Firm-level outcomes

Consider an initial equilibrium in sector k with market shares {ski } and markups {µki } where,
for simplicity, we omit time subscripts in the initial equilibrium. Taking a first-order approx-
imation of equations (4) and (5), changes in equilibrium market shares and markups are the
solution to
                                                           Nk
                           skit = Vkit + (1 - ) µkit -            ski   Vki t + (1 - ) ki ski t ,   (14)
                                                           i =1
                           µkit = ki skit .                                                         (15)

Variables with hats denote log differences at time t relative to the initial equilibrium, that is,
Vkit  log Vkit - log Vki , and ki denotes the markup elasticity with respect to market share for
firm i in sector k , evaluated at the initial equilibrium.

    14
         We thank Dmitry Mukhin for his valuable input in deriving these analytic results.


                                                             10
Markup elasticities under Cournot are, by equation (5),
                                                           
                                                ln µki      - 1 ski
                                       ki              =               .
                                                ln ski   -1-   - 1 ski

As discussed above, if  >  , markups are increasing in market shares (i.e., ki  0, with strict
inequality if ski > 0). Moreover, markup elasticities are also increasing in market shares. This
property whereby markup elasticities are increasing in market shares is satisfied by a variety of
demand models with variable elasticity, as discussed in, for example, Burstein and Gopinath
(2014) and Arkolakis and Morlacco (2017).

We now introduce pass-through elasticities, which are not required to solve for sectoral mar-
ket shares and markups but, nevertheless, we use in our analytic results that follow. Changes
in firm-level prices at time t are given by Pkit = -Zkit + µkit where, without loss of gen-
erality, we choose the wage as the numeraire. Combined with equations (15) and skit =
Akit + (1 - ) Pkit - Pkt , we obtain


                                   Pkit = ki -Zkit + ki Akit + (1 - ki ) Pkt ,                                     (16)

where ki is the pass-through rate governing how firm-level prices respond to idiosyncratic
shocks (for given changes in sectoral prices, Pkt ),

                                                              1
                                                ki =                  .                                            (17)
                                                        1 + ( - 1) ki

Conversely, 1 - ki governs how prices respond to changes in sectoral price (due to variable
markups).15 Because markup elasticities are increasing in market shares (if  >  ), pass-
through rates are decreasing in market shares.16 To isolate the role of changes in markups in
response to shocks, we consider the case in which markups are fixed at the initial equilibrium
levels, imposing ki = 0 and ki = 1.



2.2    Sectoral outcomes

In this subsection, we characterize how sectoral prices, markups, and output respond to firm-
level shocks, and provide expressions for variances and covariances of markup and output
changes over long realizations of shocks.

  15
     In the appendix, we provide expressions for the elasticity of market shares with respect to firm-level shifters and
for the variance of market shares.
  16
     We can further solve for Pkit using Pkt = ski Pkit + (1 - ski )Pk-it , where Pk-it is the competitors' price index
defined in Amiti et al. (2019). We can rewrite (16) as Pkit = ~ ki -Zki + ki Akit + (1 - ~ ki ) Pk-it , where ~ ki =
    ki
1-(1-ki )ski
             ,   which is a U-shaped function of market shares ski .


                                                            11
Sectoral prices         As a first step in understanding changes in sectoral output, we characterize
changes in sectoral prices (relative to the the numeraire, i.e., wage), which are related to sectoral
                                - 
output by CES demand, Ykt = Ak Pkt Pt Yt .

Taking a first-order approximation of the sectoral price definition (2) and using firm-level price
changes (16), log changes in sectoral prices can be expressed as a weighted average of firm
shifters,
                                                               Nk
                                                        1      i=1 ski ki Vkit
                                           Pkt = -               Nk
                                                                               ,                                       (18)
                                                        -1       i=1 ski ki

where the weights are given by the product of market shares, ski , and pass-through rates, ki .
Because   1, sectoral prices fall in response to an increase in firm shifter.

To understand how sectoral price changes are shaped by pass-through rates, note that if ki =
k , Pkt is independent of k for given market shares ski in the initial equilibrium. That is, the
response in sectoral price is identical to that if markups were fixed at their initial level (ki = 1).
Intuitively, as pass-through k falls, the larger markup change by a firm to an own shock is
exactly offset by a larger change in markup, in the opposite direction, of its competitors.

                                                                                           ¯p
With heterogeneity in pass-through rates, because ki is decreasing in ski , a single value sk
                                                       ¯p
exists such that a positive shock to firm i with ski > s k results in a smaller reduction in sectoral
prices than if markups were fixed at their initial level. Intuitively, firm i's increase in markup
more than offsets the markup decrease of its competitors. Conversely, a positive shock to firm
             ¯p
i with ski < s k results in a larger reduction in sectoral prices than if markups were fixed at their
initial level.17

From equation (18), the asymptotic variance of price changes in sector k assuming firm-level
                                         2 is
shifters are i.i.d. with common variance v

                                                             2 Nk                        2
                                                    v                         ki ski
                                   Var Pkt =                                                 .                         (19)
                                                    -1                        i ki ski
                                                                  i=1


If markups are fixed at their initial level (or, more generally, if ki = k ), this variance is propor-
                                                                                             2
                                                                                    v            Nk 2
tional to the sectoral HHI, as in Gabaix (2011): Var Pkt =                          -1           i=1 ski .   Comparing this
expression with (19), we note Var Pkt is lower under variable markups than under constant
                                                    ki ski
markups if and only if the variance of              ki ski    is lower than the variance of ski . Because ki is
                                                    i

decreasing in ski , this condition is satisfied if ski ki is increasing in ski (see condition 53 below).

Intuitively, under the condition presented above, the variance of sectoral prices is lower under
variable markups, because pass-through rates are lower for larger firms, effectively reducing
the weight of large firm shocks in the price index (with similar effects on volatility as a decline
in the HHI).

                                                             Nk
  17
                     ¯p
       The threshold s                              sp
                      k is defined implicitly by k (¯k) =    i=1   ski ki .


                                                             12
Sectoral markups         Changes in sectoral markups, defined in equation (7), can be decomposed
into changes in markups within firms and the reallocation of expenditures between firms with
heterogeneous markups:
                                                Nk
                                                            µk
                                        µkt =         ski       (µkit - skit ) .                                (20)
                                                            µki
                                                i=1


In appendix A, we derive the following expression for changes in sectoral markups:18

                                                   Nk
                                     1 1                                     i   s2
                                                                                  ki ki
                         µkt = 2      -       µk         ski ki ski -                     Vkit .                (21)
                                                                             i   ski ki
                                                   i=1

The following proposition states that a positive shock to firm i results in an increase in the
sectoral markup if and only if firm i is sufficiently large in its sector.



Proposition 1 Consider a positive shock to firm i in sector k , Vkit > 0. Then, under Cournot
competition, sector k markup increases, µkt > 0, if and only if ski > i s2
                                                                         ki ki / i ski ki .




Intuitively, recall from equation (20) that changes in sectoral markups reflect changes in firm-
level markups (within term) and between-firm reallocation (between term). Consider first the
within term. A positive shock to firm i raises firm i's markup and reduces it for competing
firms. The former dominates if firm i is large, whereas the latter dominates if firm i is small.
Consider now the between term. A positive shock to firm i reallocates market shares towards
firm i, increasing the sectoral markup if firm i's markup is sufficiently high (or, equivalently, if
its market share is sufficiently large). Therefore, the within and between terms push the sectoral
markup in the same direction.

The "2" in front of (21) reflects the fact that the magnitude of the within term is equal to
the magnitude of the between term (and hence each accounts for 50% of changes in sec-
toral markups). A change in parameters (e.g., an increase in  -  ) that increases the sensi-
tivity of markups to firm-level shocks (increasing the within term) also increases the dispersion
of markups across firms (increasing the between term). In appendix A, we show this 50-50
within/between decomposition of changes in sectoral markups under Cournot competition
holds globally (not only up to a first order).

How do changes in sectoral markups compare in the specification with variable markups ver-
sus the specification with constant markups (in which sectoral markups change only due to
between-firm reallocation)? If firm-level markups are fixed at their initial level (setting ki = 0

  18
   Ex-ante firm heterogeneity is a necessary condition for sectoral markups to change in response to firm-level
shocks. To see this, if ski and µki are equal across all firms in sector k, equations (15), (20), and N k
                                                                                                      i=1 ski ski = 0
imply that µkt = 0.


                                                            13
and ki = 1), changes in sectoral markups in equation 49) are:

                                              Nk
                                                                 µk
                                     µkt =         ski 1 -             Vkit .                                    (22)
                                                                 µki
                                             i=1

In response to a positive shock to firm i, sectoral markups increase if and only if µki > µk .

In general, we do not obtain a simple characterization comparing (22) with (21). To make ana-
lytic progress, in appendix A, we restrict the extent of ex-ante firm heterogeneity to two types.
We provide a simple sufficient condition for sectoral markups to change by more (and display
a higher variance) under variable markups than under constant markups. Intuitively, changes
in sectoral markups can be smaller under variable markups than under constant markups be-
cause the larger response of sectoral markups due to changes in firm-level markups is more
than offset by a smaller extent of between-firm reallocation due to incomplete pass-through.

To summarize, even though changes in sectoral markups under variable markups are twice
as large as the between-firm reallocation term for any firm-level shocks, variable markups do
not necessarily magnify changes in sectoral markups relative to the model specification with
constant markups, because incomplete pass-through mutes the extent of between-firm reallo-
cation


Covariance between sectoral prices and sectoral markups                         Recall from previous results that
in response to a positive shock to firm i in sector k , the sectoral price falls, whereas sectoral
markup can increase or decrease depending on the firm's initial markup. We now calculate the
asymptotic covariance between sectoral price and markup changes, which shapes the covari-
ance between sectoral output and markup that we examine below.

First, to build intuition, in the case of constant markups,

                                                           Nk
                                               1                           µk
                           Cov µkt , Pkt    =-                   s2
                                                                  ki 1 -
                                                                                 2
                                                                               × v .                             (23)
                                               -1                          µki
                                                           i=1

Thus, sectoral markups and prices are negatively correlated as long as large firms within sec-
tor charge higher markups. Intuitively, shocks to small firms induce a positive comovement,
whereas shocks to large firms induce a negative comovement. Overall, comovement is nega-
tive because shocks to large firms induce larger changes in sectoral price than shocks to small
firms.
With variable markups, using the expressions for the change in sectoral price (18) and markup
(21),
                                      Nk             Nk
                    2 µk     1   1                                 s2
                                                                    ki ki             ski ki         ski ki
Cov µkt , Pkt = -              -            s2
                                             ki ki               Nk
                                                                                -   Nk             Nk
                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                 × v .
                    -1                               i=1
                                                                       2
                                                                 i =1 ski ki        i =1 ski ki    i =1 ski ki
                                     i =1
                                                                                                                 (24)


                                                      14
Therefore, when  >  , sectoral prices and markups comove negatively in long samples if and
only if
                           Nk
                                      s2
                                       ki ki                ski ki              ski ki
                                    Nk
                                                    -     Nk                  Nk
                                                                                             > 0.                      (25)
                                          2
                           i=1      i =1 ski   ki         i =1 ski ki         i =1 ski ki

If firms are ex-ante homogeneous, equation (25) holds with equality and sectoral markups are
constant over time. If firms are heterogeneous in the initial equilibrium, inequality (25) may or
may not hold. The following proposition, proven in the appendix, states that if pass-through
rates do not fall too strongly with market shares, inequality (25) holds, so sectoral prices and
markups comove negatively.


Proposition 2 Under Cournot competition, if firms are ex-ante heterogeneous and ski ki is in-
creasing in ski , sectoral markup and price comove negatively, Cov µkt , Pkt < 0.



In appendix A.4 we show that ski ki is increasing in ski provided that market shares are not
too large. Intuitively, the condition that ski ki is increasing in ski implies, by equation (18), that
sectoral prices are more responsive to large firm shocks than to small firm shocks (i.e., the lower
pass-through rate by large firms does not fully offset their higher weight in the price index). The
fact that sectoral markups increase in response to large firm shocks and decrease in response
to small firm shocks implies a negative covariance between sectoral price and markup, as in
the case of constant markups.




Covariance between sectoral output and markups                          In appendix A, we derive the following
expression for changes in sector k output in response to sector k shocks:

                                           f +1          -1                  µ                   sk µ µkt
            Ykt = -  (1 - sk ) +                 +                      1-           sk Pkt +               .          (26)
                                           f + 1         f + 1               µk                   µk f  + 1

A sufficient condition for sectoral output and price to move in opposite directions is that sec-
tor k is small in the aggregate (sk  0) or that disutility of labor is linear (f  ). In this
case, the previous results on sectoral price apply immediately to sectoral output (with the op-
posite sign).19 Specifically, in response to a positive shock to firm i in sector k , sectoral out-
put increases whereas sectoral markup can increase or decrease depending on the firm's initial
markup.
Taking into account a long sequence of firm shocks in sector k , the covariance between changes

  19
     If f finite and sector k is sufficiently large in the aggregate, it is possible that sectoral output and price both fall
in response to positive sector k firm level shocks if sectoral markup µk is very low relative to the aggregate markup
and/or if sector k markup falls substantially when the sectoral price falls.


                                                            15
in sectoral output and sectoral markup is:
                                                                        
                                                              µ
                                     f + 1 + ( - 1) 1 -       µk                            sk µ 1
   Cov Ykt , µkt = -  (1 - sk ) +                                   sk  Cov Pkt , µkt +               Var [µkt ] ,
                                               f + 1                                        µk f  + 1


where Cov Pkt , µkt is defined above.

The following proposition provides sufficient conditions for pro-cyclical sectoral markups with
respect to sectoral output.

Proposition 3 Under the conditions of Proposition 2, sectoral markup and sectoral output co-
move positively, Cov Ykt , µkt > 0, if at least one of these three conditions holds: (i) sk  0, (ii)
f  , (iii)   1. If all three conditions (i)-(iii) are violated, Cov Ykt , µkt > 0 as long as
sectoral markup µk is not too low relative to aggregate markup.

In our empirical analysis, we also consider the cyclicality between sector output and firm-level
markups. In appendix A, we show that, for the case of f  , the covariance between changes
in firm i markup and sector k output is
                                                                                      Nk             2
                                                      ki ki                           i =1 (ski ki )
      Cov Ykt , µkit =  (1 - sk ) +  -1 sk             Nk
                                                                           ski ki -     Nk
                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                         × v .   (27)
                                             ( - 1)    i =1 ski    ki                   i =1 ski ki


The following proposition states that firm-level markups are procyclical for large firms and
counter-cyclical for small firms:

Proposition 4 If ski ki is increasing in ski and f  , firm-level markups and sectoral output
                                                            ¯µ
comove positively, Cov Ykt , µkit > 0, if and only if ski > sk , and comove negatively if and only if
      ¯µ
ski < s          ¯µ
       k , where s k is defined by the condition that the square bracket in (27) is equal to 0.


Intuitively, firm-level markups are positively correlated with sectoral output in response to
own-shocks and negatively correlated in response to competitors' shocks. Because large firms
have a disproportionate impact on sectoral price and output (if ski ki is increasing in ski ), firm-
level markups are pro-cyclical for large firms and counter-cyclical for small firms. The cutoff
¯µ
s k differs from the cutoff defined in Proposition 1, because the condition in Proposition 1 is
based on a shock to one firm only, whereas the asymptotic covariance in Proposition 4 takes
into account shocks to all firms in the sector.


2.3     Aggregate outcomes

We now describe how changes in sectoral markup, price, and output that we characterized
above shape changes in aggregate price (i.e., the negative of the real wage given the choice
­ without loss of generality ­ of the wage as a numeraire), markup, productivity, and output.

                                                       16
We provide expressions for sectoral and aggregate markup cyclicality with respect to aggregate
output, which we consider in our empirical analysis. We also examine how the variance of
aggregate output compares under variable markups and constant markups.

Up to a first order, changes in the aggregate price are Pt =               k sk Pkt .   Based on our results above,
any positive firm-level shock in sector k reduces the corresponding sectoral price and therefore
reduces the aggregate price (or increases the real wage) proportionately to the share in expen-
ditures of sector k . Whether the real wage increases more or less under variable markups rela-
tive to constant markups depends, as discussed above, on the shocked firm's relative size in its
sector.

Changes in aggregate markup can be decomposed into a within-sector markup term and a
reallocation term, analogous to the decomposition of sectoral markups in equation (20):

                                           µ                                  µ
                         µt =         sk      µkt + (1 -  )       sk 1 -              Pkt .                    (28)
                                           µk                                 µk
                                 k                            k

In response to a positive shock to a firm in sector k , aggregate markup can increase or decrease.
The first (within) term in (28) is positive if the shocked firm is relatively large (and sets a higher
markup) in sector k . The second (between) term in (28) is positive, when  > 1, if sector k has
a relatively high markup relative to the aggregate markup.

Changes in aggregate productivity, using Zt = µt - Pt , can be expressed in terms of changes in
sectoral markups and prices as

                                      µ                                          µ
                      Zt =       sk      µkt -       sk 1 + ( - 1) 1 -                    Pkt .                (29)
                                      µk                                         µk
                             k                   k


Recall that in response to positive firm-level shocks, the sectoral price decreases (Pkt < 0).
Aggregate productivity typically increases, but can decrease if shocked firms are relatively small
in their sector (such that the sectoral markup falls) or belong to low-markup sectors and  > 1.

Finally, by equation (13), changes in aggregate output are

                                      Yt = (f -1 +  )-1 f -1 Zt - Pt .                                         (30)

With inelastic labor supply (f  0), Yt = Zt . With linear disutility of labor (f  ), the
aggregate productivity term drops, so Yt = - -1               k sk Pkt .   A positive firm-level shock in sector
k reduces the sectoral price and increases aggregate output. Based on the discussion above on
the role of variable markups for the response of sectoral prices, the increase in aggregate output
is smaller under variable markups compared to constant markups if and only if the shocked
firm has a high market share.



                                                      17
Variance of aggregate output                   The variance of aggregate output (when f  ) is

                                                                     2                    Nk               2
                                -2                                  v                           ki ski
                 Var Yt =                      s2
                                                k Var   Pkt   =                      s2
                                                                                      k                        ,   (31)
                                       k
                                                                 2 ( - 1)2   k            i=1   i ki ski


where the second equality used equation (19). Based on the discussion after equation (19)
above, aggregate output is less volatile under variable markups than under constant markups
when pass-through rates are decreasing in size, effectively reducing the weight of large firms in
the price index (with similar effects on volatility as a reduction in market-share concentration).

In appendix A, we provide an expression for the variance of aggregate output without imposing
f  , as well as for the variance of aggregate markups.


Covariance between aggregate output and markups                              We first calculate the covariance be-
tween aggregate output and sector k markup, which is one of the measures of cyclicality in
our empirical analysis. When calculating this covariance, we use the fact that sector k markups
are affected only by shocks to sector k firms and not by shocks to firms in other sectors. We can
thus express this covariance as

                          Cov Yt , µkt = Cov Ykt , µkt +  (1 - sk ) Cov Pkt , µkt .                                (32)

The following proposition states that the covariance between aggregate output and sector
k markups is positive and lower than the covariance between sector k output and sector k
markup:20

Proposition 5 Under the conditions of Proposition 3,

                                           0 < Cov Yt , µkt  Cov Ykt , µkt ,                                       (33)

where the second inequality holds strictly if the economy has more than one sector (i.e. sk < 1 ).

Next, we calculate the covariance between aggregate output and aggregate markups (when f 
):
                                   µ            s2                 -1                           µ
               Cov Yt , µt = -                   k
                                                   Cov Pkt , µkt +                    s2
                                                                                       k 1-          Var Pkt .     (34)
                                                µk                                              µk
                                           k                                     k

  20
       To prove the first inequality in Proposition 5, we write equation (32) as
                                                                   
                                                                µ
                                         f + 1 + ( - 1) 1 - µ
                 Cov Yt , µkt = -sk 
                                                                 k
                                                                    Cov Pkt , µkt + sk µ 1 Var [µkt ] .
                                                  f + 1                              µk f  + 1


To prove the second inequality, we note that under the conditions of Proposition 3, Cov Pkt , µkt  0. Note the
second inequality does not extend immediately from covariances to correlations, because for some sectors, the
variance of aggregate output is smaller than the variance of sectoral output.


                                                                18
The first term in (34) is positive if sectoral markups and sectoral prices comove negatively,
which we discussed above. The second term in (34) is positive unless larger sectors have rela-
tively lower markups.

So far, we have calculated measures of markup cyclicality considering only i.i.d firm-level
shocks. In our quantitative analysis, we also allow for aggregate productivity shocks to firms in
all sectors. In our model, in which firm-level markups are functions of market shares, markups
do not respond to aggregate shocks. Therefore, incorporating aggregate shocks leaves the co-
variance of aggregate markups and output unchanged but decreases the correlation, because
the volatility of aggregate output increases with these shocks.

From these theoretical results, we see the sign of markup cyclicality depends on the level of
aggregation, market structure within and across all industries, and the set of shocked firms.
Moreover, the sign and magnitude of covariances in finite samples may differ from those of the
asymptotic covariances we derived.

In what follows, we calibrate the model to match salient features of the French firm-level data.
We evaluate quantitatively its implications for the cyclicality of markups, as well as its ability to
generate aggregate fluctuations in output and markups in response to idiosyncratic firm-level
shocks.



3     Data, Estimation, and Calibration

For the remainder of this paper, we use the model above as a data-generating process ­ from
which we simulate firm, sector, and aggregate time series ­ and then proceed to compare the
resulting model-implied moments to their empirical counterparts. In this section, we describe
how we use French administrative firm-level data to parametrize our model and provide the
empirical moments of interest. We start by describing the data and how we estimate markups.
We then describe how we parametrize the firm shock process and how we calibrate the model.
Appendix B provides additional details.


3.1   Data

Our empirical analysis deploys French firm-level data between 1994 and 2016. We use two
main datasets: the FICUS data covering the period 1994-2007 and the FARE dataset covering
the period 2008-2016. The datasets cover the universe of French firms and originate from the
French tax administration (DGFiP) that collects yearly tax statements for each firm, including
income statements, balance-sheet, and demographic information. The Institut National de la
Statistique et des Etudes Economiques (INSEE) uses these statements to construct the FICUS-
FARE datasets.

                                                 19
We assign firms to sectors according to the Nomenclature d'Activités Française (NAF2008) five-
digit classification, which is a French industry classification similar to the NACE Rev. 2 industry
classification at four-digit.21

We use a subset of the variables available in the FICUS-FARE dataset: total firm revenues, wage
bill (sum of wages and social security payments), capital (measured by fixed assets), and ex-
penditures on inputs. Our baseline measure of materials (which is our choice of variable input
in the estimation of markups) is the sum of expenditures and stock variation of materials and
merchandises (ACHAMPR and ACHAMAR, respectively). The variable ACHAMPR is defined as
"everything that the firm purchases in order to be transformed," and ACHAMAR is defined as
"everything that the firm purchases to be sold as is." We consider as a separate input expen-
ditures on service inputs (AUTACH), which includes research expenditures, outsourcing costs,
and external personnel cost (including temporary workers). We also use GDP deflators and
two-digit sector-price indices provided by EU-KLEMS.

We drop firms with non-positive revenue, materials, services expenditure, wage bill, or capi-
tal.22 We also drop firms in Finance and Insurance industries and, to comply with confidential-
ity rules, drop sectors with fewer than 12 firms in a given year. Finally, we keep firms that were
government owned early in our sample because most of them switched to private ownership
during the period we consider.23 After these treatments, we end up with 10, 928, 469 firm-year
observations across 23 years and 504 sectors.

For a subsample of manufacturing firms ­ and only from 2009 onwards ­ we can additionally
construct measures of firm-level prices based on the Enquête Annuelle d'Entreprise (EAE) sur-
vey. Although much smaller in coverage, this information is nevertheless useful below as a
robustness check to our baseline markup-estimation strategy.

Although this dataset is extremely rich, it misses some important information that limits the
extent of our analysis. First, we do not use information on imports and exports in the corre-
sponding sector. Specifically, when we compute market share as the ratio of a firm's revenue
relative to the sum of all French firms' revenue in this sector, we do not take into account the
sales of foreign firms in this market. Moreover, when we estimate markups, we do not exclude
sales to foreign countries, because we do not know the share of inputs expenditure accounted
for by exports.
  21
      In 2008, the NACE and NAF industry classification changed. To construct a panel of firms between 1994 and
2016 with a consistent industry classification over time, we proceed as follows. For firms with both the old and the
new industry codes are observed, we apply the new code to all years. For firms for which only one industry code on
either side of 2008, we assign the code that is most frequently associated with the observed industry code (using the
sample of firms where we do observe the two sectoral codes). We thank Isabelle Mejean for sharing the code to help
merge the FICUS and FARE datasets.
   22
      Due to a regulation change, the number of firms with fewer than two employees increases markedly over time
in our sample. We drop these firms when we estimate production-function parameters.
   23
      Information about government-owned firms can be found in the variable APPGR of FICUS-FARE, which is avail-
able only before 2009. Government-owned firms represented 0.12% of the total number of firms in 1994 and 0.05%
in 2008. Over the same period, their share of revenue went from 7.2% to 4.2%.


                                                         20
Second, because firm-level revenues in our dataset are reported at the national level, we do not
have information on revenues at the local level. This limitation is important for non-tradeable
goods, whose markets are most likely local.24 Because our definition of a market is at the na-
tional level, for non-tradable goods, we likely underestimate the concentration in the local mar-
ket relevant for the firm.

Table 1 presents some descriptive statistics of our data at the firm, sector, and aggregate levels.
We take 2014 as a representative year for the cross section of firms and sectors that we use
for our model's calibration. As Table 1 shows, the 2014 cross-section is qualitatively similar to
other years in our sample. Note, first, that the average market share across all firms and years,
defined as the revenue of a firm divided by the total revenue of firms in the same sector, is very
low at about 0.1%. However, the distribution of market shares is highly skewed, with the top
0.01% having a market share of about 61%. Second, among the 504 sectors in 2014, the median
number of firms is 324, while the average is 1,291. This finding reflects the large heterogeneity
across sectors: In 2014, 25% of sectors have less than 91 firms, while 25% of sectors have more
than 1,037 firms. Third, in 2014, the median HHI across sectors is 4.8%, but 1% of sectors
have a HHI higher than 71.8%. The skewness of the HHI distribution across sectors reflects the
skewness of firm-level market shares, because recall that the HHI is a sales-weighted average
of market shares. Finally, in 2014, the total revenue of manufacturing sectors (two-digit NACE
codes ranging from 10 to 35) represents 29% of the total revenue in the economy.


3.2    Markup Estimation

We now describe how we estimate firm-level markups using the FICUS-FARE data described
above. We use our markup estimates for two purposes. First, when we calibrate the model, we
target the relationship between sectoral markups and HHI (in appendix C.1, we also discuss
an alternative strategy that does not use markup estimates). Second, we calculate measures of
markup growth in the data, which we compare with markup dynamics implied by our model.

Our empirical framework to estimate markups in the data is more general than our theoretical
framework described above, where labor was the only factor of production. Specifically, we
introduce intermediate inputs and other factors of production, some of which may be subject
to adjustment frictions.25 Following Hall (1988) and De Loecker and Warzynski (2012), the first-
order condition in the cost-minimization problem by firm i in sector k for variable input M that
is not subject to adjustment costs implies

                                                   M     Pkit Ykit
                                            µkit = kit    MM
                                                                   ,                                      (35)
                                                         Pkit  kit

  24
   See Rossi-Hansberg et al. (2020) for a study of diverging local and national market-concentration trends.
  25
   We maintain the assumption that firms are price takers in the input market. Morlacco (2019) relaxes this as-
sumption to estimate markdowns on inputs.


                                                      21
                                                      Table 1: Descriptive Statistics

Description                                                      Value           Description                                                           Value
                                                                              Firm-Level

Market share (pp)                                                                St. dev. of market share growth rate
   Mean                                                            0.1                Mean                                                                 0.28
   top 1%                                                         1.28                25th percentile                                                      0.13
   top 0.5%                                                       2.59                Median                                                               0.23
   top 0.1%                                                      12.62                75th percentile                                                      0.38
   top 0.01%                                                     61.01                95th percentile                                                      0.85

                                                                            Sector-Level

# firms in a sector in 2014                                                      # firms in a sector in 1994-2016
     Mean                                                        1,291                Mean                                                             1,192
     25th percentile                                               91                 25th percentile                                                    98
     Median                                                       324                 Median                                                            328
     75th percentile                                             1,037                75th percentile                                                   987
     95th percentile                                             5,485                95th percentile                                                  4,969

HHI in 2014 (pp)                                                                 HHI in 1994-2016 (pp)
   Mean                                                          10.59              Mean                                                                9.86
   25th percentile                                                1.60              25th percentile                                                     1.47
   Median                                                         4.84              Median                                                              4.48
   75th percentile                                               12.90              75th percentile                                                    12.38
   95th percentile                                               41.25              95th percentile                                                    39.58
   top 1%                                                        71.75              top 1%                                                             70.16

                                              -1
Median effective number of firms in 2014 ( HHIk  )               20.67           Median effective number of firms in 1994-2016                         22.34

Top 5 largest sectors in 2014 (Revenue share and HHI in pp)                      Top 5 concentrated sectors in 2014 (Revenue share and HHI in pp)
     "Sale of cars and light motor vehicles"                   3.60    1.09           "Production of electricity"                                   1.71     92.68
     "Hypermarket (larger supermarket)"                        2.10    2.40           "Wholesale of tobacco products "                              0.57     90.20
     "Supermarkets"                                            2.07    3.50           "Gambling and betting activities "                            0.56     83.57
     "Activities of head offices"                             1.81    15.08           "Manufacture of steam generators"                             0.11     81.75
     "Production of electricity"                              1.71    92.68           "Shopping mall"                                               0.18     73.66

                                                                         Aggregate-Level

# of firms                                                     10,928,469        # of sectors with >11 firms                                            504
# of firms in 2014                                              650,423          Revenue Share of Manufacturing in 2014 (pp)                           29.02




                                                                                 22
       MM
where Pkit kit denotes expenditure on input M by firm i in sector k , Pkit Ykit is the revenue of
               M is the output elasticity with respect to input M . We use the above equation
this firm, and kit
to recover markups using data on firm-level revenues, expenditures on a variable input, and
estimates of the output elasticity with respect to this variable input.

We assume firms combine four inputs (labor, capital, materials, and services) according to
a flexible translog production function, and that expenditure in material inputs is the vari-
able input available to a firm. Further, all firms in the same two-digit sector share the same
production-function parameters, and inputs are homogeneous across firms within sector. This
choice is led by the availability of two-digit-level price indices for output and intermediate in-
puts for our main baseline sample. Note that with a translog specification, the output elasticity
M depends not only on parameter values but also on firm-level input use, and is therefore
kit
heterogeneous across firms.
                                M using an iterative generalized method of moments (GMM)
We estimate output elasticities kit
in which unobserved productivity is controlled for using conditional demand of material input,
following the literature (see e.g. Ackerberg et al., 2007, 2015; De Loecker and Warzynski, 2012;
De Loecker et al., 2016, 2020).

There are at least two concerns with this methodology (for a more detailed discussion, see, e.g.,
Bond et al., 2020). The first concern is due to the unavailability of firm-level quantity data when
estimating output elasticities. To address this concern, we construct firm-level price proxies
for the restricted EAE manufacturing firm sample.26 Because these prices are only a proxy for
quality-adjusted firm-level prices, we use them as a control in our production-function estima-
tion, as in De Loecker et al. (2016).

The second concern relates to the identification of the production function under imperfect
competition. To address this concern, we assume an oligopolistic competition structure in
which firm-level markups are a function of market share, as in our theoretical model. As de-
scribed in the appendix, we obtain estimates of output elasticities under imperfect competition
by using firm-level price proxies and the relationship between markups and market shares to
control for marginal cost.
                                                     M in four different ways. First, in our
Given these concerns, we implement the estimation of kit
baseline case, we ignore the lack of price data for a large fraction of firms in our sample and
treat deflated revenue (using two-digit price indices) as quantity. Second, for a subset of man-
ufacturing firms during the subperiod 2009-2016, we are able to use as a control the proxy for
firm-level prices described above. Third, we use the market share of a firm as a control for the
  26
    To construct firm-level prices for this subsample, we first measure product prices at the firm level as the ratio of
firm revenues and quantity produced by a product-firm pair in a given year. To address eventual quality differences
across firms producing the same product, we then calculate standardized prices as the ratio of the product-firm price
described above to the quantity-weighted average price across all firms producing the same product in the same
year. Finally, we calculate firm-level prices as value-weighted averages of standardized prices across all products
produced by a firm in a given year.


                                                          23
full sample. Fourth, we use as controls both market share and the proxy for firm-level prices on
the restricted sample in which the latter information is available.
                              M , we find the pairwise correlation of the implied firm-level
Across these four measures of kit
markups is very high, as reported in appendix B.1. In particular, we find the pairwise corre-
lations for firm markups in levels range between 0.8 and 0.9. Importantly, these correlations
are even higher when we consider the first differences of firm-level markups, ranging between
0.91 and 0.99 across specification pairs. Guided by the similarity of estimated markups under
the various procedures, we choose the first specification as a baseline in order to maximize our
sample size and obtain full coverage of the French economy.

Alternatively, as described in appendix C.1, by combining cost minimization and the market
structure assumed in our model, we can construct a structural relationship between market
share and variable input expenditure share, conditional on input usage, that does not require
estimates of markups or output elasticities. We use this relationship as an untargeted moment
to evaluate our calibrated model.


3.3    Calibration

In this section, we describe how we parametrize the model to match salient features of the
French data in 2014, which we take as a representative cross-section.

We first introduce the firm-level productivity stochastic process, which follows a discrete
Markov chain giving rise to random productivity growth as in the literature on firm dynamics
(see, e.g., Luttmer, 2010). We then describe how we target the size and concentration of each of
the 504 sectors, the estimated markup-market-share relationship in our data, and pass-through
estimates in the literature. Finally, we discuss the model's implications for other empirical mo-
ments that are not based on our estimates of markups.


Firm-Level Productivity Process

We assume firm-level demand shocks, Akit , are fixed over time. It follows that the composite
Vkit is driven only by productivity shocks.27 Following Carvalho and Grassi (2019), we assume
firm-level productivity, Zikt , follows the discretized random growth process introduced by Cór-
doba (2008). Specifically, firm productivity in sector k evolves on an evenly spaced log grid,
                                                                                             n-1
k = {1, k , 2           S                                                              n
            k , . . . , k }, where k is greater than 1 and where S is an integer. Note k = k k   .
A firm's productivity follows a Markov chain on this grid where the associate matrix of transition
  27
     Although our analytic results do not take a stand on the importance of productivity versus demand firm-level
shocks, in the data, we construct sectoral output by deflating nominal value-added by industry price indices. The
latter typically do not take into account high-frequency changes in demand or quality shifters. Therefore, for con-
sistency, we abstract from shocks to demand shifters.


                                                        24
probabilities is equal to:
                                                                                
                                ak + bk ck 0                ···   ··· 0    0
                                 ak
                                        bk ck               ···   ··· 0    0    
                             P =  · · · · ·· ···            ···   ··· ··· ···   
                                 0        0   0             ···   ak bk    ck 
                                    0     0   0             ···    0 ak bk + ck

with ak < 1, bk , ck > 0 and ak + bk + ck = 1. The stationary distribution of this process is Pareto
with a tail index equal to k = ln( a
                                   ck )/ ln(k ). Given these restrictions, this productivity process
                                    k



yields three parameters (k , k , and ck ) to calibrate.

As shown in Córdoba (2008) and Carvalho and Grassi (2019), this process satisfies Gibrat's law
for productivity such that, away from the boundaries, firms' productivity growth is indepen-
dent of its current level. Additionally, this law generates a stationary Pareto distribution of pro-
ductivity (Gabaix 1999). Note, however, that in our environment, this does not immediately
imply firm size satisfies these properties, due to the finite number of firms within sectors and
endogenous markups.

In section 4.4, we discuss an exercise where we add aggregate TFP shocks. We leave the discus-
sion on the calibration of these shocks to this section.



Calibration Strategy

We now describe how we assign values to the model's parameters: the two demand elasticities
 and  , the two macro parameters relative risk aversion  and the Frisch labor-supply elasticity
f , the number of firms Nk , the demand shifter Ak , and the productivity parameters k , k , and
ck for each of our 504 sectors. Table 2 summarizes parameter values and targets.

We assume that in all sectors, firms compete à la Cournot.28 We set the two demand elasticities
 = 1.704 and  = 7 to target the two following moments. First, according to equation (8), the
                                                                                             
slope between the inverse of a sector's markup and its HHI is equal to -                        - 1 /. In section
4.1, we present results for different specifications of this relationship in our data. We target a
coefficient of -0.44, reported in column (4) of Table 4.29 Second, own-cost pass-through rates
~ ki , defined in footnote 16, are shaped by our two demand elasticities. Our choice of  and 

implies pass-through is roughly 0.5 for large firms (those with a market share of 40%), consistent
with estimates in Amiti et al. (2019).30
  28
      Under Bertrand competition, no elasticity values are able to match our two calibration targets, given a flatter
relationship between firm size and markups (both in levels and over time).
   29
      In appendix C.2, we report results for the alternative calibration  = 2.0298 and  = 7. For this alternative
calibration, we target the slope between the inverse of a sector's markup and its HHI in first differences (rather than
in level as in our baseline). This coefficient equals -0.35 as reported in Table 13.
   30
      About 2200 firm-year observations have a market share above 40%, which represents the top 0.02% of the
market-share distribution.


                                                          25
                                       Table 2: Baseline Calibration


 Parameters         Value                  Description                              Target/Source
                       7            substitution across firms              pass-through rate for large firms
                   1.7040         substitution across sectors                   slope of µ- 1
                                                                                          kt on HHIkt
                       1              relative risk aversion                          log utility
      f                1        Frisch elasticity of labor supply
     f0                1           labor disutility parameter                    does not affect results
      S               70         number of productivity bins                         see main text
     k             1.1201       median firm-level pdty process                    vol. 25% and HHIk
    ak , ck       0.09,0.05     median firm-level pdty process                    vol. 25% and HHIk
     Ak              0.17      median HH preference shifts (pp)                     revenue share



In terms of macro parameters, we set the relative risk aversion to 1 (log utility) and the Frisch
labor-supply elasticity to 1, both of which are standard values in the business-cycle literature.

We now discuss how we assign the parameter values that vary across sectors. We set the number
of firms per sector, Nk , to that observed in the data in 2014. We calibrate the constant sector-
level demand shifter, Ak , to target the revenue share of each sector in the data in 2014. We
choose the tail parameter of the stationary distribution, k , to match the HHI in the data in
2014.31 The grid parameter k determines the range of values that the HHI can take as we vary
k . We choose the lowest k such that this range of values contains the value of the HHI in
the data for this sector.32 Finally, we set the remaining parameter of the productivity process,
ck , such that in each sector, the volatility of productivity growth is 4.3%. The resulting market-
share volatility is roughly 25% for small firms, which roughly matches that in the data (see Panel
B of Figure 1). Our calibrated model underestimates the volatility of large firms in the data, as
we discuss below.

Panel A of Figure 1 reports HHI in the data against the model counterpart computed in the
calibration procedure. Each dot represents a sector whose size is proportional to this sector's
revenue in 2014. All the dots are on the 45-degree line represented by the black dashed line.
The calibration procedure is successful at reproducing the HHI in each of the 504 sectors.

Panel B of Figure 1 shows the relationship between firm volatility and size. Using both data
and simulated data from the model, we compute firm growth rates in each period. We then
compute the standard deviation of this growth rate across firms in a market-share bin.33 In
  31
     Given a guess of k , we draw 1,000 samples of Nk firm-level productivities from the Pareto distribution char-
acterized by k . For each of these samples, we solve for firm-level market shares and compute the implied HHI.
We then calculate the median HHI across the 1,000 samples, and iterate over k until we match the HHI for a given
sector in the data. We repeat this procedure for each of the 504 sectors.
  32
     We choose the number of productivity bins S = 70. Higher values of S do not make a significant difference for
our results.
  33
     Computing for each firm, over time, the standard deviation of its market share and then binning gives very


                                                       26
                           Panel A                                               Panel B




                                              Figure 1: Model Fit
N OTE : Panel A shows, for each sector, the HHI in the data (x-axis) against the median HHI computed over 1,000
samples drawn from the baseline calibration (y-axis). The size of each dot is proportional to the sector's revenue
share in 2014. Panel B reports the standard deviation of market-share growth for each market-share bin in the cross-
section. The black dots and the black line are computed on simulated data from the model. The red line is computed
using the FICUS-FARE data.




Panel B, black dots are the simulated data, the black line is a linear fit on simulated data, and
the red line is a linear fit on the data (we are unable to report individual data points due to
confidentiality rules). Although the intercept of the black line is a target of our calibration, the
slope is not. Note our calibrated model underestimates the volatility of large firms compared
to the data, and hence the exercises below likely give a lower bound on the aggregate volatility
arising from large firm shocks.

Note our calibration strategy relies on estimates of markups only through the coefficient of the
HHI in the sector-level inverse-markup regression. Alternatively, we can consider a moment
of the data that does not require estimates of markups but imposes the market structure in
our model. As described in appendix C.1, under our baseline calibration, the model roughly
matches this untargeted moment.

In what follows, we use the calibrated model as a data-generating process to simulate firm-
level, sector-level, and aggregate-level time series. We use the simulated sector-level and firm-
level panels to run the corresponding regressions that we run on actual data. We also compute
aggregate business-cycle statistics using the simulated aggregate time-series, which we then
compare with counterparts in the data.




similar results.


                                                        27
4     Model meets Data

In this section, we interpret firm, sector, and aggregate markup dynamics through the lenses
of our framework. We start by providing empirical evidence on the behavior of markups as
a function of concentration measures, both within and across sectors. We additionally docu-
ment that within-firm markup dynamics account for a non-negligible fraction of sector-level
and aggregate markup dynamics. We then study some reduced-form notions of markup cycli-
cality, showing our model can rationalize the sign and magnitude of alternative, reduced-form
moments in data. We conclude by quantifying the magnitude of aggregate markup movements
in our granular setup and discussing the importance of endogenous markup dynamics in this
context.


4.1   Inspecting the Mechanism: Firm and Sector-level Evidence

Hardwired into our model are two key relationships between markups and concentration. At
the firm-level, and following the discussion in section 1.2, markups increase with a firm's mar-
ket share. In turn, this immediately gives rise to a notion of markup pro-cyclicality at the micro-
level: A firm's markup increases whenever its market share increases. At the sector-level, as
discussed in section 1.3, equilibrium aggregation of firm-level outcomes yields that sectoral
markups increase in the HHI of that sector. By the same token, this yields a simple notion of
markup cyclicality at the sector level: A sector's markup increases whenever its level of concen-
tration increases. We now evaluate whether these two relations, at the firm and sector levels,
hold empirically in the data.

Starting at the micro-level, note that taking the inverse of equation (5) for Cournot yields a
simple relation between the firm's market share and its markup,
                                                      
                                      -1      -1         -1
                                     µkit =      -          skit ,                               (36)
                                                         

where µ- 1
       kit is the inverse of the (gross) markup of firm i in sector k at time t and skit is its market
share. In turn, this suggests the following simple empirical specification,

                                    µ- 1
                                     kit = i + t + skit +       kit ,                            (37)

where  is the coefficient of interest, which the model predicts to be negative. We include firm
fixed-effects i to control for unobserved heterogeneity, and year fixed-effects t to control for
unobserved markup shifters that are common across all firms. Note these fixed effects are not
present in our model. As a robustness check, in appendix B.2, we report estimates based on a
first-difference specification with no firm fixed effects.

We start by inspecting these firm-level relations in the French data. Recall from our discussion

                                                 28
                          Table 3: Firm Inverse Markup and Market Share: Level
                                                           Dependent Variable: µ- 1
                                                                                kit

               Coefficient                    (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)

               skit                         -4.853           -4.852            -.663            -.589
                                            (.273)           (.273)            (.103)           (.101)

               Year FE                         N                  Y               N                Y
               Firm FE                         N                  N               Y                Y
               Number of Firms           1 284 905        1 284 905         1 154 181        1 154 181
               Observations              10 928 469       10 928 469        10 727 745       10 727 745

N OTE : µ- 1
         kit is the inverse of firm i sector k gross markup in year t, and skit gives the market share of firm i in sector k .
Columns (1)-(4) report empirical estimates for the FICUS-FARE (1994-2016) data. Standard errors (in parentheses)
are clustered at the firm level. Markups are winsorized at the 2% level.


in the previous section that we have estimated firm-level markups for the population of French
firms over the period 1994-2016. Firm-level market shares are immediate to calculate in data
by dividing firm-level revenue by the corresponding five-digit NAF sector revenue (abstracting,
recall, from sales by foreign firms). This yields time series for µkit and skit for each firm in data.

Table 3 summarizes the results. Column (1) displays the firm-level relation between inverse
markup and market share in the data without fixed effects. Pooling all firm-level data (across
sectors and years) for a total of over 10 million observations of markups and market shares gives
a negative and statistically significant coefficient. Further, including year fixed effects (column
2) does not alter this relation.

In our baseline specification, when we additionally include firm-fixed effects (columns 3 and
4), we again find negative and significant estimates. Point estimates are now smaller, indicating
the importance of controlling for unobserved heterogeneity in the data. Results for the speci-
fication in first-differences, displayed in Table 12 in the appendix, are very similar to those in
levels (with fixed effects) in columns (3) and (4) of Table 3.

Turning to our sector-level predictions, by the same logic as above, note that taking the inverse
of equation (8) yields the following relation between inverse sectoral markup and the sector's
HHI:                                                              
                                                     -1              -1
                                            µ- 1
                                             kt =       -         
                                                                        HHIkt .                                         (38)
                                                                     

To assess this relationship in the data, we consider the following empirical specification:

                                          µ- 1
                                           kt = k + t + HHIkt +                 kt ,                                    (39)

where k is a sector fixed-effect and t is a time fixed-effect (which are present in our model

                                                             29
                        Table 4: Sector Inverse Markup and Sector HHI: Level
                                                      Dependent Variable: µ-
                                                                           kt
                                                                             1


                    Coefficient                 (1)          (2)       (3)        (4)

                    HHIkt                     -.7267     -.7281     -.4335      -.4436
                                              (.2310)    (.2315)    (.1102)     (.1094)

                    Year FE                      N           Y         N           Y
                    Sector FE                    N           N         Y           Y
                    Number of Sectors          504        504         504        504
                    Observations              11 592     11 592      11 592     11 592

N OTE : µ- 1
         kt is sector k (inverse) markup in year t, HHIkt is the HHI in sector k . Columns (1)-(4) report empirical
estimates for the FICUS-FARE (1994-2016) data, aggregated to the sector level. Standard errors (in parentheses) are
clustered at the sector level.




only if  varies across sectors). In appendix B.2, we report estimates based on a first-difference
specification. To construct sectoral markups, we aggregate firm-level markups to their sector-
level counterparts by taking an harmonic weighted average of firm-level markups - as indicated
by the model equation (7) - within 504 narrowly defined five-digit NAF sectors.

Table 4 displays estimates of a pooled regression across all sectors and years, for different fixed-
effect combinations. Our estimates indicate a negative and significant relation between the
level of concentration and the inverse of sector markups and are stable across fixed-effect con-
figurations. We use the specification with time and sector fixed effects (column 4) as a target
in the calibration of our model. Finally, note that estimates are very similar for the alterna-
tive specification in first-differences, as shown in Table 13 in the appendix. Taken together,
these firm- and sector-level estimates confirm a basic qualitative prediction of our model in
the French data.

Our model additionally imposes cross-equation restrictions. Comparing equations (37) and
(38), note the slope coefficients of these two relations - that is, the slope of the inverse of firm
markup on market share and the slope of the inverse sector markup on HHI - should coincide.
We can formally test for the equality of the two slope coefficients in the data by forming a simple
Z-score. We focus on the specifications controlling for sector and time fixed effects. Despite
differences in the point estimates, we cannot reject the null that the two coefficients are the
same (Z-score of 1.20)

                                                        30
4.2    Markup Decomposition over Time

We now consider a within-between decomposition of sectoral and aggregate markups in the
data and in the model. Specifically, we report how much of year-on-year changes in sector-
and aggregate-level markups is due to changes in firm-level markups and how much is due to
reallocation across firms. We first consider changes in markups at the sector level and then at
the aggregate level.


Sector-Level Decomposition             By equation (7), the change in sectoral markups between two
time periods is
                                                Nk                   Nk
                                    µ- 1
                                     kt =             µ- 1
                                                       kit skit +          skit µ- 1
                                                                                 kit ,
                                               i=1                   i=1

where  denotes the year-on-year difference and bars denotes averages over two consecutive
years. The first term on the right-hand-side is the within term: It measures change in the (in-
verse) sectoral markup due to changes in firm-level markups, evaluated at the average market
share. The second term on the right-hand-side is the between or reallocation term: It mea-
sures the change in the (inverse) sectoral markup due to the changes in firm market share,
evaluated at the average (inverse) markup. As discussed in section 2.2 and shown in appendix
A.2, in the model under Cournot competition, the within and between terms are equal to each
other in every sector. From this result, it follows that the contribution of the within and be-
tween/reallocation terms are both equal to 50%.

Given time series of firm-level markups and market shares in the data and model, we calculate
sectoral markups as well as the within and between terms. For each sector, we regress the
within term over time on changes in sector-level markup. The coefficient of this regression is
the contribution of the within term to the evolution of sector-level markups. For the median
sector, the within term accounts for 65% of the changes in sector markups. For half of the
sectors, the contribution of the within term lies between 42% and 82%.34


Aggregate-Level Decomposition                 By equation equation (10), the change in the aggregate
markup between two time periods is

                                          N                N    Nk
                                µ- 1
                                 t =           skt µ- 1
                                                    kt =             (skt × skit ) µ- 1
                                                                                    kit ,
                                         k=1               k=1 i=1

where skt is the revenue share of sector k and skit is the market share of firm i in sector k . Note
that skt × skit = (Pkit Ykit )/(Pt Yt ) is equal to revenues of firm i as a share of aggregate revenues.
  34
    In the data, the reallocation term is not only due to changes in market share across firms, but also due to churn-
ing as some firms enter and exit the market each year. We define the reallocation term as the residual obtained from
the difference between the change in (inverse) sectoral markup and the within term.


                                                           31
Analogously to the sectoral-markup decomposition, changes in the (inverse) aggregate markup
can again be decomposed into a within and a reallocation term. The within term is defined as
the change in the (inverse) aggregate markup due to changes in firm-level markups, evaluated
at the average firms' aggregate revenue share. The between term is the change in the (inverse)
aggregate markup due to changes in firms' aggregate revenue share, evaluated at the average
(inverse) markup.

When computing the contribution of the within and reallocation term in the data, we find that
67.1% of year-on-year changes in the (inverse) aggregate markup is due to the within term, and
the remaining 32.9% is due to the reallocation term. In the model, and under our baseline
calibration, we find that 79.7% of year-on-year changes in the (inverse) aggregate markup is
due to the within term, and 20.3% is due to the reallocation term. That is, both in the data and
the model, more than two-thirds of the year-on-year movement in the aggregate markup is due
to within firms' change in markups.

We conclude that both in the model and in our data, changes in firm-level markups account for
a sizeable fraction of year-on-year changes in sectoral and aggregate markups.


4.3     Reduced-Form Varieties of Markup Cyclicality

Our theoretical framework yields a simple relation between markups and size: The level of a
firm's markup is determined by its market share within a sector. Further, aggregation of this
relation yields a relation between a sector's markup and its level of concentration, both across
sectors and dynamically over time. As we have seen, the data broadly supports these relations.

By contrast, a large applied literature investigates different definitions of "markup cyclicality."
This literature yields a variety of results, with some contributions arguing for pro-cyclicality
and others concluding in favor of counter-cyclicality.

In this section, we argue these conflicting empirical results can be largely ascribed to the al-
ternative reduced-form exercises pursued and, in particular, to the reduced-form definitions
of markup cyclicality being deployed in the literature. Importantly, as we show, our model
with firm-level shocks only can go a long away in accounting for these seemingly conflicting
reduced-form relations in the data.


4.3.1    Firm-level Evidence

We start by analyzing a firm-level notion of reduced-form markup cyclicality and ask how do
firm markups covary with the respective sector-level output.

Before going to the data, recall that our setting is a granular one in which extensive within-
sector heterogeneity in the firm-size distribution enables large firm dynamics to lead the sec-

                                                32
tor business cycle. In particular, in our setting with idiosyncratic firm-level shocks ­ and if
pass-through rates do not fall too strongly with market shares ­ sector-output fluctuations are
necessarily led by shocks to very large firms. To make matters concrete, consider a positive id-
iosyncratic (demand or technology) shock hitting a large market-share firm. Given the granu-
lar nature of the economy, the corresponding sector output will typically increase (see equation
26). In addition, the large shocked firm will increase its market share and markup. This implies,
as indicated in Proposition 4, that markups of large firms should comove positively with sector
output.

By the same token, the average (small) firm in a given sector loses market share to the very
largest firms: If sector-output expansions are led by large firms, the latter will increase their
market share whereas the average firm loses competitiveness - as evaluated by its market share
within the sector. Again, due to the markup-market-share relation in our setting, this implies
the average firm-markup is expected to comove negatively with sector output, as summarized
by Proposition 4.

To evaluate this implication of the model, we implement the following reduced-form regres-
sion, both in the data and in our model-simulated data:

                         ln(µkit ) = i + t +  1 Yk,t +  2 Yk,t × skit + Xkit +      it ,                   (40)

where µkit is firm i sector k gross markup in year t, Ykt is the deviation of sector k (log) value-
added in year t from its HP trend, and Xkit is a set of firm-level controls for firm i in sector
k at year t, which includes market share.35 Finally, i is a firm fixed effect, which controls for
time-invariant firm-level unobservables determining the average level of a firm's markup, while
t is a year fixed effect. In this specification,  1 captures the average correlation between firm
markups and their respective sector output, and coefficient  2 , in the interaction term, captures
heterogeneity in this relation as a function of a firm's market share.36

Before proceeding, note Hong (2017) runs a version of this regression, where Y is aggregate
(rather than sector) value-added, using data for four large European countries. For these data,
Hong (2017) estimates a negative  1 and a positive  2 estimate, concluding that (i) in the data
"markups are countercyclical" and (ii) that there is "substantial heterogeneity in markup cycli-
cality across firms, with small firms having significantly more countercyclical markups than
large firms."

Columns (1) and (2) of Table 5 summarize the estimates obtained when implementing the
above reduced-form regression on our French firm-level data with and without firm-level con-
trols. We see that, for the average firm, markups are weakly "countercyclical" with respect to
  35
     To obtain sector value-added, we sum firm-level nominal value-added to the NAF five-digit level and deflate
using EUKLEMS sectoral price deflators.
  36
     Note that according to our model, given the parameters  and  , market share determines markup (equation 5).
For this reason, we also estimate equation (40) without firm-level controls.


                                                      33
                                  Table 5: Firm Markup and Sector Output
                                           Dependent variable: ln(µkit )

                                                 (1)            (2)               (3)      (4)
                     Coefficient                Data           Data              Model    Model
                     Ykt                        -0.093         -0.068            -0.093   -0.014
                                                (0.051)        (0.042)
                     Ykt  skit                  0.209          0.192             0.598     0.089
                                                (0.092)        (0.082)

                     Firm Controls                N              Y                 N        Y
                     Firm FE                      Y              Y                 Y        Y
                     Year FE                      Y              Y                 Y        Y
                     Number of Firms          1 154 181     1 154 181        650 423      650 423

N OTE : µkit is firm i sector k gross markup in year t, skit gives the market share of firm i in sector k, year t and
Ykt is the deviation of sector k (log) value-added in year t from its HP trend. Columns (1) and (2) report empirical
estimates for the FICUS-FARE (1994-2016) data. Columns (3) and (4) report estimates based on model-simulated
data. This regression is weighted by average revenue. Standard errors in the data are clustered at the sector×year
level. Calculating standard errors across various samples of model-generated data is computationally (memory)
intensive. We will report them in the next draft.



own-sector output. Further, we additionally confirm that there is substantial heterogeneity in
this relation. In particular, the estimates on the interaction term imply large firms, roughly with
market shares above 0.35, are procyclical with respect to the dynamics of sectoral output.37

Columns (3) and (4) of Table 5 implement the same reduced-form regressions on model-
simulated data for 650,423 firms distributed across 504 sectors. The model is able to reproduce
the patterns observed in the data. Consistent with Proposition 4, markups for the average firm
are weakly countercyclical with respect to own-sector output, whereas large firms' markups are
procyclical. Furthermore, point estimates in the model-simulated and French data are of the
same order of magnitude.

Underlying this prediction of the model for the heterogeneous cyclicality of markups with sec-
toral output is that with firm-level shocks, large firms' market shares are correlated positively
with sector output whereas small firms' market shares are countercyclical. To assess this mech-
anism, we estimate the following regression:

                                          skit = i + t +  Ykt +          kit ,


where skit is the market share of firm i in sector k , Ykt is as above the sector k value-added, i is a
firm-level fixed effect, and t is a year fixed effect. In this specification,  measures the relation

  37
    Hong (2017) also reports another version of this regression where aggregate value-added is interacted with an
indicator for large firm. When we estimate a version of this reduced-form specification where sector value-added is
interacted with an indicator for market-shares over 30%, we find a coefficient of 0.168 (0.07) on the interaction term.


                                                          34
                               Table 6: Firm Market Share and Sector Output
                                       Dependent variable: skit
                              (1)             (2)               (3)            (4)             (5)              (6)
  Coefficient               Data            Data              Data          Model           Model            Model
                          (all data)    (skit < 0.30)     (skit > 0.30)    (all data)    (skit < 0.30)    (skit > 0.30)
  Ykt                        -.002          -.002             .042            -.000          -.001             .482
                            (.0002)         (.0002)           (.027)

  Firm FE                      Y               Y                 Y              Y              Y                 Y
  Year FE                      Y               Y                 Y              Y              Y                 Y
  Number of Firms         1 154 181       1 154 057            124          650 423         650 335             88


N OTE : skit gives the market share of firm i in sector k, year t, and Ykt is the deviation of sector k (log) value-added in
year t from its HP trend. Column (1) reports empirical estimates for the FICUS-FARE (1994-2016) data. Column (2)
reports estimates based on model-simulated data. Standard errors in the data are clustered at the sector×year level.
Calculating standard errors across various samples of model-generated data is computationally (memory) intensive.
We will report them in the next draft.


between market share and sector value-added. We implement this regression (i) on the whole
sample of firms, (ii) on the subsample of firms whose average market share is lower than 30%,
and (iii) on the subsample of firms whose average market share is above 30%.

Columns (1) and (4) in Table 6 report estimates of  on the full sample of the data and on the
model-simulated data, respectively. Both in the data and in the model, the average firm's mar-
ket share is counter-cyclical. Columns (2) and (5) report estimates for the subsample of firms
whose market share is lower than 30%. Estimates of  are negative both in the data and in the
model. Finally, columns (3) and (6) report estimates for the subsample of firms whose market
share is above 30%. Estimates of  are positive both in the data and in the model, although the
magnitude is smaller in the data (significant at the 11.8% level).

Taken together, the results in Tables 5 and 6 provide support for a key implication of our granu-
lar model with firm-level shocks. The average firm's market share and markup are countercycli-
cal with respect to its own sector value-added, whereas large firms' market share and markups
are procyclical.


4.3.2    Sector-Level Evidence

We now explore sector-level notions of markup cyclicality. We first ask how sector markups
covary with own-sector output.

Recall that in our granular setting sectoral business cycles are driven by large firm dynamics,
and that shocks to large firms induce a positive relationship between changes in sector-level
output and markups. As encoded in Proposition 3, we should expect a positive correlation
between sector markup and sector output.

                                                            35
                                 Table 7: Sector Markup and Sector Output
                                             Dependent variable: µkt

                                                                (1)         (2)
                                  Coefficient                  Data        Model
                                  Ykt                          0.102        0.132
                                                               (0.028)   [0.033; 0.195 ]



                                  Sector FE                      Y             Y
                                  Year FE                        Y             Y
                                  Number of Sectors             504           504

N OTE : Regression of sector-level (log) change markup (µkt ) on sector value-added (log) change (Ykt ). Column (1) re-
ports empirical estimates for the FICUS-FARE (1994-2016) data, and standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at
the sector level. Columns (2) reports estimates based on model-simulated data. The point estimate for this column
give the median coefficient obtained from running the reduced-form regression over 5,000 independent simulated
samples, each of the same length (23 years) as the French data. Terms in square brackets give, respectively, the 5 and
95 quantiles of coefficient estimates across simulated samples.




To assess this relationship in the model and data, we consider the following sector panel re-
gression:
                                           µkt = k + t +  Ykt +            kt ,                                   (41)

where µkt denotes sector k 's log change in markup (output) between t - 1 and t, and Ykt denotes
the log change in sector k value-added. Sector-level markups are aggregated from firm-level
estimates according to a harmonic weighted average, as indicated by the model equation (7).
We measure sector value-added in the data as in the previous section (see footnote 35). Finally,
we include sector and year fixed effects to control for unobservables.

Nekarda and Ramey (2013) consider a similar version of this regression based on US sectoral
data. They find  is robustly positive and significant and therefore that "markups are gener-
ally procyclical (...) hitting troughs during recessions and reaching peaks in the middle of ex-
pansions." Column (1) in Table 7 reports estimates of  in our data. Sector markups comove
positively and significantly with sector output, which is consistent with the findings in Nekarda
and Ramey (2013) despite differences regarding the country of analysis, sample period, and the
methods deployed to estimate markups.

Column (2) in Table 7 reports estimates of  in model-simulated data. In particular, we report
the median (as well as 5th and 95th percentiles) estimate of  over 5,000 independent samples
of 23 years each. Figure 2 displays the full histogram of estimated coefficients over the 5,000
simulated samples. As in the data, the model implies a positive correlation between sector
markup and sector output.

The more recent work by Bils et al. (2018) explores yet another reduced-form notion of markup

                                                          36
     Figure 2: Histogram of Sector Markup on Sector Output Slopes in Model Simulations

N OTE : Kernel density of estimated regression coefficient on model-simulated data from equation (41) based on
5,000 repetitions of independent samples. The solid red lines is the estimate in the data while the dashed red lines
reports the lower and upper bound of the 10% confidence interval.



cyclicality: Do sector-level markups comove systematically with aggregate GDP fluctuations?
That is, unlike the previous specification, markup cyclicality is evaluated with respect to its
comovement with aggregate GDP rather than sector-level output.

To understand this form of comovement in the context of our model, note that sector markups
only react to within-sector firm shocks. Over long samples, as summarized in Proposition 5,
the model implies positive comovement of a sector's markup with aggregate GDP. Over a given
cyclical episode, a positive comovement is expected if the fluctuation in aggregate economic
activity is due to large firm dynamics in the same sector. More generally, aggregate output
movements reflect shocks hitting other sectors in the economy. If a sector comoves negatively
with aggregate output, a negative correlation of that sector's markup with aggregate output will
obtain. Overall, we should expect a weak correlation between the average sector's markup and
aggregate GDP fluctuations.

To explore this logic, we implement the following regression:

                                             µkt = k +  Yt +       kt ,                                        (42)

where µkt is the deviation of sector k 's markup in year t from its HP trend, Yt gives the HP-trend
deviation of (log) aggregate value-added in year t, and k is a sector fixed effect. Sector-level
markups are computed as above by taking a weighted harmonic mean of firm-level markups,

                                                        37
                             Table 8: Sector Markup and Aggregate Output
                                            Dependent variable: µkt

                                                              (1)          (2)
                                 Coefficient                 Data         Model
                                 Yt                          0.191        0.009
                                                             (0.161)   [-0.041, 0.217 ]

                                 Sector FE                     Y             Y
                                 Number of Sectors            504           504

N OTE : Regression of sector k's markup in year t in deviation from its HP trend µkt on Yt the HP-trend deviation
of (log) aggregate real value-added in year t. Column (1) reports empirical estimates for the FICUS-FARE (1994-
2016) data. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the sector level. Column (2) reports estimates based
on model-simulated data. Point estimates for this column give the median coefficient obtained from running
the reduced-form regression over 5,000 independent simulated samples, each of the same length (23 years) as the
French data. Terms in square brackets give, respectively, the 0.05 and 0.95 quantiles of coefficient estimates from
the simulated data.




and aggregate value-added is computed by summing firm-level value-added deflated by the
respective EU-KLEMS sector-level deflator.

Bils et al. (2018) consider a version of this regression based on US data. They conclude that "the
price markup is estimated to be highly countercyclical" with the possible exception of service
industries, for which they find evidence favoring procyclicality.

Column (1) of Table 8 summarizes our estimates based on French data. We do not find a statis-
tically significant relation between sectoral markups and aggregate GDP. For the average French
sector, the data suggests that this relation is acyclical.

We now consider the relationship between sectoral markups and aggregate output implied by
our model. Column (2) of Table 8 reports the median (as well as 5th and 95th percentiles) esti-
mate of  over 5,000 independent samples of 23 years each. Figure 3 displays the full histogram
of estimated coefficients over the 5,000 simulated samples. Our model implies a positive me-
dian slope between the average sector markup and aggregate GDP. However, as in the data, the
histogram points to considerable uncertainty over the magnitude and sign of this slope. This
finding is consistent with the intuition above: Over small samples, we may expect either a pos-
itive or negative correlation to arise, depending on whether the sectors driving within-sample
aggregate dynamics have, respectively, higher or lower levels of sectoral markups with respect
to the aggregate. Thus, both the model and the data imply markups are acyclical (with large
dispersion across samples) when evaluated through this particular reduced-form statistic.

                                                        38
    Figure 3: Histogram of Sector Markup on Aggregate Output Slopes in Model Simulations

N OTE : Kernel density of estimated regression coefficient on model-simulated data from equation (42). 5,000 repe-
titions of independent samples. The solid red lines are the estimate in the data, and the dashed red lines report the
lower and upper bound of the 10% confidence interval.



4.4    Aggregate Markup Cyclicality and Output Fluctuations

In this final section, we turn our attention to fluctuations in aggregate markups and output. We
first consider only idiosyncratic firm-level shocks according to the Markov process introduced
above. Recall that in our environment, these shocks constitute the only source of markup and
output fluctuations at the firm, sector, and aggregate levels. We then introduce aggregate pro-
ductivity shocks to fully account for aggregate output volatility in our data.

Using our FICUS-FARE data, we construct aggregate markups, µt , as a weighted harmonic
mean of firm-level markups, and aggregate GDP, Yt , as the sum of firm-level value-added. We
detrend these variables using an HP-filter. Using our calibrated model, we simulate 5,000 sam-
ples of 23-year firm-level histories. We implement the same procedure to construct detrended
time-series of simulated aggregate output and markup. Table 9 presents data- and model-
based estimates of the correlation and standard deviation of aggregate output and markups.

We first consider aggregate markup cyclicality. Recall from expression (34) that our model im-
plies a positive comovement between aggregate output and aggregate markups, unless larger
sectors have lower markups or, for finite samples, if a particular expansionary episode is driven
by a sector with a sufficiently low markup, in which case negative comovement may obtain.
That is, whereas we should observe positive comovement over sufficiently long samples, in any
given short sample, comovement may be absent or negative depending on sectors driving the

                                                         39
aggregate dynamics.

In Table 9, we can see that both in the data and in the model, aggregate markup is procycli-
cal with respect to aggregate output. Our model predicts, however, much higher aggregate
procyclicality than that observed in the data: The correlation between the aggregate markup
and aggregate output is 0.13 in the data and 0.87 (on average, across shock realizations) in the
model.

Our model predicts large variation in this correlation coefficient across small samples, de-
pending on which sectors are driving aggregate dynamics and their relative levels of sectoral
markups. To see this variation at play, Panel A of Figure 4 plots the histogram of correlation
coefficients (µt , Yt ) across our 5,000, 23-year samples. A non-negligible number of samples
display only weak procyclicality (as in the data) because, over small samples, aggregate output
dynamics may be driven by positive shocks to large firms in large sectors that nevertheless have
relatively lower markups, inducing a negative correlation.

Next, we examine the magnitude of aggregate, granular fluctuations in output and markups
implied by our model. Recall from our analytic results that incomplete pass-through weakens
(relative to the specification of the model with heterogeneous but constant markups) the re-
sponse of aggregate output to firm-level shocks, as implied by equation (31) -- derived under
parameter restrictions that we relax in our quantitative analysis.

Table 9 shows the standard deviation of aggregate output is 1.71% in our French data and 0.71%
in our model (average across samples). That is, the volatility of aggregate output in our model
is 42% of the volatility in the data.

How large are granular movements in aggregate markups? The ratio of the standard deviation
of aggregate markup to that of aggregate output is 57% in the data and 33% in our calibrated
model (average across samples). However, across samples, we see large variation in this ratio,
with many instances where this ratio exceeds that in the data, as can be seen in Panel B of
Figure 4.

Although our model with firm-level shocks generates non-negligible fluctuations in aggregate
output and markups, it only accounts for a fraction of aggregate fluctuations in the data. More-
over, as we discussed above, the correlation of markups and output is much higher than that
in the data. In what follows, we show that if we superimpose on our calibrated model aggre-
gate productivity shocks, in order to match aggregate output volatility in the data, the markup
pro-cyclicality of markups is much lower and closer to the data.

Specifically, we assume firm-level productivity is given by Zt × Zikt , where Zt is normally dis-
tributed and independent across periods. We choose the standard deviation of Zt to exactly
match the volatility of aggregate output in the data. Panel (2) of Table 10 shows the implied
business-cycle moments for the median 23-year sample. As discussed in section 1, aggregate



                                               40
                            Table 9: Aggregate Markup and Aggregate Output

                                           (1)                              (2)
                                         Data                            Model
                                 x      x /Y (x, Y )            x        x /Y (x, Y )
                          Yt    1.71       1           1        0.71       1         1

                          µt    0.96      0.57       0.13       0.21      0.33     0.87

N OTE : The table reports standard deviations, x , relative standard deviations, x /Y , and time-series correlations,
(x, Y ), for aggregate output Yt and aggregate markup µt , both in deviations from their HP trend. Column (1) reports
empirical estimates for the FICUS-FARE (1994-2016) data. Column (2) reports the average over 5,000 independent
simulated samples, each of 23 years.




                 Panel A: Correlation                                  Panel B: Ratio of standard deviations




Figure 4: Histogram of Correlation and Relative Standard Deviations of Aggregate Markups and
Output in Model-Simulated Data
N OTE : Kernel density of (µt , Yt ), the correlation coefficient between aggregate markups and aggregate output, and
 (µt )/ (Yt ), the ratio of standard deviation of aggregate markups and aggregate output, on model-simulated data
based on 5,000 repetitions of 23 period samples.




                                                           41
       Table 10: Aggregate Markup and Aggregate Output with Aggregate Productivity Shocks

                                            (1)                             (2)
                                          Data                   Model (Productivity shocks)
                                   x     x /Y      (x, Y )       x     x /Y        (x, Y )
                            Yt    1.71      1         1          1.71          1           1

                            µt    0.96     0.57      0.13        0.21        0.12        0.33

N OTE : The table reports standard deviations, x , relative standard deviations, x /Y , and time-series correlations,
(x, Y ), for aggregate output Yt and aggregate markup µt , both in deviations from their HP trend. Column (1) reports
empirical estimates for the FICUS-FARE (1994-2016) data. Column (2) reports the average over 5,000 independent
simulated samples from a model with TFP    , each of 23 years. The volatility of the serially uncorrelated aggregate TFP
shocks is calibrated to match the aggregate volatility of aggregate output in France.


shocks do not affect firm market shares and markups, and hence the volatility of aggregate
markups is unchanged relative to the model with only firm-level shocks. Because output-
movements-driven aggregate productivity shocks are uncorrelated with markups, the corre-
lation between aggregate markup and output falls to 0.33. Accordingly, the histogram of this
correlation across 23-year samples (Figure 6 in the appendix D) is now shifted to the left. In
roughly 15% of our 23-year samples, aggregate markups are countercyclical.38


Role of changes in firm-level markups for aggregate results                             Whereas the within/between
decomposition in section 4.2 demonstrates the importance of changes in firm-level markups to
account for changes in aggregate markups in the model and data, as we discussed in section 2,
it is not necessarily informative of how different movements in aggregate output and markups
would be if firm-level markups were heterogeneous but fixed over time.

To answer this question, we apply quantitatively the first-order-approximation analytic expres-
sions in section 2. In Appendix A.7, we provide expressions for correlations and volatilities un-
der variable markups versus constant markups, given market shares and markups in the initial
equilibrium. Because in our model, the distribution of firms by sector changes every period, we
consider 1,000 independent samples drawn from the equilibrium in our quantitative model.39

Consider first movements in aggregate output. We compare the standard deviation of aggregate
  38
    By the same token, one could introduce additional forces or shocks to exactly match aggregate markup volatility.
As a crude first step to explore the implications of additional markup shocks on markup cyclicality, we consider an
                                                                        -1
                                                      N
extension in which aggregate markup is µt = µt        k=1   µ- 1
                                                             kt skt          , where µt is normally distributed and indepen-
dent across periods. We calibrate the standard deviation of this shock to match the volatility of aggregate markups in
the data. Aggregate markup shocks are contractionary and thus reduce the correlation between markup and output.
The resulting correlation between aggregate markups and output combining both aggregate shocks is -0.17, with
large variation across samples.
   39
      The magnitudes of correlations and ratios of standard deviations based on the first-order approximations are
remarkably close to those in our quantitative non-linear results. For the median sample, the standard deviation
of aggregate markup relative to output is 0.386 (vs. 0.33 in our quantitative non-linear results) and the correlation
between aggregate markup and output is 0.897 (vs. 0.87 in our quantitative non-linear results).


                                                            42
output under variable markups with that under heterogeneous but constant markups, given
the same initial firm-level expenditure shares and markups and assuming the same volatility
of firm-level shocks.40 For the median sample, the standard deviation under variable markups
is 0.92 times that under heterogeneous but constant markups (the 95% confidence interval is
0.80-1.00). As explained in section 2, incomplete pass-through (given pass-through rates that
are decreasing in size) reduces aggregate output volatility as does a decline in firm concentra-
tion.41 , 42

Consider now movements in aggregate markups. For the median sample, the standard devia-
tion of aggregate markups under variable markups is 0.96 times that under heterogeneous but
constant markups (the 95% confidence interval is 0.84-1.00). As discussed in section 2, variable
markups do not magnify changes in sectoral markups relative to the model specification with
constant markups because incomplete pass-through mutes the extent of between-firm reallo-
cation. The median volatility of aggregate markups relative to output is 0.386 under variable
markups and 0.372 under heterogeneous but constant markups. The median correlation be-
tween markups and output is 0.897 under variable markups and 0.932 under constant markups
(the 95% confidence interval for the difference in correlations is 0-0.09).

Overall, we see the magnitude and cyclicality of aggregate markups in our model is not too
different when we counterfactually fix markups at their initial, heterogeneous level. Of course,
rather than exogenously fixing markups, our model provides a unified theory of both markup
(level) heterogeneity across firms and endogenous markup changes. Further, as argued above,
this theory is consistent with a number of observations about markup changes in the data, at
the firm, sector, and aggregate levels.




  40
      Market shares of large firms are less volatile under variable markups than under constant markups (see equation
(47) in the appendix). One could compare aggregate volatilities under these two specifications after adjusting the
size of firm-level shocks to keep the same average volatility of market-shares (which, recall, is a target in our base-
line calibration). If we match an unweighted average of these market-share volatilities, our results remain roughly
unchanged. If we target a weighted average of these market-share volatilities, aggregate volatility is slightly higher
under variable markups. In all cases, variable markups have a limited impact on reducing aggregate output volatility.
   41
      Whereas variable markups reduce the volatility of aggregate output, markup heterogeneity per se contributes to
higher aggregate volatility. By equation (30), markup heterogeneity under constant markups does not affect output
changes with linear disutility of labor (f  ). However, with finite labor disutility, reallocation of economic activity
across heterogeneous markup firms is an additional source of output fluctuations, as studied in detail in Baqaee and
Farhi (2019). In our model, the median standard deviation under heterogeneous and constant markups is 1.2 times
that under homogeneous and constant markups, for given initial expenditure shares (the 95% confidence interval is
1.18-1.26). Combining both results, the standard deviation under variable and heterogeneous markups is 1.1 times
that under homogeneous and constant markups (the 95% confidence interval is 1-1.18). That is, variable markups
result in higher output volatility than constant and homogeneous markups.
   42
      We also consider an alternative initial equilibrium to evaluate our analytic expressions, using firm-level shares
observed in the data in 2014 rather than using data from the calibrated model. The results are similar qualita-
tively but starker quantitatively. The standard deviation under variable markups is 0.79 times that under heteroge-
neous but constant markups, and 0.99 times that under homogenous markups. The correlation between aggregate
markups and output is 0.04 lower under variable markups than under heterogeneous but constant markups.


                                                          43
5   Conclusion

In this paper, we examine markup cyclicality through the lens of a simple oligopolistic macroe-
conomic model with rich implications for the behavior of markups at the firm, sector, and ag-
gregate levels. Working with administrative firm data for France, we show the model can repro-
duce qualitatively, and many times quantitatively, an array of markup-related empirical mo-
ments at various levels of disaggregation. Within our framework and measure of markups, we
can reconcile seemingly conflicting variants of "markup-cyclicality" that have been considered
in the literature. Finally, our granular oligopolistic setting produces non-negligible aggregate
fluctuations, both in output and markups.

One obvious route for future work is to superimpose in our model alternative shocks and fric-
tions. Along this line, prime candidates would be to consider price setting and customer-
accumulation frictions (see, e.g., Gilchrist et al. 2017 and Afrouzi 2019), as well as aggregate
monetary and financial shocks. Relatedly, we have focused on static, intra-temporal markup
decisions in which movements in markups are the result of changes in the shape of the de-
mand curve in response to firm-level shocks. These forces would remain relevant even if one
were to extend the model to allow for richer inter-temporal dynamics that result in more com-
plex dynamic markup strategies (see e.g., Rotemberg and Saloner 1986). Bringing the resulting
firm, sector, and aggregate dynamics to data - and comparing them against the forces in our
static benchmark - would then render possible an assessment of the empirical merits of this
more general approach.

Finally, extensions to more realistic and richer product and market structures would allow us
to more accurately map model objects to the increasingly detailed micro data available to
researchers. Such extensions would likely include multi-product firms, interlinked through
intermediate-inputs, with some firms competing only locally in spatially segmented (product
and factor) markets and others doing so nationwide and/or internationally.



References
Acemoglu, Daron, Vasco M. Carvalho, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, "The Network
  Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations," Econometrica, 09 2012, 80 (5), 1977­2016.

Ackerberg, Daniel A., Kevin Caves, and Garth Frazer, "Identification Properties of Recent Production
  Function Estimators," Econometrica, 2015, 83 (6), 2411­2451.

Ackerberg, Daniel, C. Lanier Benkard, Steven Berry, and Ariel Pakes, "Econometric Tools for Analyz-
  ing Market Outcomes," in J.J. Heckman and E.E. Leamer, eds., Handbook of Econometrics, Vol. 6 of
  Handbook of Econometrics, Elsevier, January 2007, chapter 63.

Afrouzi, Hassan, "Firm Competition and the Cyclicality of Markups," 2019.

                                                 44
Amiti, Mary, Oleg Itskhoki, and Jozef Konings, "International Shocks, Variable Markups, and Domestic
 Prices," The Review of Economic Studies, 02 2019, 86 (6), 2356­2402.

Anderson, Eric, Sergio Rebelo, and Arlene Wong, "Markups Across Space and Time," Working Paper
  24434, National Bureau of Economic Research March 2018.

Arkolakis, Costas and Monica Morlacco, "Variable Demand Elasticity, Markups, and Pass-Through,"
  Technical Report, Yale University 2017.

Atkeson, Andrew and Ariel Burstein, "Pricing-to-Market, Trade Costs, and International Relative
  Prices," American Economic Review, December 2008, 98 (5), 1998­2031.

Baqaee, David and Emmanuel Farhi, "The Darwinian Returns to Scale," Working Paper 27139, National
  Bureau of Economic Research May 2020.

Baqaee, David Rezza and Emmanuel Farhi, "Productivity and Misallocation in General Equilibrium,"
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 09 2019. qjz030.

Berger, David W., Kyle F. Herkenhoff, and Simon Mongey, "Labor Market Power," NBER Working Papers
  25719, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc March 2019.

Bilbiie, Florin O., Fabio Ghironi, and Marc J. Melitz, "Endogenous Entry, Product Variety, and Business
  Cycles," Journal of Political Economy, 2012, 120 (2), 304 ­ 345.

Bils, Mark, "The Cyclical Behavior of Marginal Cost and Price," The American Economic Review, 1987, 77
  (5), 838­855.

  , Peter J. Klenow, and Benjamin A. Malin, "Resurrecting the Role of the Product Market Wedge in
  Recessions," American Economic Review, April 2018, 108 (4-5), 1118­46.

Bond, Steve, Arshia Hashemi, Greg Kaplan, and Piotr Zoch, "Some Unpleasant Markup Arithmetic:
  Production Function Elasticities and their Estimation from Production Data," Working Paper 27002,
  National Bureau of Economic Research April 2020.

Brooks, Wyatt J, Joseph P Kaboski, and Yao Amber Li, "Growth Policy, Agglomeration, and (the Lack of )
  Competition," Working Paper 22947, National Bureau of Economic Research December 2016.

Burstein, Ariel and Gita Gopinath, International Prices and Exchange Rates, Vol. 4, Elsevier,

Carvalho, Vasco M. and Basile Grassi, "Large Firm Dynamics and the Business Cycle," American Eco-
  nomic Review, April 2019, 109 (4), 1375­1425.

  and Xavier Gabaix, "The Great Diversification and Its Undoing," American Economic Review, August
  2013, 103 (5), 1697­1727.

Córdoba, Juan Carlos, "A Generalized Gibrat's Law," International Economic Review, November 2008, 49
  (4), 1463­1468.

De Loecker, Jan and Frederic Warzynski, "Markups and Firm-Level Export Status," American Economic
  Review, May 2012, 102 (6), 2437­71.

  and Jan Eeckhout, "The Rise of Market Power and the Macroeconomic Implications," Working Paper
  23687, National Bureau of Economic Research August 2017.


                                                   45
  and    , "Global Market Power," Technical Report 2018.

  , , and Simon Mongey, "Quantifying the Effect of Market Power: An Oligopolistic Framework for
  Firm Dynamics," Technical Report 2018.

di Giovanni, Julian and Andrei A. Levchenko, "Country Size, International Trade, and Aggregate Fluctu-
   ations in Granular Economies," Journal of Political Economy, 2012, 120 (6), 1083 ­ 1132.

  , , and Isabelle Mejean, "Firms, Destinations, and Aggregate Fluctuations," Econometrica, 07 2014,
  82 (4), 1303­1340.

  , , and , "The Micro Origins of International Business-Cycle Comovement," American Economic
  Review, January 2018, 108 (1), 82­108.

Edmond, Chris, Virgiliu Midrigan, and Daniel Yi Xu, "Competition, Markups, and the Gains from Inter-
  national Trade," American Economic Review, October 2015, 105 (10), 3183­3221.

  , , and , "How Costly Are Markups?," Working Paper 24800, National Bureau of Economic Research
  July 2018.

Gabaix, Xavier, "Zipf'S Law For Cities: An Explanation," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, August
  1999, 114 (3), 739­767.

  , "The Granular Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations," Econometrica, 05 2011, 79 (3), 733­772.

Gali, Jordi, "Monopolistic Competition, Business Cycles, and the Composition of Aggregate Demand,"
  Journal of Economic Theory, June 1994, 63 (1), 73­96.

Gaubert, Cecile and Oleg Itskhoki, "Granular Comparative Advantage," Working Paper 24807, National
  Bureau of Economic Research July 2018.

Gilchrist, Simon, Raphael Schoenle, Jae Sim, and Egon Zakrajsek, "Inflation Dynamics during the Fi-
  nancial Crisis," American Economic Review, March 2017, 107 (3), 785­823.

Gopinath, Gita, Oleg Itskhoki, and Roberto Rigobon, "Currency Choice and Exchange Rate Pass-
  Through," American Economic Review, March 2010, 100 (1), 304­36.

Grassi, Basile, "IO in I-O: Size, Industrial Organization, and the Input-Output NetworkMake a Firm
  Structurally Important," Working Papers 619, IGIER (Innocenzo Gasparini Institute for Economic Re-
  search), Bocconi University 2018.

Hall, Robert E., "The Relation between Price and Marginal Cost in U.S. Industry," Journal of Political
  Economy, 1988, 96 (5), 921­947.

Hong, Sungki, "Customer Capital, Markup Cyclicality, and Amplification," Working Papers 2017-33, Fed-
  eral Reserve Bank of St. Louis April 2017.

Hottman, Colin J., Stephen J. Redding, and David E. Weinstein, "Quantifying the Sources of Firm Het-
  erogeneity," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2016, 131 (3), 1291­1364.

Jaimovich, Nir and Max Floetotto, "Firm dynamics, markup variations, and the business cycle," Journal
   of Monetary Economics, 2008, 55 (7), 1238 ­ 1252.


                                                  46
Kikkawa, Ayumu Ken, Glenn Magerman, and Emmanuel Dhyne, "Imperfect Competition in Firm-to-
  Firm Trade," 2019.

Kimball, Miles S., "The Quantitative Analytics of the Basic Neomonetarist Model," Journal of Money,
  Credit and Banking, 1995, 27 (4), 1241­1277.

Loecker, Jan De, Jan Eeckhout, and Gabriel Unger, "The Rise of Market Power and the Macroeconomic
  Implications*," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 01 2020, 135 (2), 561­644.

  , Pinelopi K. Goldberg, Amit K. Khandelwal, and Nina Pavcnik, "Prices, Markups, and Trade Reform,"
  Econometrica, 2016, 84 (2), 445­510.

Luttmer, Erzo G.J., "Models of Growth and Firm Heterogeneity," Annual Review of Economics, 09 2010, 2
  (1), 547­576.

Mongey, Simon, "Market Structure and Monetary Non-neutrality," Staff Report 558, Federal Reserve
 Bank of Minneapolis October 2017.

Morlacco, Monica, "Market Power in Input Markets: Theory and Evidence from French Manufacturing,"
 Technical Report 2019.

Nekarda, Christopher J. and Valerie A. Ramey, "The Cyclical Behavior of the Price-Cost Markup," NBER
  Working Papers 19099, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc June 2013.

  and , "The Cyclical Behavior of the Price-Cost Markup," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking: 50th
  Anniversary Issue, Forthcoming.

Pasten, Ernesto, Raphael Schoenle, and Michael Weber, "Price Rigidity and the Granular Origins of
  Aggregate Fluctuations," Working Papers Central Bank of Chile 864, Central Bank of Chile January
  2020.

Rossi-Hansberg, Esteban, Pierre-Daniel Sarte, and Nicholas Trachter, "Diverging Trends in National
  and Local Concentration," in "NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2020, volume 35" NBER Chapters, Na-
  tional Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, 2020.

Rotemberg, Julio J and Garth Saloner, "A supergame-theoretic model of price wars during booms," The
  American economic review, 1986, 76 (3), 390­407.

Rotemberg, Julio J. and Michael Woodford, "The cyclical behavior of prices and costs," in J. B. Taylor and
  M. Woodford, eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics, Vol. 1 of Handbook of Macroeconomics, Elsevier,
  August 1999, chapter 16, pp. 1051­1135.

Stroebel, Johannes and Joseph Vavra, "House Prices, Local Demand, and Retail Prices," Journal of Polit-
  ical Economy, 2019, 127 (3), 1391­1436.

Wang, Olivier and Iván Werning, "Dynamic Oligopoly and Price Stickiness," Working Paper 27536, Na-
 tional Bureau of Economic Research July 2020.




                                                   47
                 Appendix to "Bottom-up Markup Fluctuations"
                       Ariel Burstein, Vasco M. Carvalho, and Basile Grassi



A     Theory Appendix

A.1    Solving for an equilibrium

Consider a given realization at time t of firm shifters, {Vkit }, and sectoral demand shifters, {Ak }.

Equilibrium firm-level markups and market shares, µkit and skit , are the solution to equations
(4) and (5). Sectoral markups and productivities, µkt and Zkt , are solved for from equations (7)
and (9), respectively, and sectoral expenditure shares, skt , from equation (11).

Aggregate markup, productivity, output, and employment, µt , Zt , Yt , and Lt , are solved for from
                                             ¯ as the numeraire, sectoral, and aggregate price
equations (10), (12), and (13). Setting Wt = W
levels, Pkt and Pt , are given by Pkt = µkt Wt /Zkt and Pt = µkt Wt /Zt . Sectoral output is solved for
from
                                                     - 
                                           Ykt = Ak Pkt Pt Yt ,                                              (43)

and sectoral employment using Lkt = Ykt /Zkt . Firm-level expenditures and employment,
Pkit Ykit and Lkit , are solved from from Pkit Ykit = skit Pkt Ykt and equation (6), respectively.

Finally, given realization of firm-level productivities {Zkit }, firm-level output and price are
solved from equations (1) and (3), respectively. Therefore, the split of firm shifters Vkit into
demand and productivity does not matter to solve for any model outcome (at the firm, sector,
or aggregate level) except for firm-level quantity and prices.


A.2    Global between / within decomposition of changes in sectoral markups

The change in the inverse of the sectoral markup between two time periods is, by equation (7),

                                                      Nk
                                     1     1                   skit   skit
                                        -     =                     -
                                    µkt   µkt                  µkit   µkit
                                                   i=1

This change in sectoral markups can be decomposed into a within term (i.e., changes in firm-
level markups evaluated at firms' expenditure share averaged over both time periods) and a
between term (i.e., changes in expenditure shares evaluated at firm-level markups averaged
over both time periods) as follows:

                        Nk
          1     1             1                   1             1            1        1
             -     =            (skit + skit )             -          +          +          (skit - skit )   (44)
         µkt   µkt            2                  µkit          µkit       µkit       µkit
                        i=1


                                                        48
Note that if markups are equal across firms (as is the case with  = ), then all terms in (44) are
equal to zero.

It is straightforward to show that, by equation (5) under Cournot competition, the within and
the between terms in (44) are equal to

                                      Nk
                                 1                                          1 1
                                           (skit - skit ) (skit + skit )     +             .
                                 2                                           
                                     i=1

Therefore, under Cournot competition, the contribution in changes in sectoral markups of the
between and the within terms is 50% each, irrespective of the values of  and  (as long as
 = ). If  is close to , firm-level markups are less responsive to shocks (reducing the within
term), but firm-level markups are also less heterogeneous across firms (reducing the between
term).

With Bertrand competition, the within/between decomposition is not pinned down at 50-50.




A.3   Firm-level market shares

Combining skit = Akit + (1 - ) Pkit - Pkt , (16), and (18),

                                                                Nk
                                                                i =1 ski ki Vki t
                                     skit = ki Vkit -              Nk
                                                                                       .                       (45)
                                                                   i =1 ski ki

The response of firm i's expenditure share to a firm i shock is

                                                              ski ki
                                      skit = ki 1 -         Nk
                                                                             Vkit .                            (46)
                                                            i =1 ski ki

Finally, we can express the variance of expenditure shares as
                                                                           2                             
                                                       2        Nk                    Nk
                                        ki v
                 Var [skit ] =        Nk
                                                                     ski ki  +                 (ski ki )2  .   (47)
                                      i =1 ski ki             i =i                    i =i




A.4   Changes in sectoral markups

Substituting equations (15), (16), (18), and

                                      skit = Akit + (1 - ) Pkit - Pkt ,                                        (48)

                                                           49
into equation (20) yields
                                                                                                 
                                 Nk                               Nk                  ki -1
                                                 ki - 1           i =1 ski   ki       µki
                   µkt = µk            ski ki              -             Nk
                                                                                                  Vkit .               (49)
                                                  µki                    i =1 ski   ki
                                 i=1


Setting ki = 0 and ki = 1, we obtain the expression for changes in sectoral markups under
constant markups, (22).

Under our assumptions on market structure,

                                             ki - 1   -1    2
                                                    =    -     .                                                       (50)
                                              µki          µki

(ki - 1)/µki is increasing in markup µki and hence also in market share ski . Substituting equa-
tion (50) into (49), we obtain expression (21).

Under Bertrand competition, markup elasticities ki are given by

                                          ln µki          µki - 1
                                 ki              =                   - 1 (µki - 1) ,
                                          ln ski            µki

and (ki - 1)/µki by
                                                                         2
                                             ki - 1            µki - 1
                                                    =                        .                                         (51)
                                              µki                µki
               ki -1
Both ki and    µki     are increasing in markups and market shares. Changes in sectoral markups
under Bertrand competition are

                     Nk                                          Nk
                                                                 i =1 ski    ki ( - ski ( -  ))-2
         µkt = µk          ski ki ( - ski ( -  ))-2 -                            Nk
                                                                                                              Vkit .
                     i=1                                                         i =1 ski   ki

As under Cournot, a positive shock to firm i results in an increase in sectoral markup if and only
if firm i is sufficiently large in its sector.

In general, we do not obtain a simple characterization comparing changes in sectoral markups
under constant markups (equation 15) and variable markups (equation 21). To make analytic
progress, we restrict the extent of ex-ante firm heterogeneity. Specifically, we assume that sector
            A type A firms and N B = N - N A type B firms, and in the initial equilibrium, firms
k contains Nk                   k     k   k
within each type have equal demand/productivity composite, Vkit . In the initial equilibrium,
each firm of type g = A, B has market share sg           g                         g
                                             k , markup µk , and markup elasticity k . Firms of
                                   A and firms of type B are indexed by N A + 1, ..., N . In this
type A are indexed by i = 1, ..., Nk                                     k             k
case, equation (49) under Cournot competition can be written as
                                                           A
                                                                                                           
                                                          Nk                                     Nk
                             2   sA   µk                                             µk
             µkt =                k 1- A                        Vkit + sB
                                                                        k 1-                          Vkit  ,          (52)
                     1 + ( - 1)k      µk                  i=1
                                                                                     µB
                                                                                      k           A
                                                                                             i=N +1
                                                                                                  k




                                                          50
where
                                            B B A     A A B
                                       k = Nk sk k + Nk sk k .

The term in square brackets in equation (52) corresponds to the change in the sectoral markup
under fixed markups as expressed above. Therefore, given the same firm-level shocks, sectoral
markups change by more (and the variance is higher) under variable markups than under con-
stant markups if and only if the term in front of the square brackets in equation (52) is higher
than 1, which is the case if ( - 1)k < 1. This condition is violated if  is sufficiently low and/or
 sufficiently high.

Proof of Proposition 2 Define f (s) and g (s) as probability density functions defined over
                                                                             s(s)
market shares in sector k , s = sk1 , ..., skNk , given by f (s) =         Nk              and g (s) = sf (s)a
                                                                              ski ki
                                                                           i =1
             Nk
                    ski ki
with a =     i =1
             Nk              > 1 and (s) is defined in equation (17). Because the likelihood ra-
             i =1
                    s2
                     ki
                        ki
tio g (s)/f (s) = sa is increasing in s, g (.) first-order stochastically dominates f (.). If ski ki is
                                                                          Nk
increasing in ski , f (s) is increasing in s. It then follows that        i=1 [g (ski )   - f (ski )] f (ski ) > 0,
which corresponds to inequality (25). Note that if ski ki is decreasing in ski , inequality (25) is
reversed.

Under what conditions is ski ki increasing in market shares, as required by Proposition 2? Un-
der Cournot competition,

                                                1- 1 ski -
                                                              1
                                                                -1
                                                                  ski
                                                                     2
                                   ski ki =       1            1   1   ,
                                              1 -  + ( - 2)     -  ski

which is increasing in ski if and only if

                                 -1            1 1                       ( - 1)2
                             2        ski +     -        ( - 2) s2
                                                                 ki <            .                            (53)
                                                                         ( -  )

Because the left-hand side of this equation is increasing in sik (for sik  1), this inequality holds
for ski  s
         ~k , where s
                    ~k is a function of  and . This implies inequality (25) is satisfied if all market
shares in sector k are less than or equal to ski  s
                                                  ~k . Note the condition that ski ki is increasing
in ski is sufficient but not necessary for inequality (25) to hold. In particular, inequality (25)
may hold (so that sectoral markups and prices comove negatively) even if ski ki is increasing
in some range of the distribution of market shares in a sector but decreasing at the upper tail of
the distribution.




                                                    51
A.5   Changes in sectoral productivity


By equations (9) and (15), changes in sectoral productivity are, up to a first order, given by

                            Nk
                                               µk                         µk
                    Zkt =         ski        -         Vkit -  1 -               ki skit ,
                                          - 1 µki                         µki
                            i=1

                                                                                
where changes in market shares are given by (48). The term ski ×                -1   corresponds to the elas-
ticity of sectoral productivity under monopolistic competition. The remaining terms reflect
changes in efficiency due to reallocation across firms with heterogeneous markups, as dis-
cussed in detail in Baqaee and Farhi (2019).




A.6   Changes in sectoral and aggregate output


We now derive equation (30). We first calculate changes in aggregate output. Using equations
(29) and (30), changes in aggregate output can be expressed in terms of changes in sectoral
markup and price as

                                                                      µ                   sk µ
              Yt = (1 + f  )-1          sk - f + 1 + ( - 1) 1 -                  Pkt +         µkt       (54)
                                                                      µk                   µk
                                   k


In response to sector k shocks only, changes in aggregate output are

                                                                     µ                  sk µ
               Yt = (1 + f  )-1 sk - f + 1 + ( - 1) 1 -                         Pkt +        µkt         (55)
                                                                     µk                  µk

and change in aggregate price by Pt = sk Pkt .

Changes in sectoral output are given by

                                          Ykt = - Pkt +  Pt + Yt .                                       (56)

In response to sector k shocks only, substituting changes in aggregate output and price using
the expressions above, changes in sectoral output are given by equation (26).

Finally, expression (27) is obtained as follows. First, changes in firm-level markups are, com-
bining equations (45) and (15),

                                                         Nk
                                                         i =1 ski ki Vki t
                             µkit = ki ki Vkit -            Nk
                                                                                 .                       (57)
                                                            i =1 ski ki


                                                    52
Changes in sectoral output when f   are, by equations (26) and (18),

                                                                                                   Nk
                                                                 (1 - sk ) +  -1 sk                i=1 ski ki Vkit
               Ykt = -  (1 - sk ) +  -1 sk Pkt =                                                     Nk
                                                                                                                   .        (58)
                                                                      -1                             i=1 ski ki


Calculating Cov Ykt , µkit in the presence of shocks to all firms (only those in sector k are rele-
vant), we obtain expression (27).




A.7   Volatility and covariance of aggregate markups and output


In this section, we provide expressions for the variance of and covariance between aggregate
markups and aggregate output. We do not impose f  , as we do in the main text. We use
these expressions in section 4.4.

The covariance between sector prices and markups, Cov µkt , Pkt , is given by (24) under vari-
able markups and (23) under constant markups.

The variance of sectoral prices is

                                                      2         Nk                        2
                                                     v                   ki ski
                                  Var Pkt =                                                   .                             (59)
                                                   ( - 1)2      i=1      i ki ski


Under constant markups, ki = 0 and ki = 1. The variance of the aggregate price is

                                           Var Pt =              s2
                                                                  k Var Pkt .                                               (60)
                                                            k

The variance of sectoral markups is
                                                                                                           2
                                    Nk                                   Nk                       ki -1
                                                    ki - 1               i =1 ski    ki           µki
                  Var [µkt ] = µ2
                                k         s2  2 
                                           ki ki                     -            Nk
                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                            v .             (61)
                                                     µki                          i =1 ski   ki
                                    i=1


The variance of aggregate markups is

                             2                                           2
                        µ                               2      µ                                                  µ
Var [µt ] =       s2
                   k             Var [µkt ] + (1 -  )       1-               Var Pkt - ( - 1) 1 -                      Cov µkt , Pkt
                        µk                                     µk                                                 µk
              k
                                                                                                                            (62)

The covariance between aggregate price and markup is

                                         s2                                                       µ
              Cov Pt , µt = µ             k
                                            Cov Pkt , µkt - ( - 1)                 s2
                                                                                    k 1-                  Var Pkt .         (63)
                                         µk                                                       µk
                                    k                                         k


                                                            53
The variance of aggregate output is

                                       2                              2
                              1                           1+f                         (1 + f )
           Var Yt =                        Var [µt ] +                    Var Pt -             Cov Pt , µt   (64)
                           1 + f                         1 + f                       (1 + f )2

Finally, the covariance between aggregate output and markups is

                                                 1                          1+f
                      Cov Yt , µt =                      Var [µt ] -               Cov Pt , µt .             (65)
                                              1 + f                        1 + f



A.8    Decreasing returns to scale

The production function is now given by


                                                    Ykit = Zkit Lkit .                                       (66)

where   1. Marginal cost is

                                  M Ckit =  -1 Wt (Ykit )(1- )/ (Zkit )-1/ ,                                 (67)

or, using Pkit Ykit = skit Pkt Ykt ,

                                                -1                (1- )
                              M Ckit =  -1 Wt µkit (Pkt Ykt skit )      (Zkit )-1 .                          (68)

The firm-level markup, µkit , is defined as the ratio of price to marginal cost, and is related to
expenditure shares by equation (5), which does not depend on  .

Labor payments of firm i in sector k are

                                               Lkit Wt = µ- 1
                                                          kit Pkit Ykit ,


and profits (revenues minus labor payments) are

                                             kit = 1 - µ- 1
                                                        kit Pkit Ykit .


We define the sectoral markup as the ratio of sectoral revenues to labor payments,

                                                             Pkt Ykt
                                                      µkt            ,                                       (69)
                                                             Wt Lkt

which can be expressed as a function of firm-level markups and expenditure shares,

                                                             Nk
                                                 µ- 1
                                                  kt =             µ- 1
                                                                    kit skit .                               (70)
                                                             i=1


                                                             54
The 50-50 between/within decomposition of changes in sectoral markups under Cournot com-
petition derived in the appendix holds irrespectively of the value of  .

The expenditure share of firm i in sector k , using Pkit = µkit M Ckit , satisfies

                                                                   1-
                                                          1-
                                               Vkit µkit skit
                                  skit =                                 1- .                (71)
                                                                  1-
                                             Nk
                                             i =1 Vki t    µki t ski t


Equilibrium firm-level expenditure shares and markups are the solution to equations (5) and
(71).

Log-linearizing this equation, and using µkit = ki skit , we obtain the analog to equations (14)
and (15):
                                                     Nk
                  skit = Vkit + (1 - ) ki skit -           ski   Vki t + (1 - ) ki ski t ,   (72)
                                                    i =1

where ki =  ki + 1 -  . Note ki < ki if and only if ki < 1.

We can follow similar steps to obtain expressions for changes in sectoral markups and prices to
firm-level shocks, as well as the implied variances and covariances.



B       Empirical Appendix

B.1      Markup-Estimation Appendix

In this appendix, we describe the empirical framework we use to estimate production functions
and firm-level markups. We also discuss its implementation in the FICUS-FARE French firm
census data. This framework is based on the so-called production approach and builds on to
the methodology of De Loecker and Warzynski (2012), De Loecker and Eeckhout (2017), and
De Loecker et al. (2016, 2020).

We assume all firms within two digit sectors have a common production function, up to a firm-
specific Hicks-neutral TFP. For simplicity, in what follows, we omit sector notation. The pro-
duction function of firm i is
                                    Yit = Zit F (Lit , Kit , Mit , Xit ) ,

where Zit denotes TFP, Lit denotes labor, Kit denotes capital, Mit denotes materials, and Xit
denotes services. These inputs are homogenous across firms within sectors and traded in com-
petitive markets. In our estimation of markups, we do not impose that F is constant returns to
scale.

We now describe how we recover markups given production-function estimates, and then show
how we estimate production functions.

                                                     55
B.1.1      Recovering Markups

When minimizing costs, we assume that materials is a variable input that is not subject to
any adjustment cost or any intertemporal decision. Under these assumptions, the first-order-
condition of the firms' cost-minimization problem for materials Mit can be rewritten as

                                                                                         F
                                                  F                          Pit Yit Zit M
                                   PtM = it Zit                     µit =                    ,
                                                  M                         PtM Mit Yit /Mit

                  Pit                                                                              M =
where it =        µit ;   that is output price is equal to markup over marginal cost. We denote by it
     F
Zit M
Yit /Mit   the elasticity of the production function with respect to material input Mit . Markup
is equal to the product of the ratio of sales to materials and the elasticity of the production
function with respect to materials:

                                                              Pit Yit M
                                                     µit =             .                                         (73)
                                                             PtM Mit it

We calculate the ratio of sales to materials using the FICUS-FARE data on sales and input ex-
penditures, and we estimate the elasticity as we describe below.



B.1.2      Production-function estimation

In this subsection, we describe the production-function estimation procedure. We implement
a control-function approach, introduced by Ackerberg et al. (2007, 2015), in an oligopolistic
competition environment.

We implement the estimation procedure described below at the two-digit sector level. Given
our assumptions that inputs are homogeneous and that firms are price takers in the input mar-
kets, we deflate input expenditures by sector-level price indices to recover inputs' quantities.43

We write the revenue production function as

                            log Pit Yit = log F (Lit , Kit , Mit , Xit ) + log Zit + log Pit +   it ,


where      it   denotes the (log) of measurement error. Hereafter, denote with small capital letters
the logarithm of large capital letters: zit = log Zit , pit = log Pit , lit = log Lit , kit = log Kit , mit =
log Mit and xit = log Xit , pyit = log Pit Yit , and f (lit , kit , mit , xit ) = log F (Lit , Kit , Mit , Xit ). With
this notation, we write the revenue production function as

                                       pyit = f (lit , kit , mit , xit ) + zit + pit +   it ,                    (74)

  43
     Given our assumptions that firms produce differentiated goods and set heterogeneous markups (and prices),
we cannot recover quantities by deflating firm-level revenue using sector-level output deflators.


                                                               56
This equation cannot be estimated by simple OLS, because of unobserved productivity that is
likely correlated both with the left- and right-hand sides of the equation. To address this simul-
taneity problem, we need to build an instrument for productivity by introducing a conditional
control function. To construct this control function, we use the first-order-condition with re-
spect to the static input materials in the cost-minimization problem (as in equation 73)

                                                                Pit     F
                                                     PtM =          Zit   .                                                        (75)
                                                                µit     M
                           F                                                       F
Using the fact that        M    is a function of the inputs' usage,                M      (Lit , Kit , Mit , Xit ), equation (75)
implicitly defines Mit as a function of productivity, Zit , conditional on other inputs' usage
Lit , Kit , Xit , material price, output price, and markup.44 Inverting this relationship, we can
write productivity as a function of time, input usage, output price, and markup.45 Let us call
this conditional control function ht such that

                              zit = ht (mit , lit , kit , xit , it )   with       it = {pit , µit }.                               (76)

The subscript t captures the dependence of the function h to input prices because these are the
same for all firms at a given period. Assume for now that it = {pit , µit } is observed. Substituting
equation (76) in the revenue production function (74) yields

   pyit = f (lit , kit , mit , xit ) + ht (mit , lit , kit , xit , it ) + pit +   it    t (lit , kit , mit , xit , it ) +   it ,   (77)

where t is a function that we estimate non-parametrically.46 The estimation of the function t
is the first-stage of our procedure.

In a second stage, we use a generalized method of moments (GMM) estimator. To construct the
moment conditions, we define errit  t (lit , kit , mit , xit , it ) - f (lit , kit , mit , xit ), which is equal
to (log) revenue productivity, zit + pit .47 We assume this measure of productivity is Markovian.
Specifically,
                                                  errit = g (errit-1 ) + it ,

where g is an AR(1) function and it is the innovation.48 By the Markovian assumption, it is
orthogonal to the information set at time t - 1. Formally, the moment condition is

                                                       E [it |Iit-1 ] = 0,                                                         (78)

where Iit is the information set at time t.
  44
      For the Cobb-Douglas case in which F = L           K      M   X
                                                    it Kit Mit Xit , the implicit function between material as a func-
                                                      L
                                                                                 M -1 X
tion of productivity and input usage is given by Pt = µit Zit M L
                                                       M    Pit          L  K
                                                                       it Kit Mit      Xit .
   45                                                        M µit 1   -L     -K     1-M    -X
      For the Cobb-Douglas case, this function is Zit = Pt Pit M Lit Kit Mit               Xit  .
   46                                                             M
      For the Cobb-Douglas case, the function it is equal to pt + log µit - log M + mit .
   47
      For the Cobb-Douglas case, errit = pM   t + log µit - log M + (1 - M )mit - L lit - K kit - X xit .
   48                                                                                                            2
      Our estimated elasticities are similar if we assume errit follows the process errit = 0 + 1 errit-1 + 2 errit -1 + it .



                                                                 57
We use the first-stage and the moment condition to estimate the parameters of the production
function as follows. First, we estimate non-parametrically it using an OLS estimator where
the function is approximated by a third-order polynomial. Second, for a given set of param-
eters characterizing the production function f and with a first-stage estimation of the it , we
compute the error term errit = it - f (lit , kit , mit , xit ). We then estimate the AR(1) Markovian
process g and compute the innovation it = errit - g (errit-1 ). To do so, we need a set of instru-
ments from the information set at time t - 1. In our translog production-function specifica-
tion, these instruments are the inputs {mit-1 , xit-1 , lit-1 } and the predetermined variable {kit }
together with their power (up to the third order) and cross-products. Finally, the parameters
of the production function are chosen using a numerical solver to solve the moment condition
(78).

Recall the procedure above assumed the variables it = {pit , µit } are observed. We discuss how
we deal with each unobservable variable in turn.

To address the unobserved-markup problem, we assume the markup is a function of market
share, µit = µt (sit ), as is the case under the nested CES demand system in our model under
either Cournot or Bertrand competition. In the data, this market share is defined as the ratio
between firm-level sales and the sum of the sales of all firms in the same NAF sector, where
market shares are defined at the five-digit level of sectoral disaggregation. In practice, we sub-
stitute the variable µit by the market share sit in the vector of controls it .

The second problem deals with unobserved firm-level prices. For our full dataset, as in many
large firm censuses, firm-level prices are unobserved. However, for a subsample of firms in our
data, we can construct a price proxy aggregating product-level prices, as described in section
3.1. We can thus include this proxy for firm-level price in the vector of controls zit . Recall that
this measure is only available for firms in the EAE sample, which is restricted to manufacturing
and from 2009 onwards.

Using the methodology above, we then proceed to estimate firm-level markups using four dif-
ferent sets of control variables zit : (i) firms' market share and price proxies; (ii) price proxies;
(iii) market shares; and (iv ) no controls. Note that for (i) and (ii), we have to restrict our es-
timation to the period 2009-2016 and manufacturing firms only, whereas for (iii) and (iv ) we
estimate on both the restricted and full sample.

As shown in Table 11, the pairwise correlations among these four different firm-level markup
estimates are very high, both in levels and in annual changes, ranging between 0.80 and 0.99.
With this in mind, we use the specification (iv ) as a baseline choice in order to take advantage
of the full sample, both cross-sectionally and over time. Using specification (iii), which we also
can implement on the whole dataset, leaves results virtually unchanged, whereas specifications
(i) and (ii) reduce considerably the scope of the analysis and size of the sample.




                                                  58
           Table 11: Correlation between markup estimates from different specifications

                                                           levels                              first-diff (logs)
                                               (i)       (ii)    (iii)      (iv )       (i)       (ii)      (iii)    (iv )
 (i) price proxy and market share               1                                        1
 (ii) price proxy                             0.843       1                            0.941       1
 (iii) market share                           0.896     0.860        1                 0.941     0.993       1
 (iv ) no controls                            0.830     0.801      0.890     1         0.909     0.944     0.940      1

N OTE : This table reports pairwise correlations, in levels and in log difference, across various specification of firm-
level markup estimates. These estimates and correlations are computed on the restricted sample of firms (EAE) on
the period 2009-2016. The correlation in levels (resp. first-difference) between firm-level markup for the specifica-
tion (iii) and (iv ) on the full sample is equal to 0.977 (resp. 0.977).


                  Table 12: Firm Inverse Markup and Market Share: First Difference
                                                        Dependent Variable: µ- 1
                                                                             kit

                                                            (1)                  (2)

                               skit                       -.511              -.508
                                                          (.156)             (.156)

                               Year FE                       N                   Y
                               Number of Firms          1 135 547           1 135 547
                               Observations             9 328 004           9 328 004

N OTE : µ-   1
           ikt is the first difference of the inverse of firm i sector k gross markup in year t, skit gives the first dif-
ference of market share of firm i in sector k. Columns (1) and (2) report empirical estimates for the FICUS-FARE
(1994-2016) data. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the firm level. Markups are winsorized at the 2%
level.


B.2      Markups, Market Shares, and Concentration: Robustness

This appendix derives additional cross-sectional and within-firm predictions for the empiri-
cal relation between (a) firm markup and firm market share and (b) sector markup and sector
concentration.

Proceeding in parallel to the results in the main text, taking the first difference of equation (36)
yields
                                                            
                                                                -1
                                               µ- 1
                                                kit = -
                                                        
                                                                   skit ,
                                                                
       -1
where µkit and skit are the first difference across time of the inverse firm-level markup and
market share respectively. Testing this relationship empirically yields the results in Table 12
that shows a negative and significant coefficient even after controlling for time effect.

Turning to our sector-level predictions, we follow the same methodology as above by taking the

                                                           59
                 Table 13: Sector Inverse Markup and Sectoral HHI: First Difference
                                                    Dependent Variable: µ-
                                                                         kt
                                                                           1

                                                     (1)           (2)

                          HHIkt                      -.340            -.350
                                                     (.147)           (.147)

                          Year FE                     N                 Y
                          Number of Sectors          504               504
                          Observations              11 088            11 088

N OTE : µkt is sector k gross markup in year t, HHIkt gives the HHI of concentration k. Columns (1)-(2) report em-
pirical estimates for the FICUS-FARE (1994-2016) data, aggregated to sector level. Standard errors (in parentheses)
are clustered at sector level.


first difference of equation (39) which yields
                                                       
                                                          -1
                                           µ- 1
                                            kt = -
                                                   
                                                             HHIkt .
                                                          

Table 13 reports the results with and without time fixed effects. This table shows, as predicted
by the model, a negative and significant estimate.



C       Simulation Appendix

C.1        Untargeted Moment Not based on Markup Estimation

When we calibrate the model, we also consider a specification of the markup equation (35) that
does not require estimates of output elasticities but imposes the market structure assumed in
our model. Substituting the relation between markups and market shares in our model (equa-
tion 5), we write equation (35) as
                                                           
                              Pkit Ykit                     -1                        M
                        log    MM
                                        = log    - log 1 -     skit             - log kit .                   (79)
                              Pkit  kit       -1           -1

Recall that under a translog production function, output elasticities depend on sector level pa-
rameters and firm-level factor use. We thus consider the following empirical specification of
(79):
                                      Pkit Ykit
                                log    MM
                                                = k + t + skit + Xkit +         kit ,                         (80)
                                      Pkit  kit

where Xkit denotes a vector of firm-level factor use, k is a sector-level fixed effect at the two
digit level, and t is a year fixed effect. Approximating the log term in equation (79) yields
                                           
        -1                                  -1
 =      -1
        
             around skit = 0 and  =        - 
                                           
                                                 around skit = 1. We estimate equation (80) weighting

                                                        60
                            Table 14: Firm Markup and Sector Output: Robustness
                                              Dependent variable: ln(µkit )

                                                 (1)           (2)           (3)              (4)
                    Coefficient                 Data          Data          Model            Model
                                                                            = 2.0298         = 2.0298
                    Yk,t                       -0.093         -0.068          -0.135           -0.015
                                               (0.062)        (0.035)
                    Yk,t  skit                 0.209          0.192           0.872            0.094
                                               (0.077)        (0.043)

                    Firm Controls                 N              Y               N                Y
                    Firm FE                       Y              Y               Y                Y
                    Year FE                       Y              Y               Y                Y
                    Number of Firms          1 154 181      1 154 181        650 423          650 423

N OTE : µkit is firm i sector k gross markup in year t, skit gives the market share of firm i in sector k, year t and Yk,t is
the deviation of sector k (log) value-added in year t from its HP trend. Columns (1) and (2) report empirical estimates
for the FICUS-FARE (1994-2016) data. Columns (3) and (4) report estimates based on model-simulated data for an
alternative calibration with  = 7 and  = 2.0298. This regression is weighted by average revenue. Standard errors
clustered at the firm-level.


observations by average firm-level revenues. The OLS estimate of  is 0.593 (s.e 0.141).49

Our baseline calibration strategy relies on estimates of firm-level markups only through the co-
efficient of the HHI in the regression of sector-level inverse markup. Alternatively, equation (80)
imposes the market structure in our model but does not require estimates of output elasticities
and markups. When we run this regression on model-simulated data (where labor is the only
factor of production), we obtain an estimate of  of 0.620, which is very close to 0.593 (s.e 0.141)
in the data.


C.2       Alternative Calibration

As described in footnote 29 in section 3.3, we consider an alternative calibration in which we
target a slope between sector inverse markup and HHI equal to -0.35 (as reported in colum 2
of Table 13), estimated in first difference (rather than -0.44 estimated in levels), setting  = 7
and  = 2.0298.



D        Additional Figures Appendix



  49
       The point estimate for the unweighted specification is 0.945 (s.e. 0.318).


                                                            61
                       Table 15: Sector Markup and Sector Output: Robustness
                                            Dependent variable: µkt

                                                    (1)           (2)                (3)
                        Coefficient                Data         Model               Model
                                                               ( = 1.704)         ( = 2.0298)
                        Ykt                        0.102           0.129              0.079
                                                   (0.028)     [0.029; 0.198 ]    [0.012; 0.134 ]



                        Sector FE                    Y               Y                  Y
                        Year FE                      Y               Y                  Y
                        Number of Sectors           504             504                504

N OTE : Regression of sector-level (log) change markup (µkt ) on sector value-added (log) change (Ykt ). Column (1)
reports empirical estimates for the FICUS-FARE (1994-2016) data, and standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered
at the sector level. Columns (2) and (3) report estimates based on model-simulated data for our baseline and an al-
ternative calibration, respectively. Point estimate for this column give the median coefficient obtained from running
the reduced-form regression over 5,000 independent simulated samples, each of the same length (23 years) as the
French data. Terms in square brackets give, respectively, the 0.05 and 0.95 quantiles of coefficient estimates across
simulated samples.




                     Table 16: Sector Markup and Aggregate Output: Robustness
                                            Dependent variable: µkt

                                                    (1)           (2)                (3)
                        Coefficient                Data         Model               Model
                                                               ( = 1.704)         ( = 2.0298)
                        Yt                         0.191          0.014               0.009
                                                   (0.161)     [-0.480, 0.553 ]   [-0.041, 0.217 ]

                        Sector FE                    Y               Y                  Y
                        Number of Sectors           504             504                504

N OTE : Regression of sector k's markup in year t in deviation from its HP trend µkt on Yt the HP-trend deviation
of (log) aggregate real value-added in year t. Column (1) reports empirical estimates for the FICUS-FARE (1994-
2016) data. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the sector level. Column (2) reports estimates based
on model-simulated data. Point estimates for this column give the median coefficient obtained from running
the reduced-form regression over 5,000 independent simulated samples, each of the same length (23 years) as the
French data. Terms in square brackets give, respectively, the 0.05 and 0.95 quantiles of coefficient estimates from
simulated data.




                                                          62
                         Panel A                                                    Panel B




             Figure 5: Histogram of Model-based Sector-level Regression: Robustness

N OTE : Panel A: Kernel density of estimated regression coefficient on model-simulated data from equation (41) based
on 5,000 repetitions of independent samples for the alternative calibration with  = 7 and  = 2.0298. The solid red
lines are the estimate in the data, and the dashed red lines reports the lower and upper bound of the 10% confidence
interval. Panel B: Kernel density of estimated regression coefficient on model-simulated data from equation (42).
5,000 repetitions of independent samples for the alternative calibration with  = 7 and  = 2.0298. The solid red
lines are the estimate in the data while the dashed red lines reports the lower and upper bound of the 10% confidence
interval.




                   Table 17: Aggregate Markup and Aggregate Output: Robustness

                                           (1)                        (2)
                                         Data                   Model  = 2.0298
                                 x      x /Y (x, Y )            x  x /Y (x, Y )
                          Yt    1.71       1           1        0.99      1          1

                          µt    0.96      0.57       0.13       0.27    0.29       0.96

N OTE : The table reports standard deviations, x , relative standard deviations, x /Y , and time-series correlations,
(x, Y ), for aggregate output Yt and aggregate markup µt , both in deviations from their HP trend. Column (1) reports
empirical estimates for the FICUS-FARE (1994-2016) data. Column (2) reports the average over 5,000 independent
model-simulated samples each of the same length (23 years) for the alternative calibration with  = 7 and  =
2.0298.




                                                           63
         Figure 6: Histogram of (µt , Yt ) in Model-simulated Data with Aggregate Shocks

N OTE : Kernel density of (µt , Yt ), the correlation coefficient between aggregate markups and aggregate output on
simulated data from the model with aggregate shocks based on 5,000 repetitions of independent 23 period samples.
The volatility of the serially uncorrelated aggregate TFP shocks is calibrated to match the aggregate volatility of GDP
in France.




                                                          64
