                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             HOW DO CEOS MAKE STRATEGY?

                                       Mu-Jeung Yang
                                      Michael Christensen
                                       Nicholas Bloom
                                       Raffaella Sadun
                                          Jan Rivkin

                                      Working Paper 27952
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27952


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2020




Author names are in a randomized order. Financial support was provided by Harvard Business
School. We would like to thank Michael Porter and Tim Ott for helpful comments. We also thank
seminar participants at Harvard Business School, Eccles School of Business, the Empirical
Management Conference 2018, the CAED conference 2019, the Strategy Science Conference
2019, the NBER Organizational Economics Fall 2019 meeting, for their comments and Kerenssa
Kay and Tejas Ramdas for excellent research assistance. Some of the results in this paper have
been obtained while Yang was Special-Sworn Status Researcher at the Northwest Census
Research Datacenter. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau. All results have been
reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is disclosed The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Mu-Jeung Yang, Michael Christensen, Nicholas Bloom, Raffaella Sadun, and Jan
Rivkin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Do CEOs Make Strategy?
Mu-Jeung Yang, Michael Christensen, Nicholas Bloom, Raffaella Sadun, and Jan Rivkin
NBER Working Paper No. 27952
October 2020
JEL No. L2,M1,M2

                                           ABSTRACT

We explore the critical question of how executives make strategic decisions. Utilizing a new
survey of 262 CEO alumni of Harvard Business School, we gather evidence on four aspects of
each executive's business strategy: its overall structure, its formalization, its development, and its
implementation. We report three key results. First, different CEOs use markedly different
processes to make strategic decisions; some follow highly formalized, rigorous, and deliberate
processes, while others rely heavily on instinct and intuition. Second, more structured strategy
processes are associated with larger firm size and faster employment growth. Third, using a
regression discontinuity centered around a change in the curriculum of Harvard Business
School's required strategy course, we trace differences in strategic decision making back to
differences in managerial education.

Mu-Jeung Yang                                     Raffaella Sadun
David Eccles School of Business                   Harvard Business School
Salt Lake City, UT                                Morgan Hall 233
mjyang@eccles.utah.edu                            Soldiers Field
                                                  Boston, MA 02163
Michael Christensen                               and NBER
Harvard Business School                           rsadun@hbs.edu
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163                                  Jan Rivkin
mchristensen@hbs.edu                              Harvard Business School
                                                  Morgan Hall
Nicholas Bloom                                    Boston, MA 02163
Stanford University                               jrivkin@hbs.edu
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
nbloom@stanford.edu
1. Introduction


A fundamental and central premise across economics, strategy, and management is that CEOs
shape the outcomes of their companies through the strategic decisions they make (Andrews, 1971;
Drucker, 1967; Porter, 1980; Tirole, 1988; Bertrand and Schoar, 2003). Yet we know remarkably
little about how CEOs actually make those strategic decisions. The strategy literature over the past
several decades has revealed much about the consequences of particular strategic decisions and
firm strategies but very little about how CEOs and their leadership teams determine those
strategies. This knowledge gap is particularly significant in light of longstanding calls to develop
a theory of strategy that better accounts for how firms ultimately arrive at their respective strategies
(Porter, 1991). Existing qualitative case studies and empirical work on small and selected samples
of managers have captured how specific management teams made particular types of choices (e.g.,
Graebner and Eisenhardt, 2004; Mintzberg, 2008), but systematic, large-sample empirical
evidence on this topic is still missing. If the particular strategies CEOs select are some of the most
important choices they make, then surely understanding how those choices are made is of similar
importance.


Understanding how CEOs make strategic choices within their firms raises a set of additional
related and foundational questions for researchers to consider. First, to what extent, if at all, do
CEOs vary in terms of their approaches to making strategic decisions? Within the popular press,
we see a potential breadth of decision-making approaches among top executives, from those who
enact consistent, proactive, and evidence-based decision-making in the spirit of Simon (1947), to
executives who rely entirely on intuition or a simple set of heuristics (Davis, Eisenhardt, &
Bingham, 2009; Eisenhardt & Sull, 2001), popularized by CEOs like Apple's Steve Jobs.
However, it remains to be seen whether these anecdotal examples of CEOs' decision-making
processes reflect the broader population of executives. While some empirical work has explored
this subject using qualitative case studies, both the small sample sizes and the narrow scope of
these studies do not provide us with a broader, more comprehensive view of the subject. Second,
given the potential differences in decision processes, to what extent are the process by which CEOs
make strategic decisions correlated with firm characteristics and performance? Finally, if CEOs



                                                                                                      2
differ in their processes for making strategic decisions, what particular factors, such as education,
might drive these differences?


This paper seeks to address these questions in a new, large-scale data collection effort that aims to
measure, and explain differences in, the strategy practices of 262 CEOs of U.S., U.K., and
Canadian manufacturing firms. Utilizing a research design modeled on the World Management
Survey (Bloom & Van Reenen, 2007; Bloom, et al., 2019), we overcome many of the prior
challenges associated with studying CEOs and their strategic decision processes. The design gives
us both systematic data that allow us to examine cross-firm differences in their decision processes
and detailed information about how particular processes play out within each firm. Core to these
efforts is the development of a novel survey instrument that enables us to capture rich and
consistent data for large samples of firms.


We report several findings related to the questions raised earlier. First, chief executives vary
dramatically in terms of how structured they are as they make strategic decisions. We observe a
broad range of structures in firms' processes for making strategic decisions, from firms that
typically implement ad hoc processes in response to changes in the external environment to firms
that instead follow highly deliberate and proactive practices. Second, we observe that more
structured strategy processes tend to occur in firms that are larger and faster growing. Third, we
find evidence that CEOs' management education appears to influence their strategy processes,
even decades after their training.


This research connects to a long literature on strategy. This literature has focused on two major
questions: (1) which strategies do CEOs and their firms employ (e.g. Miles & Snow, 1978; Porter,
1980) and (2) what are the performance consequences of those strategies and actions, such as how
firms that pursue joint ventures differ in performance from firms which refrain from doing so.
Perhaps surprisingly, little work has been done to understand how firms and their CEOs arrive at
those strategies and make those decisions. Some work on firms' resource allocation processes
(Bower, 1970) explores the internal processes occurring among firm executives, but this work
largely captures firms' actions and processes after strategies are determined and strategic decisions
are made. More recent work has sought to understand how CEOs make specific strategic decisions,


                                                                                                   3
such as selling (Graebner & Eisenhardt, 2004), international expansion (Bingham, Eisenhardt, &
Furr, 2007), and strategic business exit (Burgelman, 1996), but the limited and narrow scope of
the decisions this work explores does not yet give a more systematic and comprehensive
understanding of broader aspects of strategic decision making. We contribute to this literature by
identifying and measuring a set of "Strategy Practices"--i.e. specific actions or activities that
CEOs and their respective firms might engage for the purpose of making any strategic decision or
significant policy change--that can potentially apply to a wide variety of strategic decisions, and
to a wide variety of firms. While far from capturing the complete spectrum of activities that feed
into the making of a strategic decision, this approach allows us broaden the scope of the analysis
to a wider set of managerial activities compared to the earlier literature.


This paper is structured as follows. Following this introduction, we will outline our empirical
methodology in Section 2, including a detailed description of the survey instrument central to this
study. Section 3 will discuss our empirical findings related to the heterogeneity of strategic
decision practices, and Section 4 will discuss the correlations between CEOs' strategic decision
practices and a set of performance variables. Then, in Section 5, we will explore one possible
factor that may cause some of the variation we observe in how firms make strategic decisions:
business education. Finally, we will conclude in Section 6 by both summarizing our findings and
identifying potential areas for useful future research.


2. Empirical Methodology


Historically, three main challenges have limited broad, systematic empirical research on CEOs'
strategic decisions and Strategy Practices. First, the top executives who usually make these
decisions are rarely willing to complete in-depth surveys (Bandiera et al, 2019). The difficulty of
securing high numbers of study participants often limits empirical research to mostly qualitative
work that focuses on a small selection of case studies and a narrow subset of strategic decision
types. Second, differences in how managers make strategic decisions are typically hard to capture
systematically in large samples. Frameworks that would make data capture easier--such as a
taxonomy of different strategy processes or an agreed-upon way to distinguish between "good"
and "bad" ways to make strategic decisions--do not exist to our knowledge. Third, it is difficult


                                                                                                 4
to elicit truthful answers from top managers on how they really make decisions, as CEOs often
face strong pressures to give socially desirable responses to external audiences.


We overcome these challenges and explore our central research question by utilizing a novel
survey methodology and sampling strategy to gather in-depth data on a large sample of firms
within the U.S., Canadian, and U.K. manufacturing sectors. We overcome the first challenge--the
reluctance of CEOs to complete surveys--by surveying alumni of a business school, Harvard
Business School (HBS), where three authors of the paper are based. We hoped that alumni would
respond at a high rate to a survey invitation from HBS faculty, and the hope turned out to be well-
founded. While CEOs trained at HBS are by no means a representative sample of CEOs, evidence
of heterogeneity in strategy practices within this highly selected set of managers would--if
anything--represent a lower bound on the heterogeneity among the broader population of CEOs.
We overcome the second challenge--the lack of a systematic way to classify differences in
strategy processes--by creating a novel survey instrument that captures differences in the way
managers develop, select, and implement new strategic ideas. Finally, we try to minimize biases
on the part of both interviewees and interviewers by using several interview tactics that reduce
these biases and by employing trained interviewers to double-blind score responses. This
approach, modeled on the method of the World Management Survey (Bloom and Van Reenen;
2007; Bloom et al., 2019), helps us gather high-quality and comparable assessments of strategy
practices across a wide variety of firms.


2.1 Developing a Strategy Scoring Instrument
To explore systematically how chief executives formalize, develop, and implement strategy, we
developed a new semi-structured survey instrument. Prior research has examined how specific
executives made particular strategic decisions (e.g., Graebner and Eisenhardt, 2004; Mintzberg,
2008), and many popular articles and books give practitioners advice about how to make better
decisions (for which there is little consensus) (Heath and Heath, 2013; Sull and Eisenhardt, 2015;
Krogerus and Tschäppeler, 2012). But we know of no prior research to delineate systematically
the components of how top managers make a broader set of strategic decisions. Nor is there sound,
comprehensive evidence or theory that points conclusively to better or worse ways to make
strategic decisions.


                                                                                                 5
To develop the survey instrument, we relied on two inputs. First, we reviewed the management
literature--much written for practitioners--that examines how executives do and should make
strategic decisions (e.g., Drucker, 1967; Garvin and Roberto, 2001; Mankin and Steele, 2005 and
2006; Lafley et al., 2012; Lafley and Martin, 2013). We synthesized the main descriptions and
prescriptions of that literature into a draft instrument.1 Second, we piloted the draft instrument with
a set of former chief executives whom we know well2 and with dozens of participants in the senior
executive education programs at HBS. These experienced "test pilots" helped us refine the
instrument. In response to their input, we added questions about critical aspects of decision making
that the literature review missed, eliminated questions deemed irrelevant in reality, and reframed
questions so that practicing managers would more clearly understand them.3


The resulting instrument consists mostly of short, open-ended questions with no finite set of
responses--questions like "Tell me about the discussions you have in order to select between
strategies?" rather than yes-no questions like "Do you discuss strategy in monthly meetings?" We
return below to why we use open-ended questions, what challenges such questions pose, and how
we address those challenges.


2.2 Scoring Strategy Practices
This development process yielded a survey instrument that focuses on three different areas of
Strategy Practice: Formalization, Development, and Implementation. Within each of these areas,
we characterized the approaches that each executive follows and then assessed where those
approaches fall on a spectrum that runs from informal, unstructured, reactive, and intuitive on one
end to formalized, consistent, proactive, and evidence-based on the other end.


1
  Notably, while this review allowed us to identify numerous topics, such as information usage, that seemed critical
for how executives make strategic decisions, given the noted lack of consensus within the management literature, we
remained neutral as to any direction or hypothesis regarding whether any specific practice would have any particular
effect on firms.
2
  We thank Kevin Sharer and Dan Simpson for their feedback in the initial stages of the survey development. See
Appendix 1 for more details on our cognitive testing procedure.
3
  For example, some of the literature suggested that high-performing executive teams might conduct a "vote" among
the team in order to finalize critical strategic decisions, and thus we asked executives during our pilot interviews if
they ever voted to make strategic decisions. Virtually none of our pilot interviewees engaged in this practice, and
many articulated compelling reasons as to why this was a potentially detrimental practice. In finalizing the survey
instrument, we therefore eliminated questions about voting.

                                                                                                                     6
To anchor CEO's responses to their actual process for making strategic decisions, at the beginning
of the interview we first gave the respondent a brief definition of a "strategic change" as any
decision that "significantly impacts your business or changes your strategy." We then gave
examples such as "significant investments," "entering a new line of business," or "entering a new
geographic area." We abstained from any more specific definitions of "strategic change," both
because what constitutes a "strategic decision" can vary significantly between firms (e.g. small vs.
large firms make strategy decisions on different scales) and to avoid confusing interviewees with
excessively abstract concepts. To ensure comparability of responses and to ensure that
interviewees' responses were reflective of their actual strategy practices, we also asked the
respondent to give us three different examples of "typical strategic changes" in his or her firm
from the previous five years. These examples served to both ground interviewees in their actual
process for making strategic decisions (versus a description of what they think they "should" be
doing) and kept the conversation from becoming too abstract. We referred back to these examples
throughout the interview to keep the conversation grounded. We also classified these decisions
independently into potentially overlapping sets of 17 different decision types, including "M&A,"
"new business," "geographic expansion," and so on. Appendix Table 1 provides details on the 17
different types of strategic changes into which we categorized the example decisions.


After this brief introduction, we proceeded to the first section of the instrument--on strategy
formalization (henceforth: Formalization). This section focused on the question, "How deliberate
and distinct is the strategy of the interviewee's company?" We considered three factors:
   (F1) Strategy statement: the ability of the executive to state concisely the goals, scope, and
         competitive advantage of his or her company (Collis and Ruckstad, 2008);
   (F2) Deliberate scope and advantage: whether the executive could articulate clearly the
         markets the companies prioritizes and the way it intends to win in those markets; and
   (F3) Deliberate strategic distinctiveness: whether the executive could say how the company
         differs from its main competitors.


The Formalization section therefore allowed us to capture ideas that are related to fundamental
concepts of strategy, such as strategy as the deliberate choice of "a different set of activities to


                                                                                                  7
deliver a unique mix of value" (Porter, 1996) or strategy as "key choices that guide other choices"
(Van den Steen, 2017).


The second section--on strategy development (henceforth: Development)--focused on the
questions, "What prompts executives to come up with ideas for strategic change, and how do they
evaluate these potential changes, even among alternative options?" Here we assessed whether the
decision-making process at the interviewee's firm included:
    (D1) Proactive scanning: whether firms actively searched the competitive environment for
           opportunities or, rather, responded to threats or performance downturns;
    (D2) Evidence-based decisions: whether firms utilized data to inform their strategic
           initiatives (and if so, which types of data) and explicitly formulated assumptions if
           information was missing;
    (D3) Regular strategy meetings: whether decision-making was embedded in routines and
           connected strategy with implementation;
    (D4) Effective strategy meetings: whether decisions were considered in well-prepared,
           discussion-based strategy meetings;
    (D5) Exploration of alternatives: whether there was a routinized processes to generate new
           strategic alternatives and ensure similar information on the feasibility and benefits of
           each alternative; and
    (D6) Systematic risk evaluation: whether there were processes for executives to voice
           potential concerns.


The section on Development therefore measured the degree to which a firm created a structured
(or unstructured) context that facilitates decision-making. These practices are related to the rational
decision-making requirements that Simon (1947) identifies. Rational decision makers--Simon
argues--list all alternatives, determine the consequences of alternative choices, and compare the
evaluations of all alternatives.4 These practices also shed light on the extent to which the executives

4
 While we do not claim that CEOs are capable of reaching the perfect rationality that Simon (1947) identifies, the
practices captured in this section serve to explicitly increase the rationality of the process for the decision-maker
beyond where they would be without these practices. Specifically, proactive scanning for opportunities (D1) and the
exploration of strategy alternatives (D5) directly expedite listing of all alternatives. Similarly, practices to base
decisions on evidence or explicit initial assumptions (D2) as well as regular discussions on operational feasibility (D3)


                                                                                                                       8
proactively try to counter psychological and social biases in decision making.5 Further, this survey
section incorporates direct measures of whether firms explicitly formulated initial assumptions
when data were lacking (D2) and when new alternatives were explored (D5). These practices are
related to the ability to formulate working hypotheses about the effect of strategies, which are
especially important in the context of very novel strategies for which data are scarce (Lafley,
Martin, Siggelkow and Rivkin, 2012; Zenger, 2013).6


The third section of the survey--on strategy implementation (henceforth: Implementation)--
aimed to answer the questions, "How are strategies executed, and how do executives learn from
strategy outcomes?" In particular, this section assessed the following factors:
    (I1) Implementation planning: whether executives anticipated potential implementation
           problems when they made strategic decisions;
    (I2) Effective strategy reviews: whether the firm conducted regular reviews of their strategic
           decisions' outcomes and their comparison to initial assumptions;
    (I3) Learning from outcomes: whether the firm routinized systematic validation of
           mechanisms and learning in the wake of surprises from strategic decisions;
    (I4) Strategy communication: whether executives regularly communicated strategies to
           employees outside top management; and
    (I5) Resistance accommodation: whether executives anticipated potential resistance to
           strategic decisions or changes outside of their firms' top management.


These questions allowed us to measure how structured strategy execution is, which in turn is
broadly related to two ideas of effective execution from Drucker (1967). In particular, Drucker




arguably lead to a better understanding of the consequences of different strategic choices. Finally, to promote the
objective evaluation of different alternatives, meetings on strategy development should be well-prepared and
structured to enhance discussions (D4) and should systematically seek out potential concerns (D6).
5
  Examples of potential biases these practices address are inattention (e.g. through regular strategy meetings, (D6),
and well-structured meetings (D7)), overconfidence (e.g. through evidence-based analysis, (D2), exploration of
alternatives, (D5), systematic risk evaluation (D6)), narrow framing (through exploration of alternatives, (D5)),
myopia or competitor neglect (though proactive scanning of the competitive environment (D1)) and group-think
(though exploration of alternatives, (D5) and systematic risk evaluation, (D6)).
6
  This practice can also be considered a necessary step to effectively learn from data and strategy outcomes as will be
captured in the section on implementation, which is described below.

                                                                                                                     9
argues that an effective decision process requires anticipation of key implementation issues7 as
well as mechanisms to track and learn from outcomes.8 These questions also captured the extent
to which executives formulate and test hypotheses while developing a strategy. Specifically, the
data captured in (I2) and (I3) measured the degree to which a firm compared initial assumptions
to outcomes and sought to understand the mechanisms through which strategy affects performance,
including through targeted key performance indicators (KPIs) or explicit experimentation. In
addition, we measured whether executives systematically analyzed the implications of surprising
outcomes, by separating design from luck and formulated strategy from implementation issues.
This is especially worth emphasizing in light of recent studies on the "scientific approach to
learning" as in Lafley, Martin, Siggelkow and Rivkin (2012), Zenger (2013), and Camuffo,
Cordova and Gambardella (2017) as well as the increased popularity of A/B testing among
companies (Athey, 2018).


Figure 1 shows our detailed scoring grid for strategy formalization, strategy development, and
strategy implementation as well as the open-ended questions with which we started each interview.
On each item, each interview received a score from 1--reflecting a very informal, unstructured,
reactive, and intuitive Strategy Practice--to 5--reflecting a highly formalized, consistent,
proactive, and evidence-based Practice.


2.3 Additional survey questions
Strategy decisions: number and speed
In addition to firms' Strategy Practices, as discussed above, the survey captured data on strategic
decision and implementation characteristics, as well as on the type of competitive advantage the
company pursues. To measure how quickly each firm makes and implements strategic decisions,

7
  Drucker (1967) summarizes this recommendation for the need to anticipate key implementation issues as follows:
"In fact, no decision has been made unless carrying it out in specific steps has become someone's work assignment
and responsibility. (...) One has to make sure that their measurements, their standards for accomplishment, and their
incentives are changed simultaneously." In our context, anticipation of key implementation issues is captured by the
extent of implementation planning (I1) and the degree of proactive strategy communication (I4) as well as proactive
defusing of possible resistance to change in (I5). Mechanisms to track and learn from strategy outcomes are captured
in the practices of effective strategy reviews (I2) and learning practices (I3).
8
  Drucker (1967) motivates the need for learning within the decision process as follows: "Finally, a feedback has to
be built into a decision to provide a continuous testing, against actual events, of the expectations that underlie the
decision. (...) One needs organized information for the feedback. One needs reports and figures. But unless one builds
one's feedback around direct exposure to reality--unless one disciplines oneself to go out and look--one condemns
oneself to a sterile dogmatism and with it to ineffectiveness."

                                                                                                                   10
we asked the respondent to estimate the average number of strategic decisions made over the
previous five years as well as the time it took to both make and implement strategic decisions for
each of the three typical examples of strategic decisions the respondent mentioned.


Firm characteristics
We collected data on several firm important firm characteristics at the end of the interviews. We
asked interviewees to describe the ownership structure of their firms and the founding year of the
firm, and where possible, we verified this information from third-party sources. Finally, we asked
for the number of full-time employees at the respondent company. Importantly, we asked all of
these questions at the end of the interview, lest any particular description of CEOs' firm
characteristics bias any subsequent responses.


We also merged our data into the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD), maintained by the US
Census Bureau. The LBD data offers two particularly attractive features that are helpful in
evaluating the analysis of firms, their Strategy Practices, and their potential performance. First, the
source of the data are IRS tax files, which are independently gathered from our survey
measurement efforts. Associated performance data are therefore plausibly free of any survey bias
in the reporting of performance. Second, both the reporting firms and the IRS have strong
incentives for truthful reporting, while the Census is strongly investing in maintaining longitudinal
links in the data, which enable us to reliably measure firm growth.


CEO characteristics
To help understand how various CEO characteristics might affect their strategic decision-making,
we collected three specific measures that capture each CEO's respective level of experience. As
our first and second measures of experience, we asked the CEOs for both their tenure at the
company and their tenure in their current position as CEO. For our third measure of CEO
experience, age, we did not directly ask for the respondent's age during the interview in order to
avoid any awkwardness. Instead, we used the following protocol to estimate respondent age from
public sources. We searched for the CEO's LinkedIn page, recorded their college graduation year,
and estimated age assuming that the CEO graduated at age 21. If there was no information on the
college graduation year, we relied on the date of graduation from HBS for MBAs. Since HBS


                                                                                                    11
typically requires work experience before entering the MBA program, we assumed that HBS
MBAs are 27 when they graduate. If neither of these steps yielded an approximate age, we reverted
to the interviewer's initial guess of the respondent's age.9


Noise controls and interviewer effects
We also recorded data that serve as possible interview noise controls, such as the time of day,
interview duration, and interviewer scores of respondent expertise about strategy practices and
respondent honesty. Since each person conducted multiple interviews, we are able to control for
interviewer fixed effects (none of which were significant in our models). Additionally, for a subset
of our firms (approximately 23%), we interviewed other C-level executives instead of the CEO
(such as the chief operating officer or chief financial officer) or board chairs, so we constructed a
non-CEO dummy variable as an additional control variable and also confirmed our main results
were robust on the 77% data subset of CEOs.


2.4 Sampling frame
Since we are interested in strategic decision making by the top decision makers within firms, our
ideal interviewees are CEOs or equally senior managers. Our sampling frame was drawn from the
population of alumni of Harvard Business School. While HBS alumni are not a representative
sample of all managers, focusing on HBS alumni presents several benefits. First, the fact that three
coauthors are affiliated with HBS helped us better reach and advertise the survey to a type of
manager who is notoriously hard to engage in surveys. While response rates of around 10% are
not unusual in CEO surveys (Ben-David, Graham and Harvey, 2013), focusing on HBS alumni
allowed us to achieve a response rate of over 30%. Second, variation in Strategy Practices among
managers who were exposed to a similar educational experience will likely represent a lower
bound to the actual variation that exists in the general population of managers. Third, this sample
enabled us to match the survey data with detailed information on the respondents' background and
education (e.g. graduation year, MBA vs. Executive Education), which allowed us to conduct
analyses that would be impossible otherwise. For instance, we can study the relationship between
education, Formalization, and Implementation.


9
 Occasionally during interviews, CEOs would independently mention their own age, in which cases we would replace
our age estimate with their own reported age.

                                                                                                             12
For this study, we chose to focus on the U.S., Canadian, and U.K. manufacturing sectors in order
to maximize the amount of performance-related data we would be able to obtain from the U.S.
Census Bureau LBD, as we anticipated (correctly) that the majority of our CEO interviewees
would work for privately-held firms with limited publicly-available performance data. To
construct our sample, we started with a sample of 3,100+ HBS MBA and Executive Education
alumni who were listed in the HBS alumni database as working in the manufacturing sector in the
U.S., U.K., and Canada. From this list, we selected managers with the title of CEO or equivalent
(e.g. president, managing director). As the information in the alumni database is self-reported, we
took several steps to further vet and verify the data. First, we extensively researched each executive
on our list using CapitalIQ, Factset, LinkedIn, and company websites to ensure that each individual
was still employed at his or her respective firm, in the target role of CEO or other C-Suite officer
(or equivalent). We required each executive to be employed at his or her respective firm for at least
a year. Next, we collected information on each of the listed firms in the database in order to confirm
that they were active in the manufacturing sector (e.g. a manufacturer of goods, as opposed to a
distributor or retailer of manufactured goods). Our research on individual firms also allowed us to
collect additional data on these respective firms, including six digits NAICS codes (from CapitalIQ
and Orbis), as well as location and contact information. Ultimately, these selection criteria left us
with a total of 863 CEOs and equivalent managers for our sampling frame. Of these, 63% were
alumni of the HBS MBA program, and 37% were graduates of the handful of HBS executive
education programs that grant alumni status.


2.5 Collecting accurate responses
We followed a simple protocol to recruit executives to participate in our telephone-based
interviews. We first sent each executive in our sampling frame a brief email message explaining
the purpose of our research and inviting him or her to participate in an hour-long interview.
Individuals who did not respond to our initial email received a follow-up request a week later.
Next, we telephoned the remaining executives in our frame to invite them to participate in our
study, following up again a week later if we did not receive a response. Executives who did not
respond to our two rounds of emails and telephone calls were not contacted further. Ultimately,



                                                                                                   13
we were able to conduct interviews with 262 executives from our sample frame (a response rate
of 30%).10


The survey was administered from Harvard Business School by a team of 6 interviewers and
scorers, mostly Harvard MBA graduates, in late 2017 and through 2018. Interviewers received a
total of 5 days of training, including several one-on-one practice sessions and mock interviews.


To ensure accurate responses, we explained to interviewees that we did not know what a "best
practice" is and were interested in understanding the strategy process of different companies. In
particular, to avoid leading respondents and to reduce social desirability bias, we used almost
exclusively open-ended questions throughout the survey. We took great care in balancing the scope
and wording of the question to, on the one hand, be specific enough that we would be able to get
clear, accurate responses, but also, on the other hand, not be so specific to risk "leading"
interviewees to provide responses that were not reflective of their actual Strategy Practices.


We took several additional steps to further reduce any pressure to provide socially desirable
answers. First, we assured interviewees that our conversations would be completely anonymous.
Second, we informed interviewees that we would not ask for any performance-related information
(to reduce any sense that interviewees might be assessed or judged according to their firms'
performance during the interviews)11 and that they were free to decline to answer any questions
they deemed too sensitive. Third, to further reduce any sense of assessment or judgment, the
interviewees were not told that they were being scored during the interview. Additionally, we
instructed the interviewers to be supportive and positive about any answers provided by
interviewees, irrespective of the nature of those responses or what they might reflect about a firm's
performance. Finally, to allow us to review the content of the interviews at a later date, we asked



10
   Within our sampling frame, interviewed firms were slightly more likely to be based in the US (using a linear
probability model in which the dependent variable is a dummy taking value=1 if the firm was ultimately interviewed,
the coefficient on the US dummy is 0.085 with the base being firms based in the UK and Canada, standard error
0.045). We were able to gather employment data for 522 firms in the sampling frame, of which 170 were interviewed.
In this subsample, we find that interviewed firms are smaller relative to non-interviewed firms (coefficient on log
employment controlling for country of location and SIC2 dummies is -0.024, standard error 0.008).
11
   This tactic provided the added benefit of reducing potential bias in the scoring of our interviews, as interviewers
and scorers were "blind" as to any potential connection between Strategy Practices and Firm Performance.

                                                                                                                   14
the interviewees for permission to record our conversations. The vast majority of our executives
agreed.


To minimize the risk that subjective interpretations of the interviewer were driving the scoring,
two people--a main interviewer and a second listener--scored each interview independently.
While a potential drawback of open-ended questions is that individual interviewers must use
judgment in scoring answers to such questions, having a second listener present in every interview
helped to reduce any errors in judgement or scoring. Throughout each interview, the interviewer
and the second listener were connected through a chat program so the second listener could suggest
clarification or follow-up questions in case a respondent's answers were vague or not sufficiently
clear.12 To minimize any potential biases or errors resulting from incorrect information recall if
interviews were scored following the interview, answers to each question were scored "live"
throughout the interview by both the interviewers and second listeners. After each interview, the
interviewer and second listener compared their scoring, discussed and reconciled any differences,
and recorded consensus scores which were used in our final analysis.


To gain additional information and accuracy of scoring during our interviews, we also used
software-supported funneling of responses: responses that suggested structured strategy process
automatically triggered follow-up questions on details of practices or specific examples. Appendix
2 discusses this practice in more detail.


2.6 Final sample
Some features of our 262 interviewees and their firms are summarized in Table 1, Panel A. First,
the average firm in our sample reports around 2,000 employees, and the average firm is more than
47 years old, which highlights that our sample is dominated by very large and successful firms.
However, the large reported standard deviations show that our sample exhibits a high degree of
heterogeneity across firms, from large multi-national enterprises to entrepreneurial start-ups.
Second, ownership patterns are evenly distributed, with the largest fraction of firms owned by



12
  As with the main questions in the interview, we instructed interviewers to word their follow-up carefully to prevent
the asking of "leading" questions that might inadvertently pressure interviewees to provide a socially desirable
response.

                                                                                                                   15
private companies.13 Publicly listed companies constitute around 11% of the sample and are
therefore strongly overrepresented compared to the U.S. economy.14 None of the CEOs we
interviewed work for a government-owned company, and 20% work in a family-owned firm.
Third, most firms in our sample sell at least some of their products or services to other businesses,
while a large portion sell at least some of their products to consumers.


Among the executives we surveyed, 91 percent were male. The average respondent was 57 years
old, had been with the same company for 17 years, and had been in his or her current position for
nearly 14 years. Around 30 percent our interviewees reported having an undergraduate degree in
either business, economics, finance, or accounting. Over 70 percent of respondents held an MBA
from HBS, while the rest attended executive education courses at HBS.15


3. Heterogeneity of Structured Strategy Process


We now move to the first of our three sets of findings: a description of how much strategy
processes vary across firms. We approach this question in two steps. First, we characterize the
overall distribution of strategy processes. Second, we contrast within-industry heterogeneity in the
degree of structured strategy process versus across-industry heterogeneity.


3.1 Overall distribution of strategy practices
We utilize a simple procedure to aggregate the answers from each interviewee into a single
metric--the Strategy Practices score. We first standardize the score on each of the 14 items shown
in Figure 1 and then take the average of scores across all items. Finally, these constructed z-scores
are standardized again for ease of interpretation. To ensure the robustness of this method, we
experimented with different ways to aggregate the data, such as principal component analysis and


13
   The five main types of ownership we observe are founder ownership, family ownership, other private ownership,
ownership by other companies (such as venture capital or private equity firms), and the distributed ownership of a
publicly traded company.
14
   There are over 7 million employee firms in the US and 4,000 publicly listed companies, so public companies
represent less than 0.1% of all US employee firms.
15
   Executive education participants at HBS can attain alumni status only if they have attended one of the so-called
"comprehensive leadership programs". These are long programs, typically 8-12 weeks in duration.



                                                                                                                16
clustering and found that our pre-specified way to group the questions was very similar to these
alternatives. We follow a similar procedure to construct individual metrics for each of the three
sections within the interview: Formalization, Development, and Implementation.


Table 1, Panel B provides the summary statistics for the strategy scores, which we compute based
on the full range of possible responses. We use the 1-to-5 scale from Figure 1 and display the
average across questions in each section for each CEO. We observe a minimum average score of
1.56 and a maximum of 3.89 for the overall Structured Strategy Process score. Even in our very
selected sample of HBS alumni, Strategy Practices range from highly gut-driven to very structured.
The table also provides breakdowns into subcategories of Formalization, Development, and
Implementation, as well as even more detailed breakdowns by question. Overall, Development
scores display the greatest dispersion, followed by Implementation and Formalization. All
questions display the full range of possible values, highlighting that our survey instrument captures
a realistic range of practices and that no practice had entries so very high that no company attained
them. For additional clarity, Figure 2 displays a histogram of the Strategy Practice score as well
as histograms for the sub-scores, showing that the overall distribution of our Strategy Practice
scores are continuously distributed along our scoring grid. This further suggests that our measures
capture more than just the extreme differences between purely intuitive and highly structured
decision-making. If this were the case, one would have expected bunching at the extremes in the
histograms.


To understand the potential relationships between different areas of Strategy Practice, we also
analyze correlations among the strategy sub-scores. Development is strongly correlated with both
Formalization and Implementation, while Formalization and Implementation are negatively and
insignificantly correlated. This same pattern can be found at the level of individual questions:
companies that are strongly structured on some dimensions can be relatively unstructured on other
dimensions. This is in contrast to prior surveys (Bloom and Van Reenen, 2007), where different
dimensions of management practices (e.g., operations and HR) tended to be highly correlated with
each other. Our findings of differing correlations has at least two different interpretations. First, in
contrast to the operational practices measured in the World Management Survey, there may be less
complementarity between different dimensions of strategic decision making. Alternatively,


                                                                                                     17
different aspects of strategic decision making may actually be complementary in principle (e.g.,
having a more systematic way to choose among alternative strategies may provide more benefit to
firms that are also more systematic in strategy implementation), but executives might not have
acted on these complementarities in practice. Our data does not currently allow us to distinguish
fully between these two possible explanations.


3.2 Within- vs. across-industry variation
A natural question to ask is how important industry differences are for understanding differences
in Strategy Practices. It is well known that firms in the same narrow industry can deliver very
different economic performance and that industry effects often play only a limited role in
explaining performance differences (McGahan and Porter, 1997; Ruefli and Wiggins, 2003;
Syverson, 2011; Gibbons and Henderson, 2012). One reason to think that industry effects might
be rather limited in our current data is our targeted sample includes only manufacturing firms. On
the other hand, the range of manufacturing sectors in our sample includes data-driven and IP-
intensive industries such as pharmaceuticals and biotechnology as well as more traditional capital-
intensive manufacturing industries such as industrial machinery and textile mills.


In practice, industry effects appear to have little explanatory power for the strategy scores. When
we regress the strategy scores on three-digit NAICS industry fixed effects, industry effects have
very low adjusted !! s, such as -0.02 for the overall structured strategy score, -0.04 for the strategy
formalization score, -0.01 for the strategy development score, and -0.00 for the strategy
formalization score. Even at finer industry aggregations, such as 6-digit NAICS, the adjusted !!
for the overall structured strategy score is only 0.0457, which is very low considering that we use
132 industry categories for a sample of over 260 firms.16 Overall, a CEO's specific industry
environment appears to offer little explanatory power for the differences we observe in how much
firms structure their strategic decision-making process.




16
  Generally, F-tests of the joint significance of industry dummies hovers around a value of 1 across specification, i.e.
industry fixed effects are jointly insignificant.

                                                                                                                     18
4. Structured Strategy Process and Firm Performance


In our second set of findings, we examine the degree to which Strategy Practices correlate with
firm performance, using as proxies firm size (measured in terms of number of employees), growth,
and the number and speed of strategic decisions made in the firm.


4.1 Firm size
We start with an analysis of the relation between Strategy Practices and firm size. The basic
measure of firm size we utilize here comes from the end of our survey, where we ask about the
number of full-time employees at the respondent company. Firm size as measured by employment
is informative about the underlying productivity of firms, as it is well-documented that larger firms
tend to have higher productivity (Bartelsman and Doms, 2000). Our baseline regression analysis
of size controls for 3-digit NAICS industry effects.


Figure 3 shows the unconditional correlation between firm employment and our Strategy Practices
score, and Table 2, column (1) provides statistical evidence that larger firms exhibit systematically
higher levels of Strategy Practices.17 Column (2) shows the robustness of the relationship to the
inclusion of log firm age, and column (3) to other controls that are correlated with the adoption of
different Strategy Practices, and may at the same time correlate with firm size, such as CEO age,
CEO tenure in the firm, whether the firm is publicly listed, and whether the firm is family-owned.18


The table also shows the breakdown of Strategy Practices into its components of Formalization,
Development, and Implementation and their respective correlations with firm size. As columns
(4)-(6) show, all subcomponents are positively and significantly correlated with firm size.
Furthermore, the results in column (7) indicate that the sub-components--with the exception of
Implementation--capture at least some variation that is independent of each other.



17
   All specifications include noise controls (interviewer fixed effects, time of day, interview duration, ratings of
interviewee expertise and interviewee reliability and non-CEO dummy) and industry fixed effects (3 digit NAICS
dummies).
18
   We examine the correlation between Strategy Practices and these variables in Appendix Table 2. We find that the
Strategy Practices score is significantly higher in publicly owned firms and significantly lower for older CEOs and
CEOs who have been in their position for a longer time period.

                                                                                                                 19
The quantitative implications of the correlation between firm size and Strategy Practices are
substantial. To interpret the coefficients, remember that the measures we used are standardized z-
scores, which implies that the coefficients capture a one standard deviation association of the
independent variable to the Strategy Practice score. Specifically, a one standard deviation increase
in Strategy Practices is associated with a 1.92-fold (= exp(0.655)) increase in firm size (using
the coefficient from column 3). Of course, we cannot interpret this as a causal relationship. More
formalized strategy processes may help firms expand, or larger firms may formalize their strategy
processes, or some other factor may drive both.


4.2 Firm size/growth in administrative data
To strengthen the external validity of our Strategy Practices measures and obtain additional
measures of firm performance, we next merged our data into the US Census Bureau's Longitudinal
Business Database (LBD). Unfortunately, confidentiality considerations force us to drop some of
the largest firms, and the current vintage of LBD data (which ends in 2016), limits our ability to
match the very small and young (typically entrepreneurial) firms in our main sample in the Census
data. Both of these factors are likely to reduce the overall variation in our data and might therefore
plausibly attenuate our baseline results.


The first two columns of Table 3 report the correlation results for firm size which correspond to
similar regressions in Table 2. Compared to results using our survey-internal measures of firm
size, effects remain significant but are somewhat smaller in magnitude, yet still economically
important. According to column (2), a one-standard deviation increase in Strategy Practices is
associated with a 1.58-fold (= exp(0.464)) increase in firm size, which is only slightly smaller
than the relationship we find in Table 2.


We also investigate the relationship between the structured strategy process score and firm growth
and find that more structured Strategy Practices are positively correlated with a variety of growth
measures. We measure firm growth in the LBD by using symmetric firm growth measures
                                                                            # $#
proposed by Davis, Haltiwanger and Schuh (1996), -" = 2  0#! %#!"# 1for 3 = {1, 5}.
                                                                             !     !"#

Additionally, we control for initial firm size, to capture any mean-reversion effects in firm growth
patterns (Dunne, Roberts and Samuelson, 1987; 1989) and use firm-level clustering for standard

                                                                                                   20
errors. The last four columns of Table 3 report the results. Columns (3) and (4) display short-run
correlations of Strategy Practices and firm growth as measured in annual growth rates. These
results are quantitatively and statistically significant. According to column (4), a one standard
deviation increase in the Strategy Practices score is associated with an increase in the annual
growth rates by an average of 4.7%. These results continue to hold for long-run growth rates, as
measured by overlapping 5-year growth rate measures in columns (5) and (6). In the long-run
growth analysis, a one standard deviation increase in the Strategy Practices score is associated with
a 9.5% increase in the firm growth rate over a 5-year horizon, which remains an economically
important effect.


4.3 The number and speed of strategic decisions
We next analyze the extent to which more structured Strategy Practices are related to the number
of strategic changes a firm undertakes or the speed of its decision-making and implementation.


The outcome we examine here is, in essence, a management team's capacity to make and execute
decisions. On a conceptual level, the idea that "getting things done" is a key task for effective
executives can be traced back at least to Drucker (1967) and continues to be popular (Gibbons,
Matoushek and Roberts, 2012). Indeed, authors such as Mankins and Steele (2006) have argued
that the number of decisions made by an organization is a natural metric to evaluate the quality of
any strategic decision-making process. The speed of decision-making and implementation matters
for almost any context but is especially valuable in very competitive and fast-changing
environments (D'Aveni, Dagnino and Smith, 2010).


This section sheds light on whether a more structured strategy process is positively or negatively
correlated with executives' capacity to make and execute decisions. Either is possible in theory.
On the one hand, a management team with structured processes may possess well-honed routines
(Nelson and Winter, 1982) that allow them to work through a large number of decisions effectively
and quickly. On the other hand, structured processes may cause "paralysis by analysis" and delay
strategic change (Peters, Waterman, and Jones, 1982; Lentz and Lyles, 1989). This is a major
criticism of the traditional long-range strategic planning systems of the 1970s (Mintzberg, 1994).
Intuitive decision-making, in contrast, may lead to almost immediate and surprisingly accurate


                                                                                                  21
decisions, as cognitive psychologists such as Klein (2004) and other researchers (Eisenhardt &
Bingham, 2017) have argued.


Our analysis here reveals that more structured Strategy Practices have both a positive and a
negative effect on firms' ability to make decisions. In Table 4, we report that more structured
Strategy Practices are significantly and positively associated with the number of decisions made,
but a higher score is also associated with a longer time spent in decision-making. (All regressions
include the basic firm, CEO, and noise controls included in Table 2.) A one standard deviation
increase in the overall structured strategy processes score is associated with a 13% increase in the
number of decisions made (with the results driven by the Implementation score) and 28% longer
time required to reach a decision (driven by the Development score). Interestingly, we find that
implementation speed is not significantly different for firms with highly structured decision
processes.


These results suggest that firms with higher Strategy Practice scores experience countervailing
effects. On the one hand, they are able to multi-task and pursue several strategic initiatives at the
same time, but on the other hand, their deliberations are slower and take extra time. Once a decision
is made, however, structured processes do not appear to delay implementation.




5. The Impact of Business Education on Strategic Decision Making


The vast heterogeneity in the Strategy Practices that CEOs employ raises an important question:
What accounts for these large differences? In this section, we examine one mechanism that may
have contributed to this heterogeneity: the CEOs' exposure to different business curricula. To do
so, we take advantage of the fact that our interviewees who obtained their MBA at HBS
collectively experienced a sharp discontinuous change in the MBA strategy curriculum: the 1983
appointment of Michael Porter--a leading strategy academic --as head of the required HBS MBA
strategy course.




                                                                                                  22
We examine whether this change (or "shock") ­ which is plausibly exogenous to cohorts that
joined HBS just before and just after Porter was appointed head of the strategy course ­ alters parts
of the WSS score for which the curriculum change is likely to have been most consequential:
Formalization and Implementation. In particular, we argue that Porter and the HBS instructors who
followed his lead gave students a framework to analyze the external competitive environment
systematically as they crafted strategy. As the curriculum shifted to focus on analyzing the external
environment and formulating more structured strategies, it paid less attention to strategy
implementation. Therefore, we would expect interviewees trained after Porter's appointment to
rely more on deliberate considerations as they make strategic scope choices in the formulation of
their strategies; the curriculum changes should particularly influence answers to question F2 of
our survey. We would also expect interviewees trained after Porter's overhaul of the strategy
course to have less structured implementation practices (I1-I5), due to the topic's de-emphasis in
the curriculum.


5.1 Institutional history
Some history of Harvard Business School is necessary to motivate our analysis. A longtime
hallmark of the HBS MBA curriculum was the Business Policy course. Launched in 1912, only
four years after the school's founding, the course emphasized from its earliest days features that
would become central concepts in business strategy, such as a focus on "the intimate connection
of [functional] groups" and "the substitution of careful, conscious analysis of managerial problems
for unconscious analysis" (Harvard University, 1915: 35-36). Business Policy became a required
course in 1920-21 and soon stretched across the entire second year of the MBA curriculum. In the
1950s and 1960s, professors such as C. Roland Christensen, Kenneth Andrews, and Edmund
Learned used Business Policy to implant the term "strategy" in management education (Andrews,
1971). As Kiechel (2010) writes, the Business Policy course through the 1970s emphasized general
managerial skills instead of analytic frameworks to understand the situation of a company.19


19
   Kiechel (2010) summarizes the philosophy behind the pre-Porter HBS "Business Policy" education as follows:
"What Andrews and his colleagues in the Business Policy course resolutely refused to do--and the main reason his
ideas largely disappear from the subsequent history of strategy--was to agree that there were standard frameworks or
constructs that could be applied to analyzing a business and its competitive situation. Oh, they might allow one,
perhaps because they had helped develop it: so-called SWOT analysis, which called for looking at the strengths,
weaknesses, opportunities, and threats besetting an enterprise. But nothing more schematic and hard-edged than that.


                                                                                                                 23
Analysis in the course was careful and conscious, but it was hardly structured or systematic.
Moreover, analysis focused more on the inside of a company than on its external environment.


While the course evolved gradually and incrementally over the decades, more fundamental
changes happened to the course and its content in the late 1970 and early 1980s. In 1979, a desire
to have an integrative course earlier in the MBA curriculum caused HBS faculty to split Business
Policy into two separate courses (Porter and Siggelkow, 1999). Business Policy I would be taught
in the second term of the MBA's first year and would emphasize the formulation of formal
strategy. Business Policy II would remain in the second year and focus on strategy implementation.


In 1983, Michael Porter became the head of Business Policy I in what traditionalists at HBS saw
as a Dean-mandated takeover. He completely overhauled the curriculum and introduced new
course content built upon his recent research in Industrial Organization, captured in his first book,
Competitive Strategy (1980). Porter, a young upstart economist, had used deep contact with
managers when teaching executive education courses, as well as an MBA elective, to pioneer
insights on industry analysis (Porter, 1979) and to define the elements of strategic choice (Porter,
1985). In sharp contrast to the "fuzzier" notions of strategy historically taught in Business Policy,
Porter offered a discrete, holistic framework to evaluate the attractiveness of an industry, drawing
on insights from the literature on Structure-Conduct-Performance in Industrial Organization. A
key innovation of this framework was that it took a broad view of potential sources of competition.
Porter's course encouraged students to go beyond incumbent rivals and take into account firms
that might not yet exist (potential entrants) or firms that offer different products but satisfy similar
underlying needs (substitutes). Furthermore, while firms cooperate with upstream suppliers and
downstream customers to create value, they also compete with suppliers and customers to claim
value in the form of profits. Porter's version of Business Policy I, soon renamed Competition &
Strategy, would go on to become one of the most influential courses at HBS and to be formative
for an entire generation of CEOs.




Individual companies and industries were just too idiosyncratic, and the ambitions and values of their managers too
rich and varied to be mapped on any single template."



                                                                                                                24
Using material from the HBS archives, we sought to examine and confirm the nature of Porter's
changes to the Business Policy I course curriculum over the full timespan when our MBA alumni
interviewees attended HBS. Appendix 4 compares the course description for the year prior to
Porter's restructuring (1982) to the course description for his first year (1983). The contrast is
striking. While the 1982 course pays little attention to a firm's external context ("competition or
adverse circumstances"), the overhauled 1983 course devotes substantial attention to analyzing
and understanding a firm's competitive environment as a determinant of its success and
performance. While the 1982 course description places heavy emphasis on the importance of
general management of the entire enterprise (i.e. "what needs to be done"), the 1983 course
description clearly moves away from any deep focus on issues related to management, execution,
and implementation.20


5.2 Econometric specifications
We use this sudden, radical, and exogenous (to the students) change in the core strategy curriculum
in 1983 at HBS as the source of a regression discontinuity that allows us to quantify the causal
impact of MBA education on Formalization and Implementation. We use HBS MBA cohort years
as the running variable for a regression discontinuity design (RDD). To fix ideas, let 8& be the
MBA cohort year of CEO 9 and :& different outcomes, such as strategic choices or a measure of
strategy formalization. Using the potential outcomes framework, the econometric specification can
be written as


                                   :& = ;(8& ) + ='  1{)$ *'+,-} + >&                                           (2)


where >& is a random error and ;() is a continuous function. The key identification assumption in
this approach is that unobserved characteristics of MBAs entering HBS are continuous, while only
the change in the HBS strategy curriculum is discontinuous. We use a step function 1{)$ *'+,-} to
estimate the effect, both because it is less problematic in terms of potential model misspecification
and because data requirements for estimation are less demanding, which is important for our


20
   In order to confirm this de-emphasis of implementation topics in the curriculum, we also interviewed veteran faculty
at HBS who confirmed that following Porter's changes to the course, discussions of implementation faded from the
curriculum.

                                                                                                                      25
application given our limited sample. Our baseline specification uses a local, non-parametric RDD
using the optimal bandwidth selection procedure of Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2012), which in
our case is 3 years before and after 1983. Additionally, we use a global or parametric approach to
equation (2), which uses all 185 observations and specifies the functional form of ;(8& ) either as
second order polynomial ;(8& ) =  ;'  8& + ;!  8&! or third order polynomial ;(8& ) =  ;'  8& +
;!  8&! + ;-  8&- . This increases the precision of our estimates at the expense of potential bias from
the misspecification of the functional form for ;(8& ). Furthermore, more complex and flexible
functional forms for ;(8& ) will lead to overfitting, thereby eventually rendering the estimates less
precise again. In Appendix 5, we use different optimal bandwidth approaches as well as the global
parametric approaches to show estimates for all sub-questions.

5.3 Results
We start our results by reporting the distribution of the MBA subsample of CEOs across graduation
years.21 Figure 4 shows the number of potential and realized MBA interviewees (within our target
set of manufacturing industries) in the HBS alumni database by graduation year. Importantly, the
response rates do not seem to differ significantly for the cohorts immediately before 1983
compared to the cohorts following 1983. This is reassuring, as it is consistent with the view that
selection implies only continuous changes along unobservable dimensions.


We then estimate the effect of the HBS strategy curriculum restructuring on two subsets of the
Strategy Practices included in our survey that are more likely to have been affected by the
curriculum change: strategy Formalization and Implementation. Specifically, given the curriculum
changes, one would expect Porter's influence to make aspects of strategy related to the scope of
the firm, competitive advantage, and strategic distinctiveness (captured in questions F2 and F3) to
be more salient to managers, and implementation practices (captured in questions I1 to I5) to be
less relevant to them.


The main results of this analysis are shown in Table 5, Panels A and B, which presents the RDD
results. Starting with the top left of Panel A, we show that CEOs who were exposed to the

21
  We restrict our sample for this analysis to only the MBA graduates in our sample because we are unable to collect
data on and therefore observe and specify which, if any, comparable changes may have occurred in HBS's executive
education programs.

                                                                                                                26
restructured HBS MBA core curriculum were more likely to make deliberate, structured strategy
scope choices and therefore had higher degrees of Formalization. This result is shown for two
common non-parametric regression discontinuity estimators, plus a parametric estimator with
quadratic and cubic controls.


In Panel B we investigate how Porter's changes to the curriculum affect implementation-related
Strategy Practices, represented in questions I1-I5, as our observation of curriculum changes
suggested the possibility of additional effects. In line with the changes to the course curriculum
described above, we find that the cohort of students first exposed to Porter's courses appear to
have lower Implementation scores, which is significant for the non-parametric estimators but not
for the parametric estimators. In other words, the apparent de-emphasis of implementation-related
topics which we observe from the Business Policy/Strategy course descriptions appears to have
had the effect of de-emphasizing these practices among the firms in our sample.22


The combined evidence of the "Porter Effect" on CEO's Strategy Practices presents an interesting
picture of countervailing effects with potentially substantial consequences for firms' executives.
On the one hand, exposure to Porter's work appears to have caused a positive increase in the
structure of firms' Formalization Practices, but on the other hand, that same exposure appears to
have reduced the structure of firms' Implementation Practices.


6. Conclusion


A fundamental task of managers is to make decisions, and no decisions of top executives are more
consequential than the decisions that set a firm's strategic direction. Yet prior empirical literature
in strategy is largely silent on the question of how chief executives make strategic decisions,
despite long-standing calls to answer it (Porter, 1991). In this paper, we have aimed to begin
answering that question.


In seeking to answer this critical question, our paper makes several contributions. Our first
contribution is to develop techniques to collect data systematically on the strategy-making

22
     We show the results for all the individual questions included in the survey in Appendix Table 2.

                                                                                                        27
processes of chief executives. Toward this end, we devised a novel survey instrument that
examines the formalization, development, and implementation of strategy. We used open-ended
questions and highly trained interviewers to gather data on how 262 HBS-educated chief
executives make choices. In particular, we assessed the degree to which they use structured
Strategy Practices that promote consistent, proactive, and evidence-based decision making.


Our second contribution is to demonstrate that these CEOs display profound heterogeneity in their
Strategy Practices. The utilization of these Strategy Practices varied both between and within
industries. Even though the CEOs share a similar educational background, their processes span the
spectrum from highly gut-driven and intuitive to highly structured.


Our third contribution is to show that, along this spectrum of decision-making processes, the CEOs
who use more structured processes tend to share certain characteristics. Compared to their gut-
driven counterparts, they lead firms that are larger and faster growing. They make more strategic
decisions in total, but also take more time to make each decision. Once again, however, we note
that these findings are correlative, not causal, relationships.


Our fourth contribution is to suggest one possible source for the variation among executives'
processes for making strategic decisions. Thanks to a unique aspect of our sample--its focus on
Harvard Business School alumni--we have some causal evidence that management education
matters. In particular, CEOs exposed to a curriculum that emphasized systematic analysis of the
external environment utilize a different set of Strategy Practices, making their strategy scope
decisions more deliberately than do their predecessors who received a less analytical education.
The data also show that the more intense focus on scope might have crowded out attention to
practices related to strategy implementation. Remarkably, the impact of this sudden change in
HBS's curriculum on how CEOs make decisions can be discerned decades after the shift occurred.


Much remains to be learned about how chief executives make strategic decisions. Further
investigation of executives' processes for making strategic decisions in other geographies, in other
sectors of the economy, or among non-HBS graduates, for instance, will likely reveal additional
insights on this important topic. Subsequent studies might aim for more causal evidence, of either


                                                                                                 28
the antecedents or the consequences of differences in decision-making processes. We hope that
this paper makes the case that follow-up work is worthwhile and clarifies how such work might
be conducted.




                                                                                           29
References

Abadie, A. and G. Imbens, 2006. Large sample properties of matching estimators for average
treatment effects. Econometrica
Andrews, K., 1971. The Concept of Corporate Strategy, Richard D. Irwin, Homewood.
Athey, S., 2018. "The Impact of Machine Learning on Economics" in The Economics of Artificial
Intelligence: An Agenda. University of Chicago Press.
Bandiera, O. Hansen, S., A. Prat and R. Sadun, 2019. "CEO Behavior and Firm
Performance", Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
Bartelsman, E.J. and Doms, M., 2000. "Understanding Productivity: Lessons from Longitudinal
Microdata," Journal of Economic Literature, 38(3), pp.569-594.
Ben-David, I., Graham, J.R. and Harvey, C.R., 2013. "Managerial Miscalibration," The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(4), pp.1547-1584.
Bertrand, M. and Schoar, A., 2003. "Managing with Style: The Effect of Managers on Firm
Policies," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4), pp.1169-1208.
Bingham, C.B., Eisenhardt, K.M. and Furr, N.R., 2007. "What Makes a Process a Capability?
Heuristics, Strategy, and Effective Capture of Opportunities," Strategic Entrepreneurship
Journal, 1(12), pp.27-47.
Bloom, N., Brynjolfsson, E., Foster, L., Jarmin, R., Patnaik, M., Saporta-Eksten, I. and Van
Reenen, J., 2019. "What Drives Differences in Management Practices?" American Economic
Review, 109(5), pp.1648-83.
Bloom, N. and J. Van Reenen, 2007. "Measuring and Explaining Management Practices Across
Firms and Countries," Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Bloom, N. and J. Van Reenen, 2010. New Approaches to Surveying Organizations. American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings
Bower, J.L., 1972. Managing the Resource Allocation Process: A Study of Corporate Planning
and Investment. Homewood: Irwin.
Burgelman, R.A., 1996. "A Process Model for Strategic Business Exit: Implications for an
Evolutionary Perspective on Strategy" Strategic Management Journal, 17, pp. 193-214.
Calonico, S., Cattaneo, M. and T. Titiunuk, 2017. Robust data-driven inference in the regression
discontinuity design, Stata Journal.
Camuffo, A., Cordova, A. and A. Gambardella, 2017. "A Scientific Approach to
Entrepreneurial Decision-Making: Evidence from a Randomized Control Trial," CEPR Discussion
Paper.
Collis, D. and G. Ruckstad, 2008. "Can You Say What Your Strategy Is?" Harvard Business
Review.



                                                                                             30
D'Aveni, R.A., Dagnino, G.B. and Smith, K.G., 2010. "The Age of Temporary
Advantage," Strategic Management Journal, 31(13), pp.1371-1385.
Davis, J., Eisenhardt, K. and C. Bingham, 2009. "Optimal Structure, Market Dynamism, and
the Strategy of Simple Rules," Administrative Science Quarterly.
Davis, S., Haltiwanger J. and S. Schuh, 1996. Job Creation and Destruction. MIT Press.
De Loecker, J., Eeckhout, J., and G. Unger (2020) The Rise of Market Power and the
Macroeconomic Implications. Quarterly Journal of Economics
Drucker, P., 1967. The Effective Executive, New York: Harper and Row.
Dunne, T., Roberts, M. and L. Samuelson, 1987. Patterns of firm entry and exit in US
manufacturing industries. RAND Journal of Economics
Dunne, T., Roberts, M. and L. Samuelson, 1989. The growth and failure of US manufacturing
plants. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Eisenhardt, K. and C. Bingham, 2017. "Superior Strategy in Entrepreneurial Settings: Thinking,
Doing, and the Logic of Opportunity," Strategy Science.
Fuji, D., Imbens, G. and K. Kalyanaraman. 2009. Notes for Matlab and Stata Regression
Discontinuity Software, mimeo Harvard University
Eisenhardt, K.M. and Sull, D.N., 2001. "Strategy as Simple Rules," Harvard Business
Review, 79(1), pp.106-119.
Garvin, D. and Roberto, M., 2001. "What You Don't Know about Making Decisions," Harvard
Business Review.
Gibbons, R. and Henderson, R., 2012. "Relational Contracts and Organizational
Capabilities," Organization Science, 23(5), pp.1350-1364.
Gibbons, R., Matouschek, N. and Roberts, J., 2013. "Decisions in Organizations," The
Handbook of Organizational Economics, pp.373-431.
Graebner, M.E. and Eisenhardt, K.M., 2004. "The Seller's Side of the Story: Acquisition as
Courtship and Governance as Syndicate in Entrepreneurial Firms," Administrative Science
Quarterly, 49(3), pp.366-403.
Harvard University, 1915. "The Graduate School of Business Administration [HBS Course
Catalog]."
Heath, C. and Heath, D., 2013. Decisive: How to Make Better Choices in Life and Work, Random
House.
Imbens, G. and K. Kalyanaraman, 2012. Optimal bandwidth choice for the regression
discontinuity estimator. Review of Economic Studies
Jung, J. and T. Shin, 2018. "Learning Not to Diversify: The Transformation of Graduate Business
Education and the Decline of Diversifying Acquisitions," Academy of Management Quarterly.



                                                                                            31
Kiechel, W., 2010. Lords of Strategy: The Secret Intellectual History of the New Corporate World,
Harvard Business Press.
Klein, G.A., 2004. Sources of Power: How People Make Decisions, MIT Press.
Krogerus, M. and Tschäppeler, R., 2012. The Decision Book: 50 Models for Strategic Thinking,
WW Norton & Company.
Lafley, A. and R. Martin, 2013. Playing to Win: How Strategy Really Works, Harvard Business
Press.
Lafley, A.G., Martin, R.L., Rivkin, J.W. and Siggelkow, N., 2012. "Bringing Science to the Art
of Strategy," Harvard Business Review, 90(9), pp.3-12.
Lenz R. T., Lyles M. A. 1983. "Crippling effects of "hyper-rational" planning." Faculty working
paper no. 965., Gollege of Gommerce and Business Administration, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Ghampaign.
MacKinnon, J. G. 2013. Thirty years of heteroskedasticity-robust inference. In: Recent
Advances and Future Directions in Causality, Prediction, and Specification Analysis: Essays in
Honor of Halbert L. White Jr., ed. X. Chen and N. R. Swanson, 437­461. New York: Springer.
Mankins, M.C. and Steele, R., 2005. "Turning Great Strategy into Great Performance," Harvard
Business Review.
Mankins, M.C. and Steele, R., 2006. "Stop Making Plans; Start Making Decisions," Harvard
Business Review, 84(1), p.76.
McGahan, A.M. and Porter, M.E., 1997. "How Much Does Industry Matter, Really?" Strategic
Management Journal, 18(S1), pp.15-30.
Miles, R.E., Snow, C.C., Meyer, A.D. and Coleman Jr, H.J., 1978. "Organizational Strategy,
Structure, and Process," Academy of Management Review, 3(3), pp.546-562.
Mintzberg, H., 1994. "The Fall and Rise of Strategic Planning," Harvard Business Review, 72(1),
pp.107-114.
Mintzberg, H., 2009. Managers Not MBAs: A Hard Look at the Soft Practice of Managing and
Management Development, Berrett-Koehler Publishers.
Nelson, C.R. and Winter, S., 1982. Organizational Capabilities and Behavior: An Evolutionary
Theory of Economic Change, Belknap Press of Harvard University.
Nichols, A. 2011. rd 2.0: Revised Stata module for regression discontinuity estimation.
http://ideas.repec.org/c/boc/bocode/s456888.html
Peters, T.J., Waterman, R.H. and Jones, I., 1982. In Search of Excellence: Lessons from
America's Best-Run Companies.
Porter, M., 1980. Competitive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing Industries and Competitors,
Free Press.



                                                                                              32
Porter, M., 1985. Competitive Advantage: Creating and Sustaining Superior Performance, Free
Press.
Porter, M., 1991. "Towards a Dynamic Theory of Strategy" Strategic Management Journal, 12,
pp. 95-117.
Porter, M., 1996. "What is Strategy?" Harvard Business Review.
Porter, M. and Siggelkow, N., 1999. "Competition and Strategy: The Creation of a Group and a
Field," in T.K. McCraw and J.L. Cruikshank, The Intellectual Venture Capitalist, Harvard
Business School Press.
Ruefli, T.W. and Wiggins, R.R., 2003. "Industry, Corporate, and Segment Effects and Business
Performance: A NonParametric Approach," Strategic Management Journal, 24(9), pp.861-879.
Simon, H.A., 1947. Administrative Behavior: A Study of Decision-Making Processes in
Organizations, MacMillan, Inc.
Sull, D.N. and Eisenhardt, K.M., 2015. Simple Rules: How to Thrive in a Complex World.
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
Syverson, C., 2011. "What Determines Productivity?" Journal of Economic Literature, 49(2),
pp.326-65.
Teti, K., Yang, MJ, Bloom, N., Rivkin, J. and Sadun, R. 2017. "The Different Approaches
Firms Use to Set Strategy", Harvard Business Review Online Blog
Tirole, J., 1988. The Theory of Industrial Organization, MIT Press.
Van den Steen, E., 2017. "A Formal Theory of Strategy," Management Science.
Peters, T.J., Waterman, R.H. and Jones, I., 1982. In Search of Excellence: Lessons from
America's Best-Run Companies.
Porter, M., 1980. Competitive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing Industries and Competitors,
Free Press.
Zenger, T., 2013. "What is the Theory of Your Firm?" Harvard Business Review.

-------------------------------------------------




                                                                                          33
Appendix 1: Cognitive Testing and Piloting
This section describes the process we used to validate the survey questions as well as the scoring
grid. We started with an early version of the survey in 2014, but for the first versions it was unclear
whether executives would correctly interpret our questions and whether as a consequence, their
answers would be too vague and unrelated to reliably classify the responses. We used a three-stage
process to conduct cognitive testing of respondents or interviewers and to refine our survey
instrument and interview process.

In the first stage of cognitive testing, we started by sharing the earliest versions of the survey
instrument with a small number of retired executives at HBS and Berkeley-Haas to elicit feedback.

In the second stage of cognitive testing, we started a process of running approximately 20 pilot
interviews with alumni of HBS executive education programs. These pilot interviews, conducted
during 2014-2015 academic year, had several objectives. First, we wanted ensure that despite the
use of open-ended questions, these questions were specific enough that executives would not talk
about unrelated topics. Second, we used the pilots to make sure that the way we classified
responses was realistic and that our classification captured the full range of executives' responses
to our questions. Third, to make sure that the coverage of topics in the survey was comprehensive,
we asked every pilot interviewee after the completion of their interview, whether they could think
of any major issue for strategic decision making, that we might have missed. Fourth, the pilots
allowed us to quantify the total interview length as well as the time taken for each question, which
we then used to remove confusing or less important questions. During this second stage of
cognitive testing, we also used a focus group of current executives in HBS executive education
programs in Spring 2015 to address two potential issues. First, we gathered information about
which topics these executives thought are important when thinking about how they make strategic
decisions. Second, for a few questions for which either the question phrasing or the scoring grid
was unclear, we asked for responses to the open-ended questions to learn how executives
interpreted the questions and compare their answers to our scoring grid.

We then conducted the third stage of cognitive testing in 2016, which allowed us to test whether
the survey instrument could be used to gather reliable information on strategic decision making
during large scale data collection efforts. A key question in this context was whether we would be
able to train interviewers with limited knowledge about business strategy to correctly score

                                                                                                    34
executives' responses. We recruited five HBS second-year MBA students and generated training
material describing the overall goals of our research, as well as mock interview scripts that we
used to simulate the interview process. We also developed survey software that automated
interview funneling, which we developed to systematically validate high interview scores as well
as ease the cognitive burden for interviewers and double scorers. During this third cognitive testing
phase, we conducted a larger pilot with 92 executives from two different HBS executive education
programs. This pilot sample included CEOs or Presidents of small or medium-sized companies, as
well as senior executives at large, publicly traded companies and had wide sectoral as well as
international variation. During this large-scale pilot, we conducted additional cognitive testing to
ensure that the MBA student interviewers understood the scoring grid and could easily and reliably
use the survey software. We also gathered additional feedback on the questions, the scoring grid
and the survey software in weekly meetings with the MBA student interviewers.

We used the data from this pilot to write a summary of some findings for Harvard Business Review
(HBR) online, in Teti et al. (2017). The patterns reported in this summary are only tangentially
related to our final scoring of the Strategy Practices grid. Beyond this HBR online piece, the data
from the large-scale pilot have not be used.



Appendix 2: Software-supported Funneling of Responses

We extended the Bloom and Van Reenen methodology by introducing software-supported
funneling of responses: responses that suggested structured strategy process automatically
triggered follow-up questions on details of practices or specific examples. This interview practice
was introduced to achieve two specific goals. First, to counter the tendency of respondents to let
their Strategy Practices be more structured than they actually are (social desirability bias), we
deliberately asked follow-ups on details or examples of practices, to ensure that more structured
practices are indeed used. Second, the use of software-supported funneling also reduced the
cognitive burden on interviewers, since it automatically displayed follow-up questions and specific
responses to be recorded when needed, but hid those same questions when they were unnecessary.




                                                                                                  35
We illustrate this interview practice in the Figure A2, which shows the beginning of funneling of
responses for the first question of the strategy development section or (D1). The questions asks
"What TYPICALLY prompts you to think about a strategic change?" As the figure shows, low
scoring responses such as "Go with gut" or "React to performance drops", do not trigger any follow
up questions. However, responses higher than "Look for widely reported, imminent shifts", will
trigger the follow up question "What type of information do you use to inspire thinking about
strategic changes?", which will be followed again by follow-ups about the detailed nature of
information used, if and only if the respondent gives any response other than "Just intuition". As
a result of this funneling practice, high scores for structured strategy process are less likely to be
driven by respondents' desire to be perceived as rational decision makers but instead are more
likely to capture an actual structured strategy process.



Appendix 3: Additional results

A3.1 Relationship Between Strategy Practices and CEO Tenure and Age
Executives can learn though trial and error and form adaptive expectations, as more experience
increases the potential sample size of subjective data. As a result, very experienced CEOs might
more reliably use their intuition or heuristics developed through experience instead of a structured
strategy process. This section therefore explores whether reliance on structured strategy processes
is systematically correlated with CEO (lack of) experience.


Appendix Table 2 reports our results from regressing our strategy scores on logged executive age
as well as logged measures of tenure in the executive's current position or company. To reduce
collinearity across measures, we compute relative position tenure as tenure at the current position
divided by tenure at the current company. Similarly, we define relative company tenure as tenure
in the current company divided by executive age.


Columns (1) to (4) show that CEOs with more experience report systematically lower levels of
structured strategy process. We find a negative association for both relative tenure in the CEO
position and executive age, which is likely to proxy for overall work experience. This is consistent
with the view that more experience might lead to more intuition or heuristics-based decision-


                                                                                                   36
making. Correspondingly, we find that the negative correlations between CEO position tenure and
structured strategy process are strongest for the strategy development part of our survey, which
focuses on decision-making practices.


A3.2 Firm ownership
We also considered the difference between public and private firms. Publicly traded companies
are subject to a host of regulatory requirements and investor demands about transparency and
comprehensibility of strategic choices. Consequently, public firms might adopt more consistent
and formalized strategy processes in order to legitimize their strategic choices in the eyes of
investors. Since we are most interested in public firms, we use all private firms as a baseline and
only contrast public firms with family firms.


Column (5) of Appendix Table 2 displays the results of our analysis of the relationship between
Strategy Practices and firm ownership. Publicly traded firms adopt more Strategy Practices than
private firms, even when we include of number of employees as measure of firm size. One way to
understand this correlation is that public firms are subject to a high demand for comprehensibility
by professional investors and monitoring pressures which encourage firms to develop and
demonstrate rational strategic decision-making processes. In contrast, we find no significant
difference between family firms and other privately owned organizations and firm age
(unconditional on size).




                                                                                                37
Appendix 4: Changes in the HBS Strategy Curriculum*


 Business Policy I Course Description (1982)       Business Policy I Course Description (1983)
 Business Policy is the study of the functions     Business Policy I is a course about
 and responsibilities of general management        competition. It examines the competitive
 and the problems which affect the character       forces in industries, and the way in which
 and success of the total enterprise. The          companies can create and sustain
 problems of policy in business have to do with    competitive advantage through strategy.
 the choice of purposes, the molding of            Reflecting a company's competencies,
 organizational character, the definition of       competitive strategy is a set of goals and
 what needs to be done, and the mobilization of    integrated policies in each functional area that
 resources for the attainment of goals in the      define how the company will compete in an
 face of competition or adverse circumstances.     industry, taking the point of view of the
                                                   enterprise as a whole. A major theme of the
 In Business Policy, the problems considered       Business Policy I is than an acute
 and the point of view assumed in analyzing and    understanding of competitive forces will
 dealing with them are those of the chief          allow companies to shape competition in their
 executive officer or general manager whose        favor.
 primary responsibility is the enterprise as a
 whole. Cases are drawn from companies of          The primary focus of Business Policy I is on
 various sizes and industries. The purpose of      competitive strategy in the industry
 instruction is to develop in students a general   environment, the primary arena in which
 management point of view rather than a            competitive advantage is either won or lost.
 specialist or departmental orientation.           Government's effect on competition is
 Business Policy builds upon and integrates the    examined         both     domestically       and
 total work of the school.                         internationally. The course also considers how
                                                   competitive advantage may be enhanced
                                                   through the combination of business units in a
                                                   multibusiness company, an important task in
                                                   corporate strategy. Cases are drawn from a
                                                   wide variety of U.S. and global industries
                                                   illustrating the range of competitive situations
                                                   companies face. In its concern with how a total
                                                   enterprise can be related to its environment,
                                                   Business Policy I aims to integrate the work of
                                                   other functional courses. ...

*Emphasis Added

Note: Following Porter's overhaul of the Business Policy I course in 1983, it was renamed
"Competition and Strategy" in 1986.




                                                                                                  38
Appendix 5: Different RDD Specifications for the Porter-RDD estimation
This appendix gives an overview of different approaches we used to estimate the regression
discontinuity associated with MBA cohort years at HBS.

                              :& = ;(8& ) + ='  1{)$ *'+,-} + >&
In all of these cases, the cutoff year chosen was 1983, none of the specifications use any additional
control variables and we report all specifications for the strategy practice variables :& .

Non-parametric or "local regression" estimates

In non-parametric approaches, the estimation strategy focuses on choosing a neighborhood of
observations around the discontinuity point, where it is more plausible that the functional form is
linear. The length of this neighborhood is also called the bandwidth. Once the bandwidth is chosen,
the algorithm will estimate a local regression, which in our case will be a dummy regression.

There are two important steps in the implementation of this empirical strategy. First, the bandwidth
choice matters, since smaller bandwidths will include less observations and will therefore produce
noisier estimates, but also will be less biased as observations are closer to the discontinuity.
(Imbens and Kalyanaraman, 2012) propose a procedure to optimally select bandwidths for local
regressions of RDs based on MSE minimization and all of the algorithms we use, follow some
implementation of their ideas.

Second, once the optimal bandwidth has been chosen, the estimation algorithm requires variance
estimates to calculate standard errors. The first algorithm we use, follows (Calonico, Cattaneo and
Titiunuk, 2017) (henceforth CCT) and offers two choices of the variance estimations. The first
uses a k-Nearest Neighbor algorithm to estimate the variance of the estimators following (Abadie
and Imbens, 2006). The second uses a "plug-in" or analytic formula for the variance estimation
that is based on similar formulas for heteroscedasticity-robust least squares standard errors, see
(MacKinnon, 2013). The first two columns of the Appendix table 3 below show the results, which
are broadly consistent with each other.

Within the class of non-parametric local regressions, we also utilize an alternative algorithm by
(Nichols, 2011), which is based on code by (Fuji, Imbens, and Kalyanaraman, 2009) and
implements another version of the optimal bandwith selection procedure by (Imbens and


                                                                                                  39
Kalyanaraman, 2012). The results of this are displayed in the third column of the table and are
broadly consistent with the code by (Calonico, Cattaneo and Titiunuk, 2017).

Parametric or "global regression" estimates

This approach uses the entire sample instead of only focusing on a neighborhood around the
discontinuity, but also assumes that the functional form for the regression is known. In particular,
starting with the following regression:

                             :& = ;(8& ) + ='  1{)$ *'+,-} + >&
the parametric approach specifies the function ;(8& ) as different continuous functions. This
approach has the advantage of being more precise, as the whole data is used, but that comes at the
cost of increased bias in the estimates, as observations that are far away from the discontinuity can
still influence the estimates. Furthermore, the more complex and flexible the functional form of
;(8& ) is chosen, the more the noise in the data will influence the estimates, thereby eventually
rendering the estimates less precise again and increasing the standard errors.

The last two columns of the Appendix table 3 report the results using the parametric specifications
using robust standard errors. Generally, the signs of estimates are consistent with our baseline
results, although some of the results are much weaker in the parametric specifications. An
exception are the results on Formalization (F2+F3), which tend to be slightly stronger in the
parametric specifications.




                                                                                                  40
Figure 1:
Strategy
Practices
scoring grid
Figure 1 (continued):
Strategy Practices
scoring grid
Figure 2 Distribution of Strategy Practices




                                                                                    25
            15




                                                                                    20
            10




                                                                                      15
                                                                                Percent
  Percent




                                                                                    10
            5




                                                                                    5
                                                                                    0
            0




                 1               2                       3                  4                1              2                    3                  4
                     2(A): Strategy Practices (average of 1-5 rating)                                2(B): Formalization (average of 1-5 rating)
            20




                                                                                       20
            15




                                                                                       15
     Percent




                                                                                   Percent
      10




                                                                                    10
            5




                                                                                       5
            0




                 1            2                  3                      4
                                                                                       0




                       2(C): Development (average of 1-5 rating)                                 1      2                  3                  4         5
                                                                                                     2(D): Implementation (average of 1-5 rating)

  Note: The Strategy Practices score is an unweighted average of the score for each of the 14 strategy
  questions, where each question is normalized to have zero mean and standard deviation of one. The
  sub-scores consist of standardized, unweighted sums for questions (F1)-(F3) for Formalization, (D1)-
  (D6) for Development and (I1)-(I5) for Implementation.
Figure 3: Unconditional correlation of Strategy Practices and Firm Size



                32K
                8K
           128 512 2K
           employment
                32
                8
                2




                        -3     -2           -1             0           1            2
                                          Strategy Practices Score


Note: The Structured Strategy Process score is an unweighted average of the score for each of the 14
strategy questions, where each question is normalized to have zero mean and standard deviation of one.
Employment is measured as the number of full-time employees at the company.
Figure 4: Distribution of observations across graduation years




                                         Full Potential Sample Pool vs. Interviewees, by Graduation Year
                         120                                                                                                                     100%
                                                                                                                                                 90%
                         100
                                                                                                                                                 80%
Number of Interviewees




                                                                                                                                                 70%
                         80




                                                                                                                                                        Response Rate
                                                                                                                                                 60%
                         60                                                                                                                      50%
                                                                                                                                                 40%
                         40
                                                                                                                                                 30%
                                                                                                                                                 20%
                         20
                                                                                                                                                 10%
                          0                                                                                                                      0%
                               50-54   55-59   60-64   65-69   70-74   75-79     80-84   85-89   90-94   95-99   00-04   05-09   10-14   15-19
                                                  Sample          Interviewees           Response Rate           Avg. Response Rate




Note: The overall number of potential interviewees per year is measured by the number of alumni in the HBS
alumni database with a degree from HBS, including MBA and executive education programs. The response
rate has been calculated as ratio of number of executives who agreed to participate, relative to the number of
executives that could successfully be contacted.
Table 1: Descriptive Statistics

                                                                                Standard
                                                        Obs        Mean         Deviation          min         max
Panel A: Firm and Executive Characteristics

Firm characteristics
    Number of employees                                 262       2088.62        8343.00           1.00     96500.00
    Firm age                                            262        47.96          46.30            1.00      395.00
    Public ownership                                    262         0.11           0.31            0.00       1.00
    Family ownership                                    262         0.20           0.40            0.00       1.00
Executive characteristics
    Female                                              262         0.09            0.28           0.00        1.00
    Age of executive                                    262        57.34           12.14          24.00        95.00
    Tenure in position                                  262        13.86           11.31           0.00        51.00
    Tenture in company                                  262        17.31           14.23           0.00        69.00
    Bachelor degree in Business, Econ,                  262         0.31            0.34           0.00
                                                                                                               1.00
    Finance or Accounting
    Bachelor degree in Engineering                      262         0.04           0.15            0.00        1.00
    MBA dfrom HBS                                       262         0.71           0.45            0.00        1.00

Panel B: Strategy Practices                             262         2.78           0.48            1.56        3.89

Formalization                                           262         3.04           0.54            1.33        4.33
   F1: Strategy Statement                               262         2.51           0.71            1.00        5.00
   F2: Strategy Scope                                   262         2.89           0.94            1.00        5.00
   F3: Strategic Differentiation                        262         3.68           0.95            1.00        5.00
Development                                             262         2.72           0.81            1.00        4.33
   D1: Proactivity and External Focus                   262         2.63           0.86            1.00        5.00
   D2: Information for Strategy Selection               262         2.74           0.81            1.00        5.00
   D3: Strategy Meetings: Frequency                     262         2.60           1.33            1.00        5.00
   D4: Strategy Meetings: Involvement                   262         2.51           1.32            1.00        5.00
   D5: Consideration of Alternatives                    262         2.98           1.34            1.00        5.00
   D6: Structured Criticism                             262         2.85           1.23            1.00        5.00
Implementation                                          262         2.54           0.69            1.00        4.40
   I1: Implementation Planning                          262         2.09           0.94            1.00        5.00
   I2: Strategy review and Follow-ups                   262         3.02           1.20            1.00        5.00
   I3: Learning from Strategy Outcomes                  262         2.81           1.02            1.00        5.00
   I4: Strategy Communication                           262         2.83           1.21            1.00        5.00
   I5: Resistance to Change                             262         1.94           0.86            1.00        5.00
Notes: Strategy questions are scored with values between 1-5. Strategy practices (all questions), Formalization (F1-F3),
Development (D1-D6) and the Implementation (I1-I5) are averages of the underlying questions. Missing observations are
imputed at sample mean.
Table 2: Strategy and firm size

                                                  (1)              (2)            (3)         (4)              (5)            (6)            (7)
Dependent variable                                                                    log employees
Strategy Practices                            0.923***         0.841***       0.655***
                                               (0.142)          (0.123)        (0.121)
Formalization                                                                              0.307***                                       0.235**
                                                                                            (0.114)                                       (0.107)
Development                                                                                                0.610***                      0.494***
                                                                                                            (0.127)                       (0.142)
Implementation                                                                                                            0.397***         0.182
                                                                                                                           (0.135)        (0.147)
log firm age                                                   1.144***       1.058***       1.133***      1.011***       1.101***       1.066***
                                                                (0.115)        (0.142)        (0.151)       (0.147)        (0.147)        (0.146)
Noise controls                                   YES             YES            YES            YES           YES            YES             YES
Industry FE                                      YES             YES            YES            YES           YES            YES             YES
Additional Firm and CEO controls                 NO               NO            YES            YES           YES            YES             YES
Obs                                              262              262            262            262           262            262            262
Notes: Strategy Practices score is a normalized z-score with unit variance which is the sum of all 14 normalized strategy questions with mean zero and
unit variance. Formalization (F1-F3), Development (D1-D6) and Implementation (I1-I5) are also z-scores with unit variance. Noise controls include
interviewer fixed effects, time of day, interview duration, ratings of interviewee expertise and interviewee honesty and non-CEO dummy. Industry
fixed effects are 3 digit NAICS dummies. Additional firm and CEO controls include: family ownership dummy, public ownership dummy, CEO age,
CEO tenure in company, CEO tenure in position. Missing observations are imputed at sample means with imputation dummies included whenever
observations are imputed. Significance levels are: *: 10%, **: 5%, ***: 1% and robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
Table 3: Strategy practices and firm size / firm growth in Census data (LBD)

                                   (1)             (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
                                   log             log       1-year firm 1-year firm 5-year firm 5-year firm
Dependent variable
                              employees       employees        growth      growth      growth      growth
Strategy Practices              0.476**         0.464**       0.046***    0.047***    0.096***    0.095**
                                (0.190)         (0.198)        (0.012)     (0.012)     (0.035)     (0.037)
log firm age                   1.076***        1.145***
                                (0.138)         (0.155)
log initial employees                                         -0.048***       -0.049***       -0.096***       -0.095***
                                                                (0.007)         (0.007)         (0.018)         (0.019)

Noise controls                   YES             YES             YES             YES             YES             YES
Industry FE                      NO              YES              NO             YES              NO             YES
Obs (rounded)                    200             200             2000            2000            1300            1300
No of firms (rounded)            200             200              200             200             150             150
Notes: Results are based on merging the strategy practice data into the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) and
aggregating the data to the firm level. Strategy Practices score is a normalized z-score with unit variance which is the sum
of all 14 normalized strategy questions with mean zero and unit variance. Growth rates are based Davis, Haltiwanger and
Schuh (1996) formula. Industry fixed effects are 2 digit NAICS dummies. Additional firm and CEO controls include:
family ownership dummy, public ownership dummy, CEO age, CEO tenure in company, CEO tenure in position.
Missing observations are imputed at sample means with imputation dummies included whenever observations are
imputed. Significance levels are: *: 10%, **: 5%, ***: 1%. Robust standard errors are used for columns (1) and (2), while
all other columns have standard errors clustered at the firm-level. Standard errors are reported in parentheses.
Table 4: Strategy Practice Scores and strategic changes

                                                (1)                   (2)       (3)
                                                                                log
                                          log number of log decision time
                                                                          implementation
                                        strategic changes    (weeks)
                                                                           time (weeks)
Strategy Practices                          0.189***         0.213**           0.092
                                              (0.069)         (0.102)         (0.082)

Formalization                                 0.019                 0.082                 0.027
                                             (0.068)               (0.092)               (0.080)

Development                                   0.062                0.270**                0.106
                                             (0.065)               (0.107)               (0.078)

Implementation                              0.191***                0.118                 0.046
                                             (0.059)               (0.096)               (0.069)

Notes: Each coefficient corresponds to a different regression. Number of strategic changes is the
estimated number of changes over a 5 year horizon. Strategy Practices score is a normalized z-score with
unit variance which is the sum of all 14 normalized strategy questions with mean zero and unit variance.
All columns include controls for noise controls (interviewer fixed effects, time of day, interview
duration, ratings of interviewee expertise and interviewee honesty and non-CEO dummy), and firm and
CEO controls (firm age, family ownership dummy, public ownership dummy, CEO age, CEO tenure in
company, CEO tenure in position). All columns include controls for decision type fixed effects include
dummies for 17 non-exclusive types of strategic changes pursued. All columns include controls for
industry fixed effects, which are 3 digit NAICS dummies. Missing observations are imputed at sample
means with imputation dummies included whenever observations are imputed. Significance levels are:
*: 10%, **: 5%, ***: 1% and robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
Table 5: Porter RDD Effects on Strategy Practices

Panel A: Dependent Variable: Formalization
                         Non-parametric: IK- Non-parametric: IK-                       Parametric: cubic       Parametric: quadratic
Estimator
                                  NN                 PI                                    control                   control
                                   (1)               (2)                                      (3)                      (4)
Baseline                       0.845**            0.832**                                  0.583*                   0.582**
                                (0.424)           (0.373)                                  (0.307)                   (0.245)
Sample obs                        185               185                                      185                       185
Estimation obs                     36                36                                      185                       185

Panel B: Dependent Variable: Implementation
                          Non-parametric: IK- Non-parametric: IK-                      Parametric: cubic       Parametric: quadratic
Estimator
                                   NN                  PI                                   control                  control
                                    (1)               (2)                                      (3)                      (4)
Baseline                       -1.216***          -1.270***                                -0.601**                   -0.126
                                 (0.312)            (0.332)                                 (0.279)                  (0.229)
Sample obs                         185                185                                     185                      185
Estimation obs                      36                 36                                     185                      185
Notes: Effects show the impact of MBA cohort year after the cutoff date shown on top. Formalization (F2-F3), Development (D1-D6)
and the Implementation (I1-I5) are averages of the underlying questions, normalized to zero mean and unit variance. Columns (1) and (2)
use non-parametric local regressions with optimal bandwidth selections and constant effect only. The baseline uses bandwidth selection
by (Imbens, and Kalyanaraman, 2012) using a nearest-neighbor variance estimation, denoted by IK-NN and is implemented by
(Calonico, Cattaneo and Titiunuk, 2017). IK-PI uses the same bandtwidth selection procedure with analytic heteroscedasticity-robust
"plug-in" variance estimates as discussed by (MacKinnon , 2013) is implemented by (Calonico, Cattaneo and Titiunuk, 2017). Columns
(3) and (4) use parametric approaches and assume different functional forms for the continuous function f(.). It is assumed to be either
quadratic or cubic. Sample includes only HBS MBA alumni. Significance levels are: *: 10%, **: 5%, ***: 1% and robust standard
errors are reported in parentheses.
Appendix Table 1: Frequency of different Strategic Decisions
Type of Strategic Decision          Count     Mean         SD
New product or business              262       0.85       0.77
Large capital expenditure            262       0.60       0.76
New technology (incl. IT)            262       0.50       0.73
Reorientation of priorities (market
                                     262       0.50       0.70
or business)
New business process                 262       0.44       0.66
Geographic expansion                 262       0.37       0.54
M&A                                  262       0.34       0.58
Cooperation with other firms (e.g.
                                     262       0.26       0.51
joint venture, alliance)
Hiring                               262       0.26       0.50
Change in distribution channels      262       0.18       0.43
Organizational restructuring         262       0.17       0.41
Outsourcing                          262       0.15       0.36
Supply-chain reorientation           262       0.15       0.42
Focusing business or diversiture     262       0.14       0.37
Moving service in-house (in-
                                     262       0.14       0.37
sourching, vertical integration)
Significant change in funding
                                     262       0.13       0.36
sources
IPO                                  262       0.02       0.12
Notes: Tabulation of dummies that are one if this strategic decision was one of
3 examples given for typical strategic decisions. Types of strategic changes are
not mutually exclusive, and all types of changes relevant to a particular
decision, as described by an interviewee, were selected. For example, if a
decision to enter a new product market required both vertical integration into
new manufacturing processes and expenditure on new manufacturing equipment,
we would categorize the strategic decision as involving (1) New product or
business line, (2) Large capital expenditure, and (3) Moving service in-house.
Appendix Table 2: Other Firm and CEO Correlates of the Strategy Score
                            (1)       (2)        (3)            (4)       (5)        (6)
                                                 Strategy Practices
log rel. tenure position -0.272**
                          (0.117)
log rel. tenure company             -0.101
                                   (0.083)
log executive age                            -1.440***
                                               (0.290)
Family ownership                                              -0.047
                                                             (0.156)
Public firm                                                             0.742***
                                                                         (0.200)
log firm age                                                                        0.095
                                                                                   (0.069)
Noise controls           YES         YES         YES         YES         YES        YES
Industry FE              YES         YES         YES         YES         YES        YES
Obs                      262         262         262         262         262         262
Appendix Table 3: Porter RDD estimates for all questions, with different RDD specifications
                                 Non-parametric, baseline
                                                                  Non-parametric, IK-PI            Non-parametric FIK            Parametric, quadratic            Parametric, cubic
                                           (IK-NN)
Dependent variable                Estimate       Std. Error      Estimate     Std. Error        Estimate      Std. Error        Estimate      Std. Error       Estimate      Std. Error
F1: Strategy Statement               0.031        -0.244            0.03        -0.239             -0.26       -0.509             0.153        -0.233           -0.092         -0.304
F2: Strategy Scope                 0.601**        -0.304          0.629**       -0.292           1.444*        -0.772             0.32         -0.251            0.372         -0.306
F3: Strategic Differentiation        0.37         -0.456            0.379       -0.422             0.47         -0.71           0.545**        -0.259            0.496         -0.345
D1: Proactivity and External
                                     0.549        -0.406            0.559       -0.387             1.079       -0.737            0.467*        -0.252            0.478         -0.321
Focus
D2: Information for Strategy
                                     0.056        -0.316            0.057       -0.296             0.022       -0.822             -0.06        -0.234           -0.045         -0.299
Selection
D3: Strategy Meetings:
                                    -0.144        -0.328           -0.155       -0.315            -0.964       -0.764             0.298        -0.253            0.078         -0.318
Frequency
D4: Strategy Meetings:
                                    -0.398        -0.366           -0.349       -0.332            -1.254       -0.814             0.249        -0.241           -0.106         -0.314
Involvement
D5: Consideration of
                                    -0.225        -0.286           -0.217       -0.287             -0.66       -0.605            -0.015        -0.239            -0.24         -0.305
Alternatives
D6: Structured Criticism            -0.073        -0.316           -0.054       -0.318            -1.223       -1.018             0.04         -0.252           -0.167          -0.32
I1: Implementation Planning       -0.986**        -0.439         -0.986**       -0.404          -1.612**       -0.753             0.026        -0.233           -0.367         -0.285
I2: Strategy review and Follow-
                                 -1.565***        -0.416        -1.560***       -0.372         -2.475***       -0.499            -0.063        -0.258           -0.338         -0.328
ups
I3: Learning from Strategy
                                    -0.299        -0.318           -0.299       -0.338           -1.015*       -0.606             0.187        -0.228            0.065         -0.304
Outcomes
I4: Strategy Communication       -0.929***        -0.288        -0.969***       -0.302         -2.274***       -0.677            -0.277        -0.241          -0.607**          -0.3
I5: Resistance to Change          -0.562**        -0.275         -0.569**       -0.254            -0.672       -0.444            -0.245        -0.221         -0.735***        -0.267
Formalization                      0.845**        -0.424          0.832**       -0.373           1.257**       -0.635           0.582**        -0.245           0.583*         -0.307
Development                         -0.025         -0.25           -0.004       -0.246            -0.702       -0.545             0.235        -0.222           -0.001         -0.279
Implementation                   -1.165***        -0.302        -1.269***       -0.332         -2.402***       -0.573            -0.126        -0.229          -0.601**        -0.279
Notes: Column headers display different RD specifications. Non-parametric estimates use local regressions with optimal bandwidth selections of 3 years, implying the use of 36
observations. The baseline uses bandwidth selection by (Imbens, and Kalyanaraman, 2012) using a nearest-neighbor variance estimation, denoted by IK-NN and is implemented by
(Calonico, Cattaneo and Titiunuk, 2017). IK-PI uses the same bandtwidth selection procedure with analytic heteroscedasticity-robust "plug-in" variance estimates as discussed by
(MacKinnon , 2013) is implemented by (Calonico, Cattaneo and Titiunuk, 2017). The FIK estimator uses an implementation of IK by (Nichols, 2011) and (Fuji, Imbens, and
Kalyanaraman, 2009). Parametric approaches use the full sample of MBAs (185 observations) and assume different functional forms for the continuous function f(.). It is assumed to be
either quadratic or cubic.
