                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               MISALLOCATION AND CAPITAL MARKET INTEGRATION:
                            EVIDENCE FROM INDIA

                                          Natalie Bau
                                         Adrien Matray

                                      Working Paper 27955
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27955


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2020




We are particularly indebted to David Baqaee and Chenzi Xu. We thank Dave Donaldson,
Emmanuel Farhi, Pete Klenow, Karthik Muralidharan, Diego Restuccia, Richard Rogerson,
Martin Rotemberg, Chad Syverson, Christopher Udry, Liliana Varela, as well as conference and
seminar participants at the Stanford King Center Conference on Firms, Trade, and Development,
CEPR Macroeconomics and Growth Meetings, CIFAR IOG meetings, EPED, NBER SI, the
Online International Finance and Macro Seminar, Columbia, Toulouse School of Economics,
INSEAD, CREST, University of Paris-Dauphine, Georgetown, the World Bank, Dartmouth,
UToronto, UCLA, UCSD, Guelph, and USC-Marshall Business School for helpful comments and
discussions. Carl Kontz, Palermo Penano, Brian Pustilnik, Derek Wenning, and Mengbo Zhang
provided exceptional research assistance. We are also grateful to the International Growth Centre,
the Julis-Rabinowitz Center for Public Policies, and the Griswold Center of Economic Policy
Studies (Princeton), which funded this project. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Natalie Bau and Adrien Matray. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Misallocation and Capital Market Integration: Evidence From India
Natalie Bau and Adrien Matray
NBER Working Paper No. 27955
October 2020
JEL No. F21,F38,F6,O1,O11,O12,O4

                                           ABSTRACT

We show that foreign capital liberalization reduces capital misallocation and increases aggregate
productivity in India. The staggered liberalization of access to foreign capital across
disaggregated industries allows us to identify changes in firms' input wedges, overcoming major
challenges in the measurement of the effects of changing misallocation. For domestic firms with
initially high marginal revenue products of capital (MRPK), liberalization increases revenues by
25%, physical capital by 57%, wage bills by 27%, and reduces MRPK by 35% relative to low
MRPK firms. There are no effects on low MRPK firms. The effects of liberalization are largest in
areas with less developed local banking sectors, indicating that foreign capital partially substitutes
for an efficient banking sector. Finally, we develop a novel method to use natural experiments to
bound the effect of changes in misallocation on treated industries' aggregate productivity. Treated
industries' Solow residual increases by 4-17%.


Natalie Bau
Department of Economics
University of California at Los Angeles
Bunche Hall 8283
315 Portola Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
nbau@ucla.edu

Adrien Matray
Princeton University
Bendheim Finance Center,
26 Prospect Ave, Princeton, NJ 08540
adrien.matray@gmail.com
1     Introduction
The misallocation of resources across competing uses is a leading explanation for
economic disparities across countries. However, identifying policies that can affect
misallocation and quantifying their aggregate effects remains a major challenge.
There are at least two reasons for this.
    On the measurement side, it is common to attribute all -- or much of --
the cross-sectional dispersion in the observed marginal returns to firms' inputs
to misallocation. This creates upward bias in measures of misallocation and can
contaminate estimates of differences in allocative efficiency across countries or over
time.1 , 2
    On the policy side, even if one were able to fully correct for mismeasurement
and quantify the effect of changes in misallocation on aggregate productivity, the
specific sources of misallocation are difficult to identify from aggregate compar-
isons.3 This leaves policymakers with limited information about what levers to
pull to reduce misallocation. In low-income countries, where there are likely to
be large firm-level frictions in the allocation of resources, understanding which
policies reduce misallocation would provide policymakers with powerful tools to
foster economic growth.
    An unusual natural experiment in India allows us to make progress on both
the measurement front and the policy front, providing some of the first evidence
on a policy tool that can be used to reduce misallocation. Over the 2000s, In-
dia introduced the automatic approval of foreign direct investments up to 51%
of domestic firms' equity, potentially reducing capital market frictions. Using the
staggered introduction of the policy across industries, we implement a difference-
   1. Upward bias can come, for example, from measurement error (Bils, Klenow, and Ruane,
2018; Rotemberg and White, 2017; Gollin and Udry, 2019), model misspecification (Haltiwanger,
Kulick, and Syverson, 2018; Nishida, Petrin, Rotemberg, and White, 2017), volatility of produc-
tivity paired with the costly adjustment of inputs (Asker, Collard-Wexler, and De Loecker, 2014;
Gollin and Udry, 2019), unobserved heterogeneity in technology (Gollin and Udry, 2019), and
informational frictions and uncertainty (David, Hopenhayn, and Venkateswaran, 2016; David
and Venkateswaran, 2019).
   2. In a striking example, Bils, Klenow, and Ruane (2018) show that when cross-sectional
comparisons do not correct for measurement error, misallocation appears to be greater in the
United States than in India in the 2000s.
   3. To quantify the overall degree of misallocation, the literature usually compares outcomes
such as the distribution of marginal revenue products across units of production after controlling
for different observable characteristics and attributes the residual dispersion to misallocation.
Since this method of quantifying misallocation typically does not show which characteristics
causally affect the residual dispersion in marginal products, it is mostly silent on what policies
would be required to reduce misallocation in low-income countries. An important exception
is David and Venkateswaran (2019), which makes progress on distinguishing various sources of
dispersion.


                                                2
in-differences framework to estimate the effects of this foreign capital liberalization
on the misallocation of capital across firms. In the absence of a natural exper-
iment, the measurement of changes in misallocation would be contaminated by
measurement error and other (unobserved) shocks, as described above. However,
in this setting, the natural experiment allows us to isolate changes in inputs and
the observed marginal revenue product of capital due to the policy, controlling for
many sources of unobserved heterogeneity that would otherwise lead to mismea-
surement.
    A priori, the effect of opening-up to foreign capital on allocative efficiency is
unclear. On the one hand, in low-income countries, where formal credit markets
are limited, opening up to foreign capital markets might reduce funding con-
straints if foreign investors have better screening technologies or are not bound
by domestic historical, political, or regulatory constraints.4 , 5 On the other hand,
foreign investors may also be worse at processing and monitoring soft information,
particularly in low-income countries, worsening the allocation of capital.6
    We find that the liberalization of foreign capital reduces capital misallocation
by increasing capital for firms with the highest marginal revenue returns to capital
prior to the reform. We then develop a method, based on the theoretical results of
Petrin and Levinsohn (2012) and Baqaee and Farhi (2019), to translate our quasi-
experimental microeconomic estimates into lower and upper bound measures of
the effect of the policy on the treated industries' Solow residual (a proxy for these
industries' aggregate productivity). Our proposed method uses exogenous varia-
tion to generate a lower bound for the aggregate effect of changing misallocation
under relatively weak identifying assumptions, without relying on cross-sectional
dispersion in marginal revenue products.
    To measure the effects of the reform, we collected data on industry-level liber-
alization episodes in 2001 and 2006. Combining this policy variation with a panel
of large and medium-sized Indian firms over the period 1995­2015, we investigate
   4. See Townsend (1994), Udry (1994), Banerjee, Duflo, Glennerster, and Kinnan (2015),
Banerjee, Duflo, and Munshi (2003), Banerjee and Duflo (2014), Banerjee and Munshi (2004),
Burgess and Pande (2005), and Cole (2009) for examples of domestic frictions in financing.
   5. Indeed, Anne Krueger, deputy managing director of the IMF during the time of the reforms
we study, wrote that in India, "banks are considered to be very high cost and inefficiently run"
and that, "enabling [Indian banks] to allocate credit to the most productive users, rather than by
government allocation, would make a considerable contribution to the Indian economy's growth
potential" (Krueger et al., 2002).
   6. In the context of foreign banks' behavior in low-income countries, several studies have
found that foreign banks mainly lend to large domestic firms, thereby potentially increasing
credit constraints for local firms (e.g. Mian (2006) for Pakistan or Detragiache, Tressel, and
Gupta (2008) for a cross-section of countries).



                                                3
whether the reform reduced misallocation by testing whether the policy had dif-
ferential effects depending on firms' ex-ante marginal revenue products of capital
(henceforth "MRPK"). By exploiting within-industry variation in firms' MRPK
dispersion, this empirical strategy requires milder identification assumptions than
standard difference-in-differences estimators, as it allows us to control for the av-
erage effect of belonging to a deregulated industry. Thus, determining whether
the policy reduced misallocation does not require deregulation to be random, nor
for firms to have similar levels of pre-reform covariates, or even for treated and
untreated industries to be on the same trends prior to the reforms. It only requires
that high MRPK firms are not growing relatively more quickly than low MRPK
firms within treated industries prior to the reform, an assumption that we pro-
vide visual evidence for using event studies. In our most stringent specifications,
we can account for any unobserved shocks or differences in time trends at the
disaggregated industry, state, and size quartile levels.
    We find that, in response to the policy, high MRPK firms in deregulated indus-
tries increase their physical capital by 57%, revenues by 25%, wage bills by 27%,
and reduce their MRPK by 35% relative to low MRPK firms. In contrast, low
MRPK firms are not affected. Since high MRPK firms had more than 170% higher
MRPK than low MRPK firms, the micro-estimates imply that the policy reduces
misallocation. Event study graphs confirm that these effects are not driven by dif-
ferential pre-trends between high and low MRPK firms within treated industries
relative to untreated industries. They also provide evidence that the reduction in
misallocation is not due to mean reversion.
    To better understand the mechanism underlying these results, we exploit ge-
ographic variation in local access to credit prior to the reform. We find that the
effects of liberalization on misallocation are largest in areas where the local bank-
ing sector was less developed. This is consistent with the hypothesis that foreign
investors can reduce misallocation by standing in for, and competing with, local
credit markets.
    We next explore the effect of the reform on firms' products, including product
portfolio, prices, and quantities. This is made possible by a rare feature of our
firm-level data set: detailed data on each firm's product-mix, product-level output,
and prices. Since reductions in distortions on input prices should reduce marginal
costs for affected firms, firms may pass some of these gains onto consumers via
lower prices. Depending on the degree of pass-through, the change in the price
could be greater than or less than the change in the marginal cost. We find that the
reform differentially reduced prices for high MRPK firms in treated industries by

                                         4
15% but had no significant effect on the prices of low MRPK firms. Additionally,
treated, high MRPK firms increase the number of products in their portfolio, in
part by introducing more new products.
    The liberalization policy may have had broader effects than reducing firms'
wedges on capital inputs. If firms need to borrow to pay workers, relaxing financial
constraints can also affect labor misallocation.7 Motivated by this possibility, we
examine the effect of the policy on labor misallocation. Analogous to our approach
for capital, we estimate the policy's differential effect on firms with high marginal
revenue products of labor (henceforth, "MRPL"). We find wage bills only increased
for firms with high MRPL. For these firms, relative to low MRPL firms, wage bills
increased by 29%, and MRPL fell by 32%. Since high MRPL firms had at least
two times higher levels of MRPL prior to the treatment in treated industries, labor
misallocation also fell.
    Finally, combining production function parameter estimates with reduced-form
estimates of the policy effect, we generate bounds on the effect of the liberalization
on the treated industries' Solow residual. As a lower bound, the treated industries'
Solow residual increased by 4%. Accounting for the cumulative effects of the
policy over time raises this number to 7%. Even at a lower bound, the policy had
economically meaningful aggregate effects. In contrast, if we infer baseline wedges
from the pre-treatment cross-sectional data, the upper bound effect is 17%.
    The paper is organized as follows. The remainder of the introduction dis-
cusses the related literature. Section 2 provides a brief conceptual framework for
understanding misallocation and introduces the expression we will use for aggre-
gation. Section 3 describes the data and the context of the policy change. Section
4 discusses our reduced-form empirical strategy. Section 5 reports our estimates
of the average effect of the foreign capital liberalization policy and its heteroge-
neous effects on firms with high and low MRPK. It also replicates the analysis for
firms that have high and low MRPL to test whether the policy also reduced labor
misallocation. Section 6 describes the aggregation strategy and reports estimated
bounds on the foreign capital liberalization policies' effect on the Solow residual
for treated industries. Section 7 concludes.

Related Literature. This paper contributes to two main literatures. First, it
contributes to the literature quantifying the importance of misallocation for ag-
gregate outcomes (e.g. Restuccia and Rogerson, 2008; Hsieh and Klenow, 2009;
  7. For more discussion of this mechanism, see Schoefer (2015) in the U.S. and Fonseca and
Doornik (2019) in Brazil.


                                            5
Bartelsman, Haltiwanger, and Scarpetta, 2013; Restuccia and Rogerson, 2013;
Bento and Restuccia, 2017; Baqaee and Farhi, 2020; David and Venkateswaran,
2019; Sraer and Thesmar, 2020), particularly in the context of developing countries
(e.g. Guner, Ventura, and Xu, 2008; Banerjee and Moll, 2010; Collard-Wexler,
Asker, and De Loecker, 2011; Kalemli-Ozcan and Sørensen, 2014).8 Second, it
contributes to the literature on the effects of capital account liberalization, finan-
cial frictions, and misallocation (Buera, Kaboski, and Shin; 2011; Midrigan and
Xu, 2014; Moll, 2014; Hombert and Matray, 2016; Bai, Carvalho, and Phillips,
2018; Delatte, Matray, and Pinardon Touati, 2019).
    Regarding the misallocation literature, much of the previous work has focused
on measuring the effect of all sources of misallocation on aggregate output by
exploiting cross-sectional dispersion in marginal revenue products. The principal
advantage of this "indirect approach" (Restuccia and Rogerson, 2017) is that it
allows for the estimation of the overall cost of misallocation without identifying
the underlying sources of the distortions, even if the sources are not observable to
researchers. However, in this approach, model misspecification and measurement
error can inflate estimates of misallocation and bias estimates of the effects of
changing misallocation.
    We make three contributions to this literature. First, since we exploit a liber-
alization episode that affected only certain industries, we can estimate the effect
of deregulation on misallocation using weaker identification assumptions. Our
difference-in-differences strategy only requires that measurement error or other
unobserved attributes are uncorrelated with the policy change to identify changes
in input wedges. Second, our approach isolates the changes in distortions pro-
duced by a specific policy, foreign capital liberalization.9 This allows us to isolate
the effect of access to the foreign equity market, holding constant access to the
foreign debt market and other macroeconomic determinants that might affect the
cost of capital differentially for different firms. Third, we show how our natural
experiment estimates can be used to compute aggregate effects of reducing misal-
location that are less vulnerable to inflation due to measurement error or model
   8. A survey of this literature can be found in Restuccia and Rogerson (2017).
   9. In the context of India, several recent papers have studied specific characteristics of the
Indian economy that might explain the high degree of misallocation observed in the country:
the role of property rights and contract enforcement (Bloom et al., 2013); land regulation (Du-
ranton, Ghani, Goswani, and Kerr, 2017); industrial licensing (Chari, 2011; Alfaro and Chari,
2015); privatization (Gupta, 2005; Dinc and Gupta, 2011); reservation laws (Garcia-Santana and
Pijoan-Mas, 2014; Martin, Nataraj, and Harrison, 2017; Boehm, Dhingra, and Morrow, 2019;
Rotemberg, 2019); highway infrastructure (Ghani, Goswami, and Kerr, 2016); roads (Asher and
Novosad, 2020); electricity shortages (Allcott, Collard-Wexler, and Connell, 2016), and labor
regulation (Amirapu and Gechter, 2019).


                                               6
mis-specification. In so doing, we develop a method that can be applied in many
other contexts by researchers studying misallocation.
     By developing a general method that exploits a natural experiment to identify
changes in misallocation and quantify their effects on aggregate productivity, we
also relate to Sraer and Thesmar (2020). Sraer and Thesmar (2020) develop
a sufficient statistics approach that uses estimates from natural experiments to
calculate the counterfactual effects of scaling-up a policy to the entire economy.
This is fundamentally different from the object we bound -- the aggregate effect
of the policy that was actually enacted -- which can be bounded with relatively
few assumptions about firms' production functions and interactions.
     In terms of capital account liberalization, this paper relates most closely to a re-
cent strand of this literature that has explored how increased foreign financial flows
affect domestic firms' productivity, sectoral misallocation, and welfare (Alfaro,
Chanda, Kalemli-Ozcan, and Sayek, 2004; Gopinath, Kalemli-Ozcan,      ¨       Karabar-
bounis, and Villegas-Sanchez, 2017; Varela, 2017; Larrain and Stumpner; 2017;
Saffie, Varela, and Yi, 2020; Xu, 2020; M´     endez-Chac´  on and Van Patten, 2020;
Li and Su, 2020; Liu, Wei, and Zhou, 2020).10 We add to this literature in two
ways. First, while much of the previous literature exploits country-level variation
in access to foreign investment, this paper exploits variation across industries over
time within the same country. This allows us to hold the institutional setting
constant, which is important since institutional differences affect cross-country
comparisons. Second, since the Indian deregulation only affected foreign invest-
ment in equity, it allows us to cleanly isolate the effect of foreign investment in
equity on misallocation, holding fixed access to foreign debt.11
  10. Varela (2017) shows that financial liberalization can increase productivity, while Saffie,
Varela, and Yi (2020) find that financial liberalization also accelerates the reallocation of re-
sources across sectors, promoting the development of service/high-income sectors. On the other
                            ¨
hand, Gopinath, Kalemli-Ozcan,     Karabarbounis, and Villegas-Sanchez (2017) find that better
access to capital markets can amplify misallocation.
  11. In contrast, Varela (2017) studies the deregulation of capital controls in Hungary, in a con-
text where foreign capital was already integrated and was not affected by the policy. Gopinath,
          ¨
Kalemli-Ozcan,    Karabarbounis, and Villegas-Sanchez (2017) study the effect of the drop in the
interest rate for Southern European countries following the adoption of the Euro, which did not
directly change the equity market.




                                                7
2      Conceptual Framework
2.1      Misallocation and Reduced-Form Predictions
We follow standard practice in the literature and model misallocation as wedges
on the prices of inputs. Intuitively, the wedges can be thought of as explicit or
implicit taxes that implement a given (potentially inefficient) allocation in the
decentralized Arrow-Debreu-McKenzie economy. Thus, the allocative price paid
by a firm i for an input x is (1 +    ~ix )px , where x  {K, L, M } and K , L, and M
denote capital, labor, and materials, respectively. The observed price of input x is
px , and ~ix is the additional wedge a firm pays for the input over the observed price.
The wedge      ~ix can be negative, indicating that a firm is subsidized, or positive,
indicating that the firm pays a tax relative to the observed price. A single-product
firm's profit function is

                       i = pi fi (Ki , Li , Mi ) -                  (1 + ~ix )px xi
                                                        x{K,L,M }


where fi (Ki , Li , Mi ) is the firm's production function, which exhibits diminishing
marginal returns in each input.
   A cost-minimizing firm will consume an input xi until that input's marginal
revenue returns pi fi (Ki , Li , Mi )/xi are equal to the cost

                                    fi (Ki , Li , Mi )
                               pi                      = µi (1 + ~ix )px
                                         xi

where µi is the mark-up or output wedge.12 Then, define the combined wedge
1 + ix = µi (1 + ~ix ). The marginal revenue product of input x is proportional to
the (combined) wedge ix . Therefore, firms with higher combined input wedges ix
(capital, labor or any other) will have higher marginal revenue products on this
input (henceforth, "MRPX").
   We now generate partial equilibrium predictions that we can use to test for a
reduction in misallocation in the data. A decrease in the misallocation of input
x occurs when the wedge ix declines for a firm whose wedge is high relative to
other firms. A decline in the wedges of firms with relatively high initial ix will
  12. Technically, if firm i has pricing power, then the marginal revenue product of an in-
put x (MRPX) is better defined as pi fi (Ki , Li , Mi )/xi + pi /xi fi (Ki , Li , Mi ) rather than
pi fi (Kx
        i ,Li ,Mi )
           i
                    . This is because a change in x both directly affects a firm's output and (if it
has pricing power) its price. However, in the misallocation literature, MRPX typically refers to
pi fi (Kx
        i ,Li ,Mi )
           i
                     because it is dispersion in this value that causes misallocation. Thus, we use this
definition of MRPX at the cost of abusing terminology.


                                                    8
have several effects. First, since ix falls, the measured MRPX should also fall for
these firms. Second, firms with high wedges will increase their use of x. Finally,
the increase in input x (say capital) will increase the marginal revenue products
of the other inputs, which will incentivize firms to also increase their demand
for these other inputs (e.g. labor). As a result of higher input use, these firms
will produce more and earn higher revenues. Thus, if the policy reduces capital
misallocation by reducing the wedges of firms with high ik , we should expect to
find that the policy increases capital, labor, and sales, and decreases MRPK for
firms with ex-ante high values of MRPK.


2.2    Framework for Quantifying Effects on Solow Residual
To quantify the effects of reducing misallocation on treated industries' aggregate
productivity, following much of the literature, we proxy for changes in aggregate
productivity with changes in the Solow residual, which measures the net output
growth minus the net input growth. Thus, denoting the Solow residual for a sector
of interest I as SolowI ,

                   SolowI = N et OutputI - N et InputI .                        (1)

Net output growth is the change in the treated firms' output net the outputs re-
used as inputs by treated firms. Net input growth is the change in the inputs used
by treated firms net of the inputs that are produced by treated firms. Let net
output of good i be ci = yi - j I yji , where yi is the output of firm i and yji are
the inputs used by firm j of the output of i. The change in the treated firms' net
output is defined as CI = iI pi ci . This is the total change in net quantities
valued using fixed prices. The Solow residual in discrete time is then

                                              iI pj yij
                SolowI =  log CI -                       log        yij .       (2)
                                        j/I    iI pi ci        iI


The summation j     / I sums over firms that supply intermediate goods to firms in
the treated industries but are not themselves treated, while the summation iI
sums over firms in the treated industries. Thus,  log CI measures the change
in output due to the policy (differencing out outputs that are re-used as inputs),
while the latter term in equation (2) subtracts out changes in inputs purchased
from outside the treated industries. Intuitively, as shown in equation (1), the
Solow residual measures the change in output valued using current market prices


                                         9
and differences out the growth in inputs valued using those same prices. Thus, in
an accounting sense, it controls for input growth due to the policy.
   In general, as demonstrated by Petrin and Levinsohn (2012) and Baqaee and
Farhi (2019), a first order approximation of the change in the Solow residual of
the set of treated firms in I over time is given by:

                                                             x     ix
            SolowI,t             i  log Ai +               i i           log xi         (3)
                            iI                   iI
                                                                 1 + ix
                                               x{K,L,M }


where i is the ratio of firm i's sales to treated industry I 's net output,  log Ai
                                                        x
is the change in total factor productivity (TFPQ), i      is the output elasticity with
respect to x, ix is the level of firm-specific input wedges prior to the policy change,
and  log xi is the change in the log input x consumed by firm i. This expression
allows us to convert firm-level effects, which are in different units depending on
the goods being produced, into aggregate effects. A derivation of this expression
is provided in Appendix A. We show that this expression does not require any
assumptions about returns to scale, cross-good aggregation, or the shape of input-
output networks. As we will explain in Section 6, equation (3) will allow us to
exploit our reduced-form estimates to put bounds on the aggregate effect of the
policy change on the treated industries' Solow residual.


3     Data and Policy Change
3.1     Indian Foreign Investment Liberalization
Following its independence, India became a closed, socialist economy, and most
sectors were heavily regulated.13 However, in 1991, India experienced a severe
balance of payments crisis, and in June 1991, a new government was elected.
Under pressure from the IMF, the World Bank, and the Asian Development Bank,
which offered funding, the Indian government engaged in a series of structural
reforms. These reforms led India to become more open and market-oriented.
In addition to initiating foreign capital reforms in more than one-third of the
manufacturing sector in this period, India also liberalized trade (e.g. Topalova
and Khandelwal, 2011; Goldberg, Khandelwal, Pavcnik, and Topalova, 2010) and
dismantled extensive licensing requirements (e.g. Aghion, Burgess, Redding, and
Zilibotti, 2008; Chari, 2011).
 13. See Panagariya (2008) for a thorough review of the Indian growth experience and govern-
ment policies.

                                            10
    Before 1991, most industries were regulated by the Foreign Exchange Regula-
tion Act (1973), which required every instance of foreign investment to be individ-
ually approved by the government, and foreign ownership rates were restricted to
below 40% for each firm in most industries. With the establishment of the initial
liberalization reform in 1991, foreign investment up to 51% of equity in certain
industries became automatically approved.14 In the following years, different in-
dustries liberalized at different times, with each liberalization increasing the cap
on foreign investment and allowing for automatic approval.
    We study the effects of financial liberalization episodes that occurred after
2000, well after the main period of reform in the 1990s. This is both due to
data availability, as described below, and to avoid conflating the effects of the
financial liberalization reforms with other ongoing reforms. To study the effects of
foreign investment liberalization, we collected data on the timing of disaggregated
industry-level policy changes from different editions of the Handbook of Industrial
Policy and Statistics. We match this data to industries at the 5-digit NIC level. An
industry is coded as having been treated if a policy change occurred that allowed
automatic approval for investments up to at least 51% of capital (though, in some
cases, the maximum is higher). We then merge this data at the industry-level
with the firm-level dataset described below.


3.2     Firm and Product-Level Data
Our firm-level data comes from the Prowess database compiled by the Centre for
Monitoring the Indian Economy (CMIE) and includes all publicly traded firms,
as well as a large number of private firms. Unlike the Annual Survey of Indus-
tries (ASI), which is the other main source of information used to study dynamics
in the Indian manufacturing sector, Prowess is a firm-level panel dataset.15 The
data is therefore particularly well-suited for examining how firms adjust over time
in reaction to policy changes. The dataset contains information from the income
statements and balance sheets of companies comprising more than 70% of the eco-
nomic activity in the organized industrial sector of India and 75% of all corporate
taxes collected by the Government of India. It is thus representative of large and
medium-sized Indian firms. We retrieve yearly information about sales, capital
stock (measured as tangible, physical assets), consumption of raw materials and
 14. This policy is described by Topalova (2007), Sivadasan (2009), and Chari and Gupta (2008).
 15. The ASI is collected at the plant-level and does not include information on whether plants
are owned by the same firm, making it impossible to detect changes in misallocation across firms
due to opening or closing establishments.


                                              11
energy, and compensation of employees for each firm.
    To estimate the effect of the reform on prices, we take advantage of one rare
feature in firm-level datasets that is available in Prowess: the dataset reports both
total product sales and total quantity sold at the firm-product level, allowing us
to compute unit prices and quantities. This unusual feature is due to the fact that
Indian firms are required by the 1956 Companies Act to disclose product-level
information on capacities, production, and sales in their annual reports.16 The
definition of a product is based on Prowess's internal product classification, which
is in turn based on India's national industrial classification (NIC) and contains
1,400 distinct products. Using this information, we can calculate the unit-level
price for each product, which we define as total unit sales over total unit quantity.
This allows us to also construct a separate panel of product-level output and prices
from 1995-2015.17


3.3     Local Financial Development Data
To examine whether financial liberalization's effects depend on local financial de-
velopment, we also collect state-level banking data. India is a federal country with
a banking market that is largely regulated at the state-level, creating important
disparities in the degree of the development of the local credit market across states
(e.g. Burgess and Pande, 2005; Vig, 2013). To take advantage of this geographic
variation, we collected data at the state-level from each of the pre-reform years
(1995­2000) on the credits of all scheduled commercial banks from the Reserve
Bank of India.
    Over the study period, the administrative organization of districts and states
in India changed several times due to the formation of new states (e.g. Jharkhand
was carved out of Bihar in November 2000) or the bifurcation of existing districts
within a state. We keep the administrative organization of states fixed as of
1999. This is straightforward since the vast majority of cases where a new state is
created are because that state was carved out of an existing state. Our state-level
measures encompass 25 out of 26 Indian states and 4 out of 7 union territories.
Altogether, this data covers 91.5% of net domestic product and 99% of credit.
  16. A detailed discussion of the data can be found in Goldberg, Khandelwal, Pavcnik, and
Topalova (2010).
  17. One limitation of this dataset is that firms choose which type of units to report, and units
are not always standardized across firms or within-firms over time. Thus, when we want to
analyze the effects of policy changes on prices/output and there is not enough information to
reconcile changes in unit types within a firm-product over time, we drop the set of observations
associated with a firm-product. We omit 2% of observations.


                                               12
3.4     Final Combined Datasets
To arrive at our final datasets for analysis, we merge the firm-level and product-
level panel data with the industry-level policy data and state-level financial devel-
opment data.
     As is common in the literature, we restrict our analysis to manufacturing firms.
We further restrict the sample to observations from the period between 1995 and
2015. Restricting the sample to 1995­2015 has two advantages. First, focusing on
this later period avoids potential bias from other liberalization reforms during the
early-1990s, the main Indian liberalization period. While 45% of manufacturing
firms in the data are in industries that liberalized at some point, by restricting
our sample to observations after 1995, we only exploit policy variation from the
10% of manufacturing firms who experienced foreign capital liberalizations in the
2000s. Second, although Prowess technically starts in 1988, its coverage in the
first few years was limited and grew substantially over time. In 1988, Prowess
only included 735 manufacturing firms total, but it had grown to 3,652 firms by
the beginning of our study period in 1995. In contrast, from 1995 onward, during
our study period, the coverage of the database is more stable, with similar numbers
of firms observed across subsequent years (3,664 firms observed in 1996, 3,470 in
1997, and 3,614 in 1998).18
     Additionally, to allow for a longer pre-policy period over which to calculate
MRPK and classify MRPK as high or low, as described below, we drop a very small
number of observations that experienced a liberalization in 1998. This amounts
to 104 total firm-year observations (roughly 4­5 per year) or 0.26% of the sample.
Appendix Table A1 provides a list of the different industries in the manufacturing
sector affected by the deregulation during the remaining sample. As the table
shows, after dropping the 1998 liberalization, the only remaining liberalization
episodes occurred in 2001 and 2006.
     Finally, we restrict the sample to the set of firms for whom we can compute
marginal revenue products of capital and labor (MRPK and MRPL) prior to
the earliest policy change in 2001. These pre-treatment measures are needed to
estimate the effects of the policy on misallocation. Thus, we restrict the sample
to firms observed before 2001 with non-missing, positive data on both assets and
sales.19 These restrictions leave us with 5,013 distinct firms, across 343 distinct
  18. This likely reflects the fact that the first wave of liberalizing reforms also standardized
financial reporting in the mid-1990s.
  19. This is the minimal requirement to calculate MRPK. As we document in the next sub-
section, we exploit the fact that, under Cobb-Douglas production functions, sales divided by



                                               13
    Table 1: Summary Statistics for Manufacturing Firms in the Prowess Data

                                                                       Percentile
                                                    Obs.       Mean   10 50 90
              Treated during Study Period (%)       68,690      10        0   0    100
              Foreign (%)                           68,690       4        0    0     0
              State Owned (%)                       68,690       4        0   0      0
              Firm Age                              68,690      26        8   21    52
              Gross Fixed Assets (Deflated)         67,339      23        0    3    38
              Sales/Revenues (Deflated)             64,808      61        1   11   113
              Wages                                 65,912       3        0   1      7
              MRPK (Revenue/K)                      63,210       8        1   3    13

This table reports summary statistics for the manufacturing firms appearing in the CMIE
Prowess dataset from 1995 to 2015. An observation is at the firm-year level. Firms' capi-
tal, income, salaries, and revenues are measured in millions of USD. The 10th, 50th, and 90th
percentiles are given by the final three columns.


5-digit industries, for a total of 68,690 observations.
    Table 1 documents summary statistics for the final firm-level sample used in
our analysis. As the table shows, the typical firm in our analysis is a domestic
firm, while 4% of firms are foreign-owned firms, and 4% are state-owned. The
table also shows that 10% of firms are in industries that experienced a policy
change between 1995 and 2015.


4     Empirical Strategy
4.1     Measurement: MRPK and TFPQ
To determine whether foreign investment liberalization reduces misallocation, we
follow the predictions in our conceptual framework and test if the reform has
a differential effect on firms with high and low MRPK. Below, we describe the
method used to measure firms' MRPK.
    As is standard in the production function estimation literature,20 we assume
that firms have Cobb-Douglas revenue production functions:

                                                    j    j k  jl      m
                           Revenueijt = TFPR ijt Kijt Lijt Mijt                              (4)

where i denotes a firm, j denotes an industry, and t denotes a year. Revenueijt ,
                                                                      k
capital will be proportional to MRPK within an industry, as long as j   is the same for all firms
in industry j .
  20. Duranton, Ghani, Goswani, and Kerr (2017) describe a variety of methods used to estimate
production functions and the revenue returns to capital and labor.


                                               14
Kijt , Lijt , and Mijt are measures of sales, capital, the wage bill, and materials,
and TFPR ijt is the firm-specific unobserved revenue productivity. Throughout
this paper, capital is measured as the total value of tangible, physical assets.
    To estimate MRPK, we take advantage of the fact that, under the revenue
Cobb-Douglas production function, MRPK = Revenue       Kit
                                                            it
                                                               = j k Revenueit
                                                                        Kit
                                                                               . Thus,
Revenueit
   Kit
          provides a within-industry measure of MRPK, under the assumption that
                                          k
all firms in an industry share the same j   . To determine whether firms had a high
or low MRPK prior to the reform, we average each firm's measures of MRPK over
1995­2000 (the last year prior to the first policy change). We then classify a firm
as high MRPK if its average MRPK is above the 4-digit industry-level median.
    In addition to measuring MRPK, we also create a measure of TFPQ as a
proxy for firm-level productivity. We implement the Levinsohn and Petrin (2003)
method (henceforth "LP"), using the GMM estimation proposed by Wooldridge
(2009), to estimate the parameters of revenue production functions at the 2-digit
industry-level.21 , 22 The LP method estimates the parameters of the production
function using a control function approach, where materials are assumed to be
increasing in a firm's unobserved productivity conditional on capital. This identi-
fying assumption does not require that capital or labor are not misallocated -- the
key sources of misallocation that we study in this paper -- but does assume away
misallocation of materials. For the production function estimation, we measure
inputs and revenues with deflated Ruppee amounts, so that Revenueijt is prox-
ied with deflated sales.23 The revenue production function allows us to calculate
revenue total factor productivity, TFPR. Using the product data, which measures
unit prices, we calculate log TFPQ = log TFPR - log p    ~, where p
                                                                  ~ is the sales share
weighted average of the prices of a firm's products. By estimating the effect of
the reform on TFPQ, we can examine whether foreign capital liberalization af-
fects within-firm productivity as well as misallocation. The sample size for which
TFPQ is available is much smaller (46,765 firm-year observations), as calculating
  21. In principle, we could use the quantity data to directly estimate quantity production func-
tions, but in practice, relying on this data greatly reduces the sample size available for estimation.
  22. One concern is that multi-product firms produce goods in multiple industries, leading to
bias when we estimate production function parameters at the industry-level. We use the firm-
level industry identifiers provided by Prowess to assign firms to industries (Prowess provides
a single industry value for each firm), and this issue is partially mitigated by the fact that
subsidiaries of large conglomerates in different industries appear as different observations in the
data.
  23. We use deflators for India made available by Allcott, Collard-Wexler, and Connell (2016)
for the period 1995­2012, and we extended the price series to 2015. Revenue is deflated using
three-digit commodity price deflators. The materials deflators are measures of the average output
deflator of a given industry's suppliers using the 1993-4 input-output table. The capital deflator
is obtained using an implied national deflator.


                                                 15
this measure requires data on all firm inputs, as well as price data. Thus, we
view our within-firm level productivity results as more exploratory than our main
misallocation results.


4.2      Main Specification: Heterogeneous Effects
To measure the effect of liberalization on the allocation of resources across firms
within industries, we estimate the following equation:

   Outcomeijt = 1 Reform jt + 2 Reform jt × IiHigh MRPK + Xit + i + t +                          ijt

                                                                                                   (5)

where i denotes a firm, j denotes an industry, t denotes a year, and outcomeijt
is the outcome variable of interest, consisting of the logs of physical capital, the
total wage bill, sales, and MRPK. Reform jt is an indicator variable equal to one
if foreign investment has been liberalized in industry j , and IiHigh MRPK is an
indicator variable equal to 1 if a firm has a high pre-reform MRPK according to
our measure defined in Section 4.1. Xit consists of firm age and firm pre-treatment
size-by-year fixed effects,24 so that 1 and 2 are identified by comparing two firms
with the same age and within the same size bin. In a robustness check, we show
that our main results are robust to including a more parsimonious set of controls.
i and t are firm and year fixed effects respectively. t controls for aggregate
fluctuations, while i removes time invariant unobserved firm-level heterogeneity,
which may bias estimates of the MRPK dispersion.25 Standard errors are two-way
clustered at the 4-digit industry and year level to account for any serial correlation
that might bias our standard errors downward.26
    The coefficient of interest is 2 , which captures the differential effect of the
reform on ex-ante high MRPK firms relative to low MRPK firms. 2 > 0 implies
that the dependent variable increases for high MRPK firms relative to low MRPK
firms in industries that have opened up to foreign capital relative to industries
that have not. 1 measures changes in low MRPK firms' outcomes, and 1 + 2
  24. Firm size is defined as fixed effects for the within 2-digit industry quartiles of firms' average
pre-treatment capital.
  25. As previously discussed, cross-sectional measures of MRPK are likely to be inflated by mea-
surement error. Indeed, if we calculated the level of capital misallocation using cross-sectional
data, a standard approach would be to use an estimate of the variance of MRPK as a proxy for
the dispersion of the wedges. This estimate would sum over both the variance of the wedges and
the variance of measurement error, leading to inflated estimates of the dispersion of the wedges.
  26. Our treatment variable is coded at the 5-digit industry-level, but we cluster at the 4-digit
level to account for possible correlations across more closely related industries.



                                                  16
measures total changes in high MRPK firms' outcomes.


4.3     Identification
Below, we discuss the extent to which our empirical strategy is vulnerable to three
potential sources of bias: (1) non-random assignment of treatment status across
firms, (2) the endogeneity of foreign equity flows, and (3) measurement error in
MRPK. We also emphasize that our test does not require that foreign investors
directly identify and invest in high MRPK firms for the liberalization policies to
reduce misallocation.

Selection of treated firms. One natural concern is that firms in industries
that are liberalized are different from firms in industries that are not. As long
as these differences are time-invariant, this selection is fully accounted for by
firm fixed effects (i ). Similarly, firm fixed effects account for any time invariant
differences, observed or unobserved, between high and low MRPK firms. Thus,
our specification does not require that the reform was randomly allocated, nor
does it require that firms must have the same pre-treatment characteristics.
    A classic difference-in-differences set-up requires that treated firms would have
had the same time trends as untreated firms in the absence of the reform. However,
because we exploit differences within deregulated industries to estimate 2 , our key
parameter for evaluating the change in misallocation, our identification assumption
for 2 is milder than the classic differences-in-differences assumption. We can still
identify 2 if treated and untreated industries have different industry-level time
trends, as the latter are controlled for by the variable Reform jt .27 Thus, even if the
Indian government liberalized industries that were growing more quickly earlier,
2 would not be biased as long as high MRPK firms were not growing relatively
more quickly than low MRPK firms within these industries.
    While the assumptions needed to identify 2 are milder than the standard
difference-in-differences assumptions, when we turn to the aggregation exercise in
Section 6, we will use our estimates of both 1 and 2 . In contrast to identifying
solely 2 , identifying 1 requires that time trends are parallel between treated
and untreated industries. We provide support for this assumption in two ways.
First, we visually assess whether there are parallel pre-trends between treated
and untreated industries in an event study figure. Second, we show that our
 27. Our most stringent specifications account for time-varying differences across industries
non-parametrically by including 5-digit industry-by-year fixed effects.



                                             17
estimates of both 1 and 2 are insensitive to the inclusion of additional controls
for differential time trends at the firm and industry-level.

Endogeneity of foreign equity flows. While it is likely that within an in-
dustry, foreign capital is targeted towards specific firms, we do not use observed
variation in foreign capital in our regressions. Instead, we exploit an exogenous
shifter to the amount of foreign capital an industry can receive. Therefore, to
be unbiased, 1 and 2 do not require that foreign capital is allocated randomly
across firms in treated industries. As long as the differential time trends assump-
tions discussed above are not violated, our approach delivers valid estimates of
the effect of liberalizing industry-level access to foreign capital.

Measurement error in MRPK. Measurement error should have little effect
on our estimates if it is either firm-specific and time-invariant or time-variant but
common across firms in a given year. Firm fixed effects and year fixed effects
account for systematic measurement error at the firm and year level.
    On the left side of the equation, as is well-known in the econometrics literature,
classical measurement error (i.e. error independent of the latent true variable)
in the outcome variable will not bias the point estimates. On the right side,
idiosyncratic measurement error in MRPK may bias our estimate of 2 if it leads
to error in the coding of IiHigh MRPK . This measurement error would lead some
firms that are actually high MRPK to be coded as low MRPK, while some low
MRPK firms will be coded as high MRPK. As long as the true effect of the policy
is to reduce MRPK more for ex-ante high MRPK firms, misclassification will lead
to attenuation bias. Since 2 captures the change in high MRPK firms' capital
wedges, this would lead us to underestimate the change in these firms' wedges due
to the policy. However, non-classical measurement error could still bias our results
in the other direction. We return to this issue in Section 5, when we show that
our reduced-form estimates are not sensitive to winzorizing extreme values.

Investors allocate FDI in response to characteristics besides MRPK.
Our test of the effect of the policy on misallocation does not require that foreign
investors knowingly invest more in high MRPK firms or even that foreign invest-
ment specifically increases for high MRPK firms. Indeed, we do not take a stance
on whether the relative increase in capital investment in ex-ante high MRPK firms
is directly or indirectly driven by foreign investment. It could be, for example,
that foreign investment frees up domestic capital to flow to smaller, high MRPK


                                         18
            Table 2: Average Effect of the Foreign Capital Liberalization

              Dependent Variable      Revenues         Capital    Wages     MRPK

                                          (1)            (2)        (3)       (4)
              Reform jt                  0.110         0.305***   0.171*    -0.181*
                                        (0.088)         (0.102)   (0.093)   (0.092)

              Fixed Effects
                 Firm
                 Firm Age
                 Size × Year
              Observations              62,924          65,393    63,999    61,342

All dependent variables are in logs. Reform jt is an indicator variable equal to one if the industry
had liberalized access to the international capital market in or before year t and zero otherwise.
Size×Year are quartile fixed effects for firms' average pre-treatment capital interacted with year
fixed effects. In column 4, MRPK is computed using Revenue/K as a proxy for the marginal
revenue product of capital. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the 4-digit industry and
year level. *, **, and *** denote 10, 5, and 1% statistical significance respectively.


firms. Regardless of whether foreign investors can identify and directly target high
MRPK firms or not, foreign capital liberalization policies reduce misallocation if
they lead to a relative increase in capital for high MRPK firms.


5     Results
5.1     Average Effects
We start by estimating the effect of the reform on the average firm by removing
the interaction term Reform jt ×IiHigh MRPK from equation (5). Table 2 reports the
results. The estimates indicate that the liberalization policy has positive effects
on firm investments. For the average firm, capital increases by 31% (column 2).
The point estimates for the total wage bill and revenues are also positive, albeit
not significant at the 5%-level, while average MRPK declines by a marginally
significant 18% (column 4).
    Figure 1 plots the event study graph for the average effects on capital by
showing the estimated yearly effect of belonging to a treated industry before and
after the reform, including the same controls as in Table 2. Here, 0 is normalized
to be the year before a reform. Consistent with the absence of differential pre-
trends, we see that there is no effect of belonging to a treated industry before the
reform took place.



                                                  19
Figure 1: Event Study Graph for the Average Effect of Foreign Capital Liberal-
ization on Physical Capital




                         .6
                         .4
                         .2
                         0
                         -.2




                               -5          0                       5   10
                                               Year Since Reform


This figure reports the event study graph for the average effect of the liberalization on firms'
physical capital. The dependent variable is in logs. The reform is normalized to take place in
year 1. Each dot is the coefficient on the interaction between being observed t years after the
reform and being in a treated industry. The confidence interval is at the 95% level.




5.2     Differential Effects by Ex-ante MRPK
Baseline specification. Table 3 reports the estimates of the heterogeneous
effects of the policy from equation (5), our main estimating equation. Following
the liberalization, high MRPK firms generate higher revenues by 25% (column 1),
made possible by the fact that these firms invest more, with their physical capital
increasing by 57% (column 2).
    Higher investment does not crowd-out labor. High MRPK firms also experi-
ence a relative increase in their wage bills by 27%, suggesting that there may be
important complementarities between capital and labor. We will explore specifi-
cally whether the reform also reduced labor misallocation in Section 5.5. Among
the ex-ante high MRPK firms, the policy reduced MRPK by 35%. Given that,
prior to the reform, high MRPK firms had a MRPK more than twice as high
as low MRPK firms, the reform led to an important decline in the dispersion of
MRPK (and a substantial reduction in misallocation).28
    We use the same empirical strategy to examine whether the composition of
capital changed heterogeneously as a result of the reform. Appendix Table A2
  28. This finding might be surprising given the results in Bollard, Klenow, and Sharma (2013),
who find that most of economic growth in this period in India could be attributed to within
firm changes in productivity. However, Nishida, Petrin, Rotemberg, and White (2017) show that
this conclusion depends on the form of the production function and might underestimate the
contribution of reallocation to growth.


                                                 20
Table 3: Heterogeneous Effects of Foreign Capital Liberalization by Firms' Ex-
ante MRPK

                Dependent Variable                       Revenues       Capital     Wages             MRPK

                                                            (1)               (2)     (3)                 (4)

                Reform jt ×I i High MRPK                 0.245***       0.565***    0.265***         -0.353***
                                                          (0.071)        (0.063)     (0.058)          (0.101)
                Reform jt                                  -0.030         -0.009     0.022              0.021
                                                          (0.115)        (0.077)    (0.095)            (0.113)

                Fixed Effects
                   Firm
                   Firm Age
                   Size × Year
                Observations                              62,924         65,393      63,999            61,342

All dependent variables are in logs. Firms are classified as high MRPK if their average MRPK
in the pre-treatment period from 1995­2000 is above the 4-digit industry median. MRPK is
estimated with the Revenue/K method. Size×Year are quartile fixed effects for firms' average
pre-treatment capital interacted with year fixed effects. Standard errors are two-way clustered at
the 4-digit industry and year level. *, **, and *** denote 10%, 5%, and 1% statistical significance
respectively.

Figure 2: Event Study Graphs for the Relative Effect of Foreign Capital Liberal-
ization on High MRPK Firms


                                Physical Assets                                                MRPK
                                                                        .5
     1




                                                                        0
     .5




                                                                        -.5
     0




                                                                        -1
     -.5




           -5               0                        5        10              -5       0                       5   10
                                 Year Since Reform                                         Year Since Reform




This figure reports event study graphs for the relative effects of the liberalization on firms with
high pre-treatment MRPK relative to those with low pre-treatment MRPK in treated industries.
The reform is normalized to take place in year 1. Each dot is the coefficient on the interaction
between being observed t years after the reform and being a high MRPK firm in a treated
industry. All dependent variables are in logs. The confidence intervals are at the 95% level.


reports the results when the outcome variables are the share of a firm's capital
in each category. These results show that following the reform, for high MRPK
firms, 4 percentage points more of firms' capital was in the form of plants and


                                                                   21
equipment. There are no effects for low MRPK firms.

Pre-trends. To assess whether these heterogeneous effects are driven by pre-
trends, we produce event study graphs. We create indicator variables for being
observed five years before a reform, four years before, and so on and interact
these with being in a treated industry and being a high MRPK firm in a treated
industry. We include the same additional controls as in Table 3. Figure 2 reports
the relative effects by year of being a high MRPK firm in a treated industry for the
two key outcomes ­ the logs of capital and MRPK. Appendix Figure A1 reports
the graphs for revenues and wages. Two facts are noteworthy.
    First, for both of the main outcomes, being treated by the policy did not have
a strong differential effect on high MRPK firms before the policy was adopted,
providing visual evidence that pre-trends are not driving the results. To the extent
there is a pre-trend for MRPK, it is in the wrong direction, indicating that MRPK
was increasing for high MRPK firms prior to the policy change. The lack of
correlation between high MRPK firms' outcomes and the reform prior to the year
of deregulation also provides some preliminary evidence that the results are not
driven by mean reversion, an alternative explanation that we explore in more
detail in Section 5.4.
    Second, the effect of the liberalization is progressive over time, consistent with
the idea that changes in the allocation of resources (such as the adjustment of
worker flows and adaptation of production tools) are likely slow-moving, particu-
larly in India (e.g. Topalova, 2010). In addition, some of the changes in allocative
efficiency, might also come from competitive effects, which also happen progres-
sively through time.

TFPQ. Turning to our measure of within-firm productivity, column 1 of Table
4 reports the average effect of the policy on TFPQ. While the reform changed the
allocation of inputs across the firms, we cannot reject a zero effect on within-firm
productivity. Though imprecise, the point estimate is consistent with a positive
average effect on TFPQ. Similarly, when we interact the reform with the indicator
variable for high MRPK (column 2), we do not find any statistically significant
differential effect. However, to the extent that the effects of the policy on TFPQ
are positive, when we estimate the effects of reducing misallocation on aggregate
productivity in Section 6, we may be underestimating the aggregate productivity
gains from the policy.



                                         22
             Table 4: Effect of Foreign Capital Liberalization on TFPQ

                          Dependent Variable         TFPQ      TFPQ

                                                       (1)       (2)
                         Reform jt                    0.241     0.220
                                                     (0.180)   (0.146)

                         Reform jt ×I i High MRPK               0.035
                                                               (0.063)

                         Fixed Effects
                            Firm
                            Firm Age
                            Size × Year
                         Observations                46,765    46,765

All dependent variables are in logs. Firms are classified as high MRPK if their average MRPK
in the pre-treatment period from 1995­2000 is above the 4-digit industry median. MRPK is
estimated with the Revenue/K method. Size×Year are quartile fixed effects for firms' average
pre-treatment capital interacted with year fixed effects. TFPQ is measured by estimating revenue
production functions using the methodology of Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) and subtracting log
average price from log TFPR. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the 4-digit industry and
year level. *, **, and *** denote 10%, 5%, and 1% statistical significance respectively.


Importance of the local banking market. Our results so far show that
opening-up to foreign capital allows high MRPK firms to invest more and grow
faster. If foreign capital is acting as a substitute for a more efficient domestic bank-
ing sector, a natural implication is that firms located in areas with more developed
local banking markets prior to the reform should benefit less from the reform. We
directly test this hypothesis by creating a variable Financial Development s , defined
as the log average over 1995­2000 of all bank credit in state s. We then interact
this measure with all the single and cross-terms in equation (5). The variable is de-
meaned to restore the baseline effect on Reform jt × IiHigh MRPK . The coefficient of
interest is the coefficient for the triple interaction Reform jt × IiHigh MRPK ×Financial
Development s , which captures the differential effect of the policy on high MRPK
firms located in more developed local banking markets.
    Table 5 reports the results.29 For capital and wages, the interaction IiHigh MRPK
×Reform jt ×Financial Development s is negative and significant at the 1% level.
For MRPK, the triple interaction is positive and significant. Taken together, these
results imply that capital wedges fell more following the reform for high MRPK
firms located in less financially developed states.
    In addition to being statistically significant, the magnitudes of the hetero-
  29. The sample sizes are somewhat reduced from Table 3 since state information is not available
for all firms.


                                               23
                 Table 5: Heterogeneity by Local Financial Development

Dependent Variable                                     Revenues   Capital     Wages       MRPK

                                                         (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)

Reform jt × I jt High MRPK ×Financial Development s     -0.0752   -0.258***   -0.176***   0.184***
                                                       (0.0703)    (0.0819)    (0.0592)   (0.0378)
Reform jt × I jt High MRPK                             0.207**    0.546***    0.232***    -0.378***
                                                       (0.0793)   (0.0823)    (0.0575)     (0.115)

Fixed Effects
   Firm
   Firm Age
   Size × Year
Observations                                            57,435     59,788      58,480      56,005


All dependent variables are in logs. Reform jt is an indicator variable equal to one if the industry
has liberalized access to the international capital market. Firms are classified as high MRPK if
their average MRPK in the pre­treatment period from 1995­2000 is above the 4-digit industry
median. MRPK is calculated using the Revenue/K method. Size×Year are quartile fixed
effects for firms' average pre-treatment capital interacted with year fixed effects. Local financial
development is proxied using the log average amount of bank credit in the state in the pre­
treatment period. All double and single interactions of the triple-differences specification are
included in the regressions. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the 4-digit industry and
year level. *, **, and *** denote 10%, 5%, and 1% statistical significance respectively.


geneous effects are economically meaningful. If we focus on the change in the
marginal revenue products of capital (column 4), ex-ante high MRPK firms whose
state is at the 25th percentile of the bank credit distribution experience a decrease
in MRPK of 51% (-0.38 + (0.18 × -0.71)). In contrast, high MRPK firms whose
state is at the 75th percentile of the bank credit distribution experience a decrease
in MRPK of 13% (-0.38+(0.18 × 1.37)). Thus, the reduction at the 25th percentile
is roughly four times larger than the one at the 75th percentile.
    The fact that the effects of the policy are smaller in states where credit con-
straints were a priori lower further suggests that opening up to foreign capital re-
laxed credit constraints and allowed previously constrained firms to invest more.
Moroever, it provides evidence that under-developed domestic banking markets
are an important source of misallocation in India (consistent with Krueger et al.,
2002) and that foreign capital can act as a substitute.


5.3      Product Outcomes
We next estimate the effects of the policy on product-level outcomes, including
prices and output. Opening-up to foreign capital can reduce prices for two reasons.
If liberalization reduced the wedges on capital for high MRPK firms, these firms'


                                                  24
       Table 6: Effect of Foreign Capital Liberalization on Product Outcomes

Dependent Variable                  Price                  Output          Log(# Products)   Pr(Addition)   Pr(Deletion)

                              (1)             (2)       (3)          (4)         (5)             (6)           (7)
Reform jt                  -0.181***         -0.075   0.222***    0.033         0.007          -0.057**        0.011
                            (0.033)         (0.049)    (0.060)   (0.094)       (0.021)          (0.023)       (0.030)

Reform jt ×I i High MRPK                -0.154**                 0.273**       0.022*          0.083***       -0.074*
                                         (0.066)                 (0.122)       (0.011)          (0.028)       (0.041)

Fixed Effects
   Firm
   Firm Age
   Size × Year
   Firm × Product                                                                --               --            --
Observations               108,046      108,046       109,059    109,059       34,863           34,863        34,863


In columns 1-4, each observation is at the firm-product-year level. In columns 5-7, each ob-
servation is at the firm-year level. Firms are classified as high MRPK if their average MRPK
in the pre-treatment period from 1995­2000 is above the 4-digit industry median. MRPK is
calculated using the Revenue/K method. Size×Year are quartile fixed effects for firms' average
pre-treatment capital interacted with year fixed effects. Standard errors are two-way clustered at
the 4-digit industry and year level. *, **, and *** denote 10%, 5%, and 1% statistical significance
respectively.


marginal costs would fall. Lower marginal costs may be passed on to consumers in
the form of lower prices. In addition, by allowing high MRPK firms to invest more
and expand, the reform could also increase competition in the product market,
leading firms to reduce their mark-ups and cut their prices.
    Using product-level data on prices and output, we use the same identification
strategy as before but now control for product-firm fixed effects. With these fixed
effects, the regressions are identified by changes in prices or output for a given
product produced by a firm. Thus, the results are not biased by the addition or
the deletion of products. Columns 1­2 of Table 6 report the results. On average,
the reform reduces prices by 18% (column 1). Column 2 shows that the reduction
is mainly driven by high MRPK firms, who reduce their prices (in total) by more
than 20%.
    We also test whether the increase in revenues caused by the reform is accompa-
nied by a product-level increase in output. An increase in output for high MRPK
firms does not need to occur mechanically in the data, since the results we have
shown previously are for firm-level sales. Separately reported unit-level sales and
prices are used to calculate output. Columns 3­4 of Table 6 report the effect of the
reform on product-level output, which increases by 22% on average. The average
effect masks considerable heterogeneity: high MRPK firms increased output by
27% relative to low MRPK firms, while low MRPK firms' output does not change.
    In the last three columns of Table 6, we examine whether the policy affected

                                                                25
the product portfolio of treated firms. Column 5 indicates that the number of
products offered increased for high MRPK firms but not low MRPK firms. Low
MRPK firms were less likely to add new products (column 6) but not more likely to
delete products (column 7). High MRPK firms, on the other hand, were relatively
more likely to offer new products and (marginally significantly) less likely to delete
products. Altogether, these results are consistent with the initially high MRPK
firms expanding into new areas, crowding out expansions by low MRPK firms.


5.4    Robustness of Firm-level Results
In this subsection, we report a variety of robustness tests. We show that our results
are not driven by mean reversion and that they are robust to the inclusion of
alternative sets of controls, accounting for other Indian policies and cross-industry
spillovers, and winsorizing variables to reduce measurement error.

Mean Reversion. We provide several additional pieces of evidence that our
results are not driven by mean reversion. First, in Appendix Figure A2, we plot
the event study graphs using only variation from the later, 2006 reform. Since
high and low MRPK status are assigned using data from 1995­2000, if mean
reversion is driving the results, we would expect to see the effects appear before
2006 (normalized to be year 1 in the graph). Instead, the timing of the effects
lines up with the timing of the reform.
    Second, in Appendix Table A3 we show that the results are robust to assigning
high MRPK status using a shorter pre-treatment period (1995-1997 in Panel A
and 1995-1998 in Panel B) or using only variation from the 2006 reform (Panel
C). In all three cases, the years directly before the reform are not used to assign
high MRPK status, so these results should be less affected by any mean reversion.
In all three panels, we see that the estimates are similar to the baseline results in
Table 3.

Differential industry-level time-varying shocks. We further explore whether
2 is robust to differential time trends by controlling for 5-digit industry-year fixed
effects in equation (5). This non-parametrically accounts for 5-digit industry-
level unobserved, time-varying shocks and only exploits within -industry changes
in firms' outcomes. Reform jt is therefore subsumed by the fixed effects. Appendix
Table A4 reports the results and shows that the estimates of 2 are very similar.
     Because the estimation of the coefficient on Reform jt will be important when


                                         26
we compute the aggregate effect of the policy, we also show in Appendix Table
A5 that the point estimates for Reform jt and Reform jt × IiHigh MRPK are robust to
the inclusion of 2-digit industry-year fixed effects.30 These fixed effects force the
coefficients to be estimated by solely comparing firms in the same 2-digit industry,
in the same year, which accounts for any unobserved, time-varying, sector-level
shocks, such as aggregate trade shocks and differences in input costs at the 2­digit
industry level.

Accounting for state-year fixed effects. To account for the possibility that
some Indian states are more exposed to the reform due to their industrial compo-
sition and may have instituted policies affecting misallocation or were affected by
shocks concurrent with the reform, we flexibly control for state-level, time-varying,
unobserved shocks. In Appendix Table A6, we include state-year fixed effects in
our main specifications. The estimates are therefore identified by comparing firms
in the same state and the same year. The inclusion of these controls has little
effect on the magnitude of our estimates.

Controlling for reservation laws. Starting in 1967, the government imple-
mented a policy of reserving certain products for exclusive manufacture by small-
scale industry (SSI) firms in order to boost their development. By the end of 1978,
more than 800 products had been reserved. In 1996, it was more than a thousand.
After the wave of deregulation in the early 1990s, the Indian government decided
to remove most of these protective laws, and from 1997 to 2008, the government
dereserved almost all products. The consensus is that dereservation led to more
entry, higher output, and greater efficiency for deregulated industries.31
    Because part of the dereservation happened during our sample period, we check
that our results are robust to accounting for this deregulation. To do so, we use
the list of deregulated industries in ASICC from Boehm, Dhingra, and Morrow
(2019) and create a crosswalk between ASICC and our definition of industry (NIC
2008) by using the ASI 2008­2009.32
    To assess whether dereservation could be driving our results, we perform two
  30. There are 23 distinct 2-digit industries.
  31. See Garcia-Santana and Pijoan-Mas (2014), Martin, Nataraj, and Harrison (2017), Boehm,
Dhingra, and Morrow (2019), and Rotemberg (2019) for a detailed description of the laws and
their consequences.
  32. We would like to thank the authors for generously sharing their data with us. For each
establishment in the ASI, the data reports both the NIC code of the establishment and the list
of all the products sold at the ASICC level. We compute a one to one mapping by assigning to
each NIC the ASICC with the highest share of products sold.


                                             27
tests, both reported in Appendix Table A7. In the odd columns, we exclude all 5-
digit NIC industries that contained a product that was affected by a dereservation
reform after 2000 (the year before our first episode of liberalization). Because
this cuts our sample by more than half, in even columns, we create an indicator
variable Dereservation jt that is equal to one after industry j has been dereserved
and control for it and its interaction with IiHigh MRPK . In both cases, the pattern
of the point estimates is largely unchanged.

Controlling for trade liberalization. India also experienced a massive reduc-
tion in its trade tariffs in the 1990s. This raised firms' productivity by increasing
competition in the industries in which they operated and allowed them to access a
broader set of inputs at a lower price (Topalova and Khandelwal, 2011; Goldberg,
Khandelwal, Pavcnik, and Topalova, 2010; De Loecker, Goldberg, Khandelwal,
and Pavcnik, 2016). If trade liberalization occurred in similar industries to the
foreign financial liberalization, this could bias our results.
    Our specification with industry-year fixed effects already partially accounts for
this potential bias, since the trade liberalization occurred at the industry-level.
However, it is possible that trade liberalization had a differential effect on high and
low MRPK firms. To account for this, we compute input and output tariffs from
1995-2010 -- the period for which tariff data is available -- following Goldberg,
Khandelwal, Pavcnik, and Topalova (2010) and assume tariffs remained constant
for the period 2010-2015.33 Input tariff measures are obtained by computing the
weighted sum of the percent tariffs on each input used to produce a product based
on the Indian input-output table. We then include both the tariff measure and its
interaction with IiHigh MRPK as controls in our main regression specification.
    Appendix Table A8 reports the results when we control for the output tariffs
only (the odd columns) or both the output and input tariffs (the even columns).
For our key outcomes, capital and MRPK, the effect of the foreign capital liber-
alization on high MRPK firms remains virtually unchanged.

Winsorizing outliers. We directly test the extent to which our results might
be driven by outliers by winsorizing the data at the 5% level. We identify outliers
either across industries or within each 2-digit industry. We report the results in
Appendix Table A9 and show that the point estimates are similar to those without
a measurement error correction.
 33. We would like to thank Johanes Boehm for generously sharing his tariff measure with us.




                                            28
Firm entry and exit. To test whether differential attrition could affect our
results, we directly test whether the policy affected firm exit and entry using
industry-level variation in the policy over time. If the policy had no effect on
attrition, attrition should not bias our results. We identify entry in the data using
the year of incorporation and use the last year in the dataset as a proxy for exit.34
To estimate the average effect of the policy on exit and entry, we then create
counts of the number of firms in a 5-digit industry-year cell that exited or entered.
To estimate the differential effect on exit for high and low MRPK firms, we create
these counts for industry-year-MRPK category cells. We cannot use the same
strategy to test for differential entry, since, if a firm enters after 2000, we do not
observe its MRPK during the pre-treatment period. Appendix Table A10 reports
the results. We find little evidence that the policy affected entry and exit.35

Spillovers. Cross-industry spillovers through input-output linkages across treated
and non-treated industries could bias our estimates if they lead the policy to affect
the outcomes of firms in non-liberalized industries.
    As in Acemoglu, Akcigit, and Kerr (2016), we separately measure the inten-
sity of the spillover effects of liberalization through the input-output matrix on
upstream and downstream industries, using entries of the Leontief inverse matrices
as weights:

                 U pstreamk,t =               Input%2000
                                                    lk - 1l=k × Reform l,t
                                      l

    and

               Downstreamk,t =                Output%2000
                                                     kl - 1l=k × Reform l,t
                                          l

where k and l represents industries at the input-output table level, 1l=k is an
indicator function for l = k , and the summation is over all industries, including
industry k itself. The notation Input%lk represents the elements of the input-
                                        Salesj i
output matrix A = [aij ], where aij  Sales     i
                                                 measures the total sales of inputs
from industry j to industry i, as a share of the total inputs of industry i. The
notation Output%kl denotes the input-output matrix A       ^ = [^             ^ij 
                                                                 aij ], where a
  34. True exit is not explicitly recorded in Prowess, since a firm may simply exit the panel
because it decides to stop reporting its information to CMIE.
  35. This is not necessarily surprising since Prowess only includes large and medium-sized firms,
for which exit and entry rates are likely to be relatively low. Indeed, in the average 5-digit
industry, there are only 0.84 exit events a year and only 0.033 entry events. In more than 50%
of industry-years, there are zero exits. In 95% of industry-years, there are zero entrances.


                                                 29
Salesij        Sales
 Salesi
          = aji Salesj
                     i
                       measures the total sales of outputs from industry i to industry
j , as a share of the total sales of industry i. We use the input-output matrices in
2000 since it is the last pre-treatment year and subtract the direct policy effects
by controlling directly for the policy change in industry k in the regression.
     Appendix Table A11 reports the results for the average effect of the policy,
controlling for the upstream and downstream effects, and shows that they are
unchanged. Appendix Table A12 reports the estimates of the heterogeneous effects
of the policy, again controlling for spillovers. The estimates are again very similar
to those that do not account for spillovers.

Minimal controls. We next show that our results are robust to including only
firm and year fixed effects and removing all additional controls. Appendix Table
A13 reports the results and shows that our key estimates are again quite similar.

Heterogeneous effects by firm risk. One potential explanation for our esti-
mates is that firms with high ex-ante MRPK were relatively riskier for domestic
lenders since they were more correlated with the Indian economy. Then, after
the reform, foreign capital flowed to these firms (e.g. Liu, Wei, and Zhou, 2020).
Indeed, our misallocation framework nests this possibility, since wedges may rep-
resent the constraints that kept foreign lenders from lending to risky firms. To
test this hypothesis, in Appendix Table A14, we calculate firms' pre-treatment
correlation between revenue growth and the Indian economy and control for this
measure interacted with the reform. The reform did not have a differential effect
on ex-ante riskier firms, and controlling for this relationship has little impact on
our estimates.


5.5       Extension to Labor Misallocation
Our results so far show that opening up to foreign capital allowed firms not only to
invest more (as seen by the increase in their capital stock) but also to expand their
wage bills. Reducing capital market frictions may simply increase the demand for
labor because of the complementarity between capital and labor in the production
function. However, it is also possible that the financial liberalization directly
reduced labor misallocation, a hypothesis that we test in this section.
   Although labor is often modelled as a fully adjustable variable input across
periods,36 in reality, labor is likely to have a fixed-cost component due to wage
  36. For example, Olley and Pakes (1996) model labor as a flexible, variable input, while mod-
eling capital as a stock that requires adjustment.

                                              30
   Table 7: Effect of Foreign Capital Liberalization by Firms' Ex-ante MRPL


            Dependent Variable        Revenues         Capital   Wages       MRPL

                                          (1)            (2)       (3)         (4)

           Reform jt ×I i High MRPL      -0.037        0.230*    0.285***   -0.322***
                                        (0.093)        (0.116)    (0.076)    (0.070)
           Reform jt                     0.139          0.116     0.014       0.125
                                        (0.099)        (0.068)   (0.096)     (0.089)

           Fixed Effects
              Firm
              Firm Age
              Size × Year
           Observations                  46,064        46,030     46,064     46,064

All dependent variables are in logs. High MRPL firms are defined in an analoguous way to high
MRPK firms using the Revenue/L method. Reform jt is an indicator variable equal to one if the
industry has liberalized access to the foreign capital market. Size×Year are quartile fixed effects
for firms' average pre-treatment capital interacted with year fixed effects. Standard errors are
two-way clustered at the 4-digit industry and year level. *, **, and *** denote 10%, 5%, and
1% statistical significance respectively.


rigidity and hiring/firing costs. As a result, when there is a mismatch between
the payments to labor and the generation of cash-flows, financial constraints may
affect employment and labor (mis)allocation. Schoefer (2015) and Fonseca and
Doornik (2019) provide evidence in support of this channel.
    To investigate if the reform reduces labor misallocation, we use the same esti-
mation strategy as before but now compare the effects of the policy on firms with
higher or lower marginal revenue products of labor (MRPL) prior to the reform.
We classify high and low MRPL firms analogously to how we classify high and low
MRPK firms and estimate the heterogeneous effects of the reform on high MRPL
firms.
    Table 7 reports the results. Following the reform, high MRPL firms relatively
increase their total wage bill (column 3) by 29%. Among ex-ante high MRPL firms,
MRPL decreases by 32% relative to low MRPL firms (column 4). By allowing high
MRPL firms to grow faster and to expand employment, the deregulation appears
to have reduced labor misallocation.




                                                  31
6     Aggregate Effects
While our reduced-form estimates show that misallocation fell, they do not tell us
whether this had economically meaningful effects on output growth. To measure
the policies' aggregate effects, we now estimate bounds for the effect of the reduc-
tion in misallocation on treated industries' Solow residual, a proxy for aggregate
productivity, using equation (3). Equation (3) is re-stated below:


                                                               x     ix
             SolowI,t             i  log Ai +                i i           log xi
                             iI                    iI
                                                                   1 + ix
                                                 x{K,L,M }


where i is the ratio of firm i's sales to treated industry I 's net output,  log Ai is
                         x
the change in TFPQ, i      is the output elasticity with respect to x, ix is the level
of firm-specific input wedges prior to the policy change, and  log xi is the change
in the log input x consumed by firm i.


6.1     Identification
Equation (3) shows that the Solow residual can increase for two reasons: (1)
individual firms become more productive (within-firm productivity) or (2) inputs
either increase for producers with positive wedges or decrease for producers with
negative wedges (firm-level inputs). We discuss each part in turn.

Within-firm productivity. The contribution of the change in within-firm pro-
ductivity to the Solow residual is given by      iI i  log Ai . Since we do not
observe a significant effect of the policy on TFPQ in the difference-in-differences
regressions (see Table 4), we set  log Ai = 0.37

Firm-level inputs. The contribution of changing firm-level inputs to the Solow
residual is given by:

                                                     x     ix
                       SolowI,t =                  i i           log xi .                     (6)
                                         iI
                                                         1 + ix
                                       x{K,L,M }


Note that an increase in inputs for some firms does not need to mechanically
increase the Solow residual. The wedge ix can be negative for firms whose capital
 37. To the extent that our estimated effect on TFPQ, while insignificant, is positive, by setting
Ai to zero, we may underestimate the policy's effect on the Solow residual.


                                               32
is subsidized, zero if there is no distortion, or positive for firms that face distortions
in accessing capital. An increase in inputs if there is no misallocation will have
no effect on the Solow residual, since, in that case, i would be zero for all firms.
Similarly, if the policy increases misallocation by increasing inputs xi for firms
with negative wedges, the contribution to the Solow residual would be negative
even though inputs increase.
    To estimate (6), observe that most components of this expression are readily
identifiable in the data or given by our estimates from the natural experiment. The
sales shares of net output i can be computed using input-output data,38 and i            x

can be estimated using the production function estimation. Under the standard
difference-in-differences assumption that untreated industries are unaffected by
the policy,  log xi can be predicted from difference-in-differences regressions with
heterogeneous effects where log usage of each input is the outcome variable.39
    We next turn to identifying ix . Equation (6) highlights that errors in the
estimation of ix , the level of firm-specific input wedges prior to the policy change,
                                                x
can bias the aggregate policy effects, as 1+i x is multiplicative with  log xi and
                                                  i
increasing in ix . If we use cross-sectional variation prior to the policy change to
identify ix , measurement error could lead to greater dispersion in these values.
Since we have shown in Section 5 that the reform has a positive effect on inputs
                                                                  x
for firms with relatively greater wedges, inflated values of 1+i x would be multiplied
                                                                    i
by the positive predicted change in inputs.
    To circumvent this potential bias, we generate lower and upper bound estimates
of the policies' effect. We first note that if the policy strictly reduces misallocation,
then the aggregate effects are strictly increasing in ix (as discussed above). Then, a
lower bound for ix generates a lower bound aggregate effect, while an upper bound
for ix generates an upper bound aggregate effect. To generate an upper bound, we
can attribute all observed pre-treatment deviations from efficiency to wedges. As
we will see, under the assumption that the policy strictly reduced misallocation,
we can also generate a lower bound value for ix . While this assumption may
not always be reasonable, our reduced-form empirical results, which show that
the policy causally reduced MRPK and MRPL for firms that had ex-ante above
median values of MRPK and MRPL, provide strong evidence in its favor.
  38. To measure total sales by sector I not re-used by firms in I as inputs, we sum over treated
firms' total sales in 2000 (the last pre-treatment year). We then use information from the Annual
Survey of Industries to compute the share of output that is re-used by the treated industries
as inputs and scale total sales by 1 minus this value. Finally, i is calculated for a firm i by
dividing a firm i's sales by this value.
  39. The difference-in-differences assumption could be partially relaxed by modeling spillovers
explicitly and estimating spillovers effects.


                                               33
Identifying & estimating the lower bound of ix . By definition, the post-
                                                x       x
policy wedge for a firm is always given by: post   = pre   +  x , where  x is the
change in  x due to the policy and i is suppressed to simplify notation. Under the
assumption of no increase in misallocation after the policy (i.e. the policy does not
                    x                                        x          x
subsidize firms), post  0, which implies that minpost x   0 pre = - . Thus, the

minimum possible pre-treatment wedge is given by the scenario where, after the
policy change, the industry is efficient, and there are no wedges left. In this case,
any measured dispersion in marginal revenue products after the policy change is
attributed to mismeasurement and misspecficiation as opposed to misallocation.
So estimating  x gives us a lower bound estimate of pre       x
                                                                , and we can apply
equation (6) to estimate a lower bound of the first order effects of the policy on
the Solow residual.
    Since the minimum values of the pre-reform wedges  x are given by the change
in the wedges due to the policy, and since in our formula, wedges vary at the
firm level, we can predict the minimum firm-specific wedges with a difference-in-
differences regression with heterogeneous effects where the outcome variable is the
marginal revenue product of input x. For example, in the case of ik , we estimate

               log MRPK ijt =g (Reform jt , Cit ) + Xit + i + t +         ijt           (7)

where g (Reform jt , Cit ) is a flexible function of Reform jt and firm characteristics
Cit . Since we focus on within-industry changes in allocation, allowing the effect of
Reform jt to depend on firm characteristics is important, as it allows our estimates
of ik to vary within an industry j . As shown in Appendix B, if the policy com-
pletely eliminated misallocation, g   ^(1, Cit ) is an unbiased predictor of log(1 + ik ).
Then, ik can be estimated by computing ik = eg         ^i (1,Cit )
                                                                   - 1. An analogous process
can be used to estimate the wedges on labor. Appendix C discusses more gener-
ally the settings where this methodology can be applied to estimate lower bound
aggregate effects with natural experiments.
    As discussed in Section 4.2, estimating the change in wedges using a difference-
in-differences specification is less sensitive to the issues that occur when cross-
sectional data are used to estimate distortions. To the extent that firms' measure-
ment error is time-invariant over the period of our experiment, it will be differ-
entiated out by the firm fixed effects i . Time-varying macro-economic shocks or
economy-wide changes in markups or the costs of inputs will be absorbed by year
fixed effects, as well as any year fixed effects interacted with firm characteristics.
Additionally, the effects of time-varying shocks to marginal revenue products, such


                                            34
as productivity shocks, even if they are not economy-wide, will not be attributed
to the reform, as long as the standard difference-in-differences assumption holds,
and they are uncorrelated with Reform jt conditional on the controls. Appendix
Table A9 provides further evidence that these estimates are not highly sensitive
to measurement error.
    In practice, since we observe larger effects on inputs and marginal revenue
products for firms with ex-ante higher marginal revenue products, we specify
g (Ref ormjt , Cit ) to allow for heterogeneous effects for firms with above median
pre-treatment values of MRPK and MRPL.40 We use analogous regression speci-
fications to estimate the change in inputs due to the policy. Appendix Table A15
reports the results of the regressions used to identify both the change in wedges
and the change of inputs. Following the identifying assumption in the produc-
tion function estimation used to identify TFPQ, we assume that materials are not
misallocated (im = 0 for all i).41

Identifying & estimating the upper bound of ix . For our upper bound
measure of ix , we attribute all the pre-treatment, cross-sectional observed devia-
tions from efficiency in the data to misallocation. While we observe pre-treatment
measures of MRPK directly, M RP K = (1 + ix )px                 x
                                                     i . Since pi is not observable,
observing MRPK alone does not directly identify the level of the wedges. Instead,
                                                                       K p i yi
to identify the levels of the wedges, we use the relationships iK = i    rKi
                                                                                - 1 and
         p y
iL = i  L i i
         wLi
              - 1, where r is the rental rate of capital and wLi is the wage bill.42
The wage bill wLi and sales pi yi are observable in the last pre-treatment year
                                      K         L
(2000) in Prowess, and as before, i      and i    are given by production function
estimation. For the rental rate of capital r, we follow Hsieh and Klenow (2009)
 40. For example, for the marginal revenue product of capital, we estimate
                                                 High MRPK                  High M RP L
     log M RP Kijt =1 Reform jt + 2 Reform jt × Ii         + 3 Reform jt × Ii
                      + Xit + i + t +      ijt .


We can then predict ik by computing:

       log(1 + ik ) =^1 Reform + ^2 Reform × I High MRPK + ^3 Reform × I High M RP L ,
                              j           j   i                     j   i

where Reform j is an indicator variable equal to 1 if a firm is in an industry that liberalized
between 1995 and 2015.
  41. In practice, relaxing this assumption and calculating wedges and changes in inputs for
materials the same way we do for capital and labor has a small but positive effect on the
estimated change in the Solow residual.
  42. These relationships come from firms' cost-minimization problems. A cost-minimizing firm
              K                     L
     rK (1+i    )          wLi (1+i   )
sets    pi yi
                    K
                  = i  and    pi yi
                                          L
                                        = i                          rK
                                            . An efficient firm sets p i yi
                                                                              K
                                                                            = i and wL
                                                                                    pi yi = i , so
                                                                                        i   L

the wedges are the taxes or subsidies that would make firms' decisions appear efficient.


                                                   35
and set r = 10%. In practice, since the capital wedges are decreasing in r, the
estimated aggregate effect will also be decreasing in r. Thus, our choice of a rela-
tively low value of r = 10% for India is consistent with our goal of calculating an
upper bound.


6.2     Results
Bounds on the first order approximation. Having estimated all the com-
ponents of equation (3), we calculate that the lower bound increase in the treated
industries' Solow residual is 3.7% (see row 1 of Table 8), and the upper bound is
16.9% (row 2).

Comparison with alternative estimates. For robustness, we next compare
this lower bound estimate to several other estimates of the aggregate effect of the
policy. In row 3, we combine the CES model of Hsieh and Klenow (2009), which
translates changes in the log variance of TFPR into changes in aggregate TFP,
with our reduced-form estimates.43 This allows us to obtain a direct estimate of
the aggregate effects of the policy rather than a first order approximation, at the
cost of stronger assumptions about firm's production functions, demand, and the
distribution of wedges. This model indicates that treated industries' aggregate
TFP increased by 8.6%.
    We next consider the cumulative effect of the reforms. The estimates of the re-
forms' effects over time in Figure 2 suggest that the effects on inputs and the
wedges grew over time. Thus, using estimates from a standard difference-in-
differences that assumes constant treatment effects over time may lead row 1
of Table 8 to underestimate the long-run effects of the policies. Since the effects
plateau after 5 years in Figure 2, we re-calculate the lower bound approximation
using the estimated policy effect five years after the reforms. This yields a larger
estimate (6.7%, row 4).
    Since the first order approximation may not be a good approximation if there
are important higher order effects of the policy on the Solow residual, we also
construct a non-linear approximation of the policies' effects on the Solow residual
by estimating policy effects year-by-year and chaining the results. Appendix D
  43. In the model of Hsieh and Klenow (2009), log T F P = -/2V ar(log T F P Ri ), where  is
                                      K                 L
assumed to be 3, and log(T F P Ri ) = i  log M RP Ki + i  log M RP Li . We can use our estimates
of log M RP Ki and log M RP Li in 2000 to directly predict log T F P Ri and then estimate its
variance. To get the post-treatment log T F P Ri , we can simply use the regression estimates in
Appendix Table A15 to predict the firm-level change in log M RP Ki and log M RP Li and add
the predicted  log T F P Ri to the pre-treatment value of log T F P Ri .


                                              36
Table 8: Effects of Foreign Capital Market Liberalization on the Solow Residual
of Treated Industries

                                                           Increase in Solow Residual
         Lower Bound                                                  3.7%
         Upper Bound                                                  16.9%
         Hsieh-Klenow Model                                           8.6%
         Lower Bound Allowing for Cumulative Effects                  6.7%
         Non-Linear Approximation                                     6.5%


This table reports the estimates of the effect of the foreign capital liberalizations in 2001 and
2006 on treated industries' Solow residual. Rows 1, 2, and 4 use a first order approximation
(equation (3)). Row 3 uses a model in the style of Hsieh and Klenow (2009), and the last row
uses a non-linear approximation, described in Appendix D. The estimates are generated using
the Prowess dataset. Rows 1, 4, and 5 identify the wedges by assuming the policy eliminated
misallocation. Rows 2 and 3 use cross-sectional data to identify the baseline wedges.


describes this process. Since the non-linear approximation requires estimating
dynamic policy effects over five years, it should be compared to the cumulative
estimate in row 4. The non-linear approximation (6.5%, reported in row 5) is
quite close to the simpler, cumulative first order approximation.


7     Conclusion
Exploiting within-country, within-industry, and cross-time variation, we show that
foreign capital liberalization reduced the misallocation of capital and labor in In-
dia. In doing so, this paper addresses two of the key challenges faced by the
misallocation literature. First, it provides direct evidence that policymakers can
change allocative efficiency and productivity. Second, it develops new tools that
can be combined with estimates from natural experiments to measure the aggre-
gate effects of policies.
    The liberalization, which allowed for the automatic approval of foreign in-
vestments and raised caps on foreign equity in the 2000's, increased capital in
the treated industries. However, the effect of the liberalization on the average
firm masks important heterogeneity. The entirety of the liberalization's effect on
firms' outcomes is driven by increased investment in firms that previously had
high MRPK (high sales to capital ratios). These firms' MRPK fell, indicating
that the policy reduced misallocation. Thus, foreign capital liberalization can be
an important tool for low-income countries to reduce capital market frictions.


                                               37
    Variation from a natural experiment also allows us to estimate aggregate effects
of reducing misallocation that ­ unlike cross-country or time series comparisons ­
are less sensitive to measurement and model misspecification error. Aggregating
our reduced-form estimates, we find that the policy had economically meaningful
effects, increasing treated industries' Solow residual by between 4% and 17%.


References
Acemoglu, Daron, Ufuk Akcigit, and William Kerr. 2016. "Networks and the
   macroeconomy: An empirical exploration." NBER Macroeconomics Annual
   30 (1): 273­335.

Aghion, Philippe, Robin Burgess, Stephen J Redding, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2008.
    "The unequal effects of liberalization: Evidence from dismantling the License
    Raj in India." American Economic Review 98 (4): 1397­1412.

Alfaro, Laura, Areendam Chanda, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Selin Sayek. 2004.
    "FDI and economic growth: the role of local financial markets." Journal of
    International Economics 64 (1): 89­112.

Alfaro, Laura, and Anusha Chari. 2015. "Deregulation, Misallocation, and Size:
    Evidence from India." Journal of Law and Economics 57 (4): 897­936.

Allcott, Hunt, Allan Collard-Wexler, and Stephen D O Connell. 2016. "How Do
     Electricity Shortages Affect Industry ? Evidence From India." American Eco-
     nomic Review 106 (3): 587­624.

Amirapu, Amrit, and Michael Gechter. 2019. "Labor Regulations and the Cost
   of Corruption: Evidence from the Indian Firm Size Distribution." Review of
   Economics and Statistics: 1­48.

Asher, Sam, and Paul Novosad. 2020. "Rural Roads and Local Economic Devel-
    opment." American Economic Review 110 (3): 797­823.

Asker, John, Allan Collard-Wexler, and Jan De Loecker. 2014. "Dynamic Inputs
    and Resource (Mis)Allocation." Journal of Political Economy 122 (5): 1013­
    1063.

Bai, John, Daniel Carvalho, and Gordon M. Phillips. 2018. "The Impact of Bank
     Credit on Labor Reallocation and Aggregate Industry Productivity" [in En-
     glish]. Journal of Finance 73 (6): 2787­2836.


                                        38
Banerjee, A. V., and K. Munshi. 2004. "How Efficiently is Capital Allocated?
    Evidence from the Knitted Garment Industry in Tipur." Review of Economic
    Studies 71 (1): 19­42.

Banerjee, Abhijit V., Esther Duflo, Rachel Glennerster, and Cynthia Kinnan. 2015.
    "The Miracle of Microfinance? Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation."
    American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 7 (1): 22­53.

Banerjee, Abhijit V, and Esther Duflo. 2014. "Do Firms Want to Borrow More?
    Testing Credit Constraints Using a Directed Lending Program." Review of
    Economic Studies 81 (2): 572­607.

Banerjee, Abhijit V, Esther Duflo, and Kaivan Munshi. 2003. "The (Mis)allocation
    of Capital." Journal of the European Economic Association 1 (2­3): 484­494.

Banerjee, Abhijit V, and Benjamin Moll. 2010. "Why Does Misallocation Persist?"
    American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2 (1): 189­206.

Baqaee, David, and Emmanuel Farhi. 2019. "A Short Note on Aggregating Pro-
    ductivity," NBER Working Paper, no. 25688.

      . 2020. "Productivity and misallocation in general equilibrium." The Quar-
    terly Journal of Economics 135 (1): 105­163.

Bartelsman, Eric, John Haltiwanger, and Stefano Scarpetta. 2013. "Cross-Country
    Differences in Productivity: The Role of Allocation and Selection." American
    Economic Review 103 (1): 305­334.

Bento, Pedro, and Diego Restuccia. 2017. "Misallocation, Establishment Size, and
    Productivity." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 9 (3): 267­303.

Bils, Mark, Peter Klenow, and Cian Ruane. 2018. "Misallocation or Mismeasure-
     ment?," Working paper.

Bloom, Nicholas, Benn Eifert, Aprajit Mahajan, David McKenzie, and John Roberts.
    2013. "Does Management Matter? Evidence from India." Quarterly Journal
    of Economics 128 (1): 1­51.

Boehm, Johannes, Swati Dhingra, and John Morrow. 2019. "The Comparative
    Advantage of Firms." Working Paper.

Bollard, Albert, Peter J Klenow, and Gunjan Sharma. 2013. "Indias mysterious
    manufacturing miracle." Review of Economic Dynamics 16 (1): 59­85.

                                       39
Buera, Francisco J, Joseph P Kaboski, and Yongseok Shin. 2011. "Finance and
    Development: A Tale of Two Sectors." American Economic Review 101 (5):
    1964­2002.

Burgess, Robin, and Rohini Pande. 2005. "Do rural banks matter? Evidence from
    the Indian social banking experiment." American Economic Review 95 (3):
    780­795.

Chari, A V. 2011. "Identifying the Aggregate Productivity Effects of Entry and
    Size Restrictions: An Empirical Analysis of License Reform in lndia." Amer-
    ican Economic Journal: Economic Policy 3 (2): 66­96.

Chari, Anusha, and Nandini Gupta. 2008. "Incumbents and protectionism: The
    political economy of foreign entry liberalization." Darden - JFE Conference
    Volume: Capital Raising in Emerging Economies, Journal of Financial Eco-
    nomics 88 (3): 633­656.

Cole, Shawn. 2009. "Financial Development, Bank Ownership, and Growth: or,
    Does Quantity Imply Quality?" Review of Economics and Statistics 91 (1):
    33­51.

Collard-Wexler, Allan, John Asker, and Jan De Loecker. 2011. "Productivity
    Volatility and the Misallocation of Resources in Developing Economies," NBER
    Working Paper, no. 17175.

David, Joel M, Hugo A Hopenhayn, and Venky Venkateswaran. 2016. "Informa-
    tion, Misallocation and Aggregate Productivity." Quarterly Journal of Eco-
    nomics.

David, Joel M, and Venky Venkateswaran. 2019. "The Sources of Capital Misal-
    location." American Economic Review 109 (7): 2531­2567.

De Loecker, Jan, Pinelopi K Goldberg, Amit K Khandelwal, and Nina Pavcnik.
    2016. "Prices, Markups, and Trade Reform." Econometrica 84 (2): 445­510.

Delatte, Anne Laure, Adrien Matray, and No&eacute;mie Pinardon Touati. 2019.
    "Private Credit Under Political Influence: Evidence from France." Working
    Paper: 1­40.

Detragiache, E, T Tressel, and P Gupta. 2008. "Foreign banks in poor countries:
    theory and evidence." Journal of Finance 63 (5): 2123­2160.



                                      40
Dinc, I Serdar, and Nandini Gupta. 2011. "The Decision to Privatize: Finance and
    Politics." Journal of Finance 66 (1): 241­269.

Duranton, D., E. Ghani, A. Goswani, and W. Kerr. 2017. "Misallocation in India,"
    Working paper.

Fonseca, Julia, and Bernardus Van Doornik. 2019. "Financial Development, Labor
    Markets, and Aggregate Productivity: Evidence from Brazil," Working paper.

Garcia-Santana, Manuel, and Josep Pijoan-Mas. 2014. "The reservation laws in
    India and the misallocation of production factors." Journal of Monetary Eco-
    nomics 66:193­209.

Ghani, Ejaz, Arti Grover Goswami, and William R Kerr. 2016. "Highway to suc-
   cess: The impact of the Golden Quadrilateral project for the location and
   performance of Indian manufacturing." Economic Journal 126 (591): 317­
   357.

Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou, Amit Kumar Khandelwal, Nina Pavcnik, and Petia
    Topalova. 2010. "Imported Intermediate Inputs and Domestic Product Growth:
    Evidence from India." Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (4): 1727­1767.

Gollin, Douglas, and Christopher R Udry. 2019. "Heterogeneity, Measurement
     Error and Misallocation: Evidence from African Agriculture," NBER Working
     Paper, no. 25440.

Gopinath, Gita, S                 ¨
                 ¸ ebnem Kalemli-Ozcan,   Loukas Karabarbounis, and Carolina
    Villegas-Sanchez. 2017. "Capital allocation and productivity in South Eu-
    rope." Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (4): 1915­1967.

Guner, Nezih, Gustavo Ventura, and Yi Xu. 2008. "Macroeconomic implications
   of size-dependent policies." Review of Economic Dynamics 11 (4): 721­744.

Gupta, Nandini. 2005. "Partial Privatization and Firm Performance." Journal of
   Finance 60 (2): 987­1015.

Haltiwanger, John, Robert Kulick, and Chad Syverson. 2018. "Misallocation Mea-
    sures: The Distortion That Ate the Residual," NBER Working Paper, no.
    24199.




                                      41
Hombert, Johan, and Adrien Matray. 2016. "The Real Effects of Lending Rela-
   tionships on Innovative Firms and Inventor Mobility." Review of Financial
   Studies 30 (7): 2413­2445.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Peter J Klenow. 2009. "Misallocation and manufacturing
    TFP in China and India." Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (4): 1403­
    1448.

Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, and Bent E Sørensen. 2014. "Misallocation, Property
    Rights, and Access to Finance: Evidence from within and across Africa."
    In African Successes, Volume III: Modernization and Development, 183­211.
    University of Chicago Press.

Krueger, Anne O, et al. 2002. Economic policy reforms and the Indian economy.
    University of Chicago Press.

Larrain, Mauricio, and Sebastian Stumpner. 2017. "Capital account liberalization
    and aggregate productivity: The role of firm capital allocation." Journal of
    Finance 72 (4): 1825­1858.

Levinsohn, James, and Amil Petrin. 2003. "Estimating production functions using
    inputs to control for unobservables." Review of Economic Studies 70 (2): 317­
    341.

Li, Xiang, and Dan Su. 2020. "Total Factor Productivity Growth at the Firm-
     Level: The Effects of Capital Account Liberalization." Working Paper.

Liu, Xin, Shang-Jin Wei, and Yifan Zhou. 2020a. A Liberalization Spillover: From
     Equities to Loans. Working Paper, Working Paper Series 27305. National
     Bureau of Economic Research, June.

     . 2020b. A Liberalization Spillover: From Equities to Loans. Working Paper,
    Working Paper Series 27305. National Bureau of Economic Research, June.

Martin, Leslie A., Shanthi Nataraj, and Ann E. Harrison. 2017. "In with the big,
    out with the small: Removing small- scale reservations in India." American
    Economic Review 107 (2): 354­386.

M´
 endez-Chac´
           on, Esteban, and Diana Van Patten. 2020. "Multinationals, Monop-
   sony and Local Development: Evidence from the United Fruit Company."
   Working Paper: 1­83.



                                       42
Mian, Atif. 2006. "Distance constraints: The limits of foreign lending in poor
    economies." Journal of Finance 61 (3): 1465­1505.

Midrigan, Virgiliu, and Daniel Yi Xu. 2014. "Finance and Misallocation: Evidence
    from Plant-Level Data." American Economic Review 104 (2): 422­458.

Moll, Benjamin. 2014. "Productivity Losses from Financial Frictions: Can Self-
    Financing Undo Capital Misallocation?" American Economic Review 104
    (10): 3186­3221.

Nishida, Mitsukuni, Amil Petrin, Martin Rotemberg, and T. Kirk White. 2017.
    "Are We Undercounting Reallocation's Contribution to Growth?" Working
    Paper.

Olley, G Steven, and Ariel Pakes. 1996. "The Dynamics of Productivity in the
    Telecommunications Equipment Industry." Econometrica: 1263­1297.

Panagariya, Arvind. 2008. India: The emerging giant. Oxford University Press.

Petrin, Amil, and James Levinsohn. 2012. "Measuring aggregate productivity
    growth using plant-level data." The RAND Journal of Economics 43 (4):
    705­725.

Restuccia, Diego, and Richard Rogerson. 2008. "Policy distortions and aggregate
    productivity with heterogeneous establishments." Review of Economic Dy-
    namics 11 (4): 707­720.

      . 2013. "Misallocation and productivity." Review of Economic Dynamics 1
    (16): 1­10.

      . 2017. "The Causes and Costs of Misallocation." Journal of Economic
    Perspectives 31 (3): 151­174.

Rotemberg, Martin. 2019. "Equilibrium effects of firm subsidies." American Eco-
    nomic Review 109 (10): 3475­3513.

Rotemberg, Martin, and Kirk White. 2017. "Measuring Cross-Country Differences
    in Misallocation," Working paper.

Saffie, Felipe, Liliana Varela, and Kei-Mu Yi. 2020. The Micro and Macro Dynam-
     ics of Capital Flows. Working Paper, Working Paper Series 27371. National
     Bureau of Economic Research, June.



                                      43
Schoefer, Benjamin. 2015. "The financial channel of wage rigidity," Working paper.

Sivadasan, Jagadeesh. 2009. "Barriers to competition and productivity: Evidence
    from India." BE Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 9 (1).

Sraer, David Alexandre, and David Thesmar. 2020. "A Sufficient Statistics Ap-
    proach for Aggregating Firm-Level Experiments." NBER Working Paper.

Topalova, Petia. 2007. "Trade liberalization, poverty and inequality: Evidence from
    Indian districts." In Globalization and poverty, 291­336. University of Chicago
    Press.

      . 2010. "Factor immobility and regional impacts of trade liberalization:
    Evidence on poverty from India." American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
    nomics 2 (4): 1­41.

Topalova, Petia, and Amit Khandelwal. 2011. "Trade Liberalization and Firm
    Productivity: The Case of India." Review of Economics and Statistics 93 (3):
    995­1009.

Townsend, Robert. 1994. "Risk and Insurance in Village India." Econometrica
   62:539­591.

Udry, Christopher. 1994. "Risk and Insurance in a Rural Credit Market: An Em-
    pirical Investigation in Northern Nigeria." Review of Economic Studies 61
    (3): 495­526.

Varela, Liliana. 2017. "Reallocation, Competition, and Productivity: Evidence
    from a Financial Liberalization Episode." Review of Economic Studies 85
    (2): 1279­1313.

Vig, Vikrant. 2013. "Access to Collateral and Corporate Debt Structure: Evidence
     from a Natural Experiment." Journal of Finance 68 (3): 881­928.

Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. 2009. "On estimating firm-level production functions using
   proxy variables to control for unobservables." Economics Letters 104 (3): 112­
   114.

Xu, Chenzi. 2020. "Reshaping Global Trade: The Immediate and Long-Run Effects
    of Bank Failures." Working Paper.




                                        44
                             Online Appendix

Appendix A: Derivation of Aggregation Formula

In this section, we derive equation (3), the formula used to approximate the change
in the Solow residual due to the policy. We start by defining

                                    yi = Ai fi ({yij }j ) ,

where yi is the output of firm i, Ai is firm i's productivity, fi is the production
function, and yij is the amount of input j used by firm i. Then, the total derivative
of yi is

                                           log fi
                     d log yi =                    d log yij + d log Ai .                     (8)
                                    j
                                           log yij

A firm i solves the cost minimization problem

                    Ci (p, yi ) =        pj yij + i (yi - Ai fi ({yij }j ) ,                  (9)
                                    j


where p is the vector of prices, pj is the price of a good produced by j , and i is
the Lagrange multiplier. From the first order conditions of equation (9)

                                                          fi
                                         p j =  i Ai          .                             (10)
                                                          yij

Then,

                                               pi    pi
                                    µi =            = ,
                                              C /yi  i
                                                                                 pi
where µi is the output wedge of i (price over marginal cost), implying that i = µ i
                                                                                    .
                                                                    pi   fi
Substituting this relationship into equation (10) shows that pj = µi Ai yij . Then

                                    pj yij   Ai yij fi
                                           =
                                    pi y i   µi yi yij
                                              log fi 1
                                           =             ,
                                              log yij µi
                                pj yij        log fi
which can be rewritten as µi    p i yi
                                         =    log yij
                                                      .    Then, substituting this into the total


                                                 45
derivative (equation (8)) produces

                                                                   pj yij
                           d log yi = d log Ai + µi                       d log yi .
                                                              j
                                                                   pi y i

Note that this implies that

            1                                       pj yij                          pj yij
               (d log yi - d log Ai ) -                    d log yij =                     d log yij .    (11)
            µi                                      pi y i                    j I
                                                                                    pi y i
                                            j/I


Now that we have these expressions, we can turn to deriving our object of interest.
We define firm-level net output to be ci and total nominal industry-level output
to be P C = iI pi ci , where ci = yi - j I yji . Then

                                         yi                         yji
                            d log ci =      d log yi -                  d log yji .
                                         ci                  j I
                                                                    ci

The change in industry-level net output is defined by

                                                          p i ci
                                   d log C =                     d log ci ,
                                                     i
                                                          PC

where after substitution, we get

                            p i ci                       pi yi                       pi yji
         d log C =                 d log ci =                  d log yi -                   d log yji .
                       i
                            PC                  i
                                                         PC                   j I
                                                                                     PC

Then, the change in the Solow residual for I is given by

                                                                  pj yij pi yi
                     dSolowI = d log C -                                       d log yij .
                                                    iI j 
                                                                  pi y i P C
                                                         /I


Using equation (11), with a little algebra, we can rewrite this as

                                         1
            dSolowI =           i (1 -      )(d log yi - d log Ai ) +                    i d log Ai ,     (12)
                           iI
                                         µi                                         iI


where i = p  i yi
            PC
                  . Now, we transform equation (12) to use input wedges instead of
output wedges, so that it matches equation (3). This allows us to rewrite equation
(12) in terms of firm-level capital, labor, and materials wedges where each firm-
input combination is a "producer."44 The wedge on firm i's input x is ix , and the
 44. While equation (12) models wedges on output rather than inputs, this framework is general
and input wedges can be thought of as a special case of this formulation. In particular, we can


                                                     46
price paid by the firm is (1 + ix )px , while the marginal cost of producing x is px .
The gross output wedge for producer (x, i) is given by: µx                x
                                                                i = 1 + i . Then, for
                                                   x                   x
a given firm i, d log yi - d log Ai = x{K,L,M } i    d log xi , where i  is the output
elasticity with respect to input x. So, we can rewrite equation (12) as:


                                                            x            1
           dSolowI,t =         i d log Ai +               i i 1-              d log xi ,
                          iI                    iI
                                                                       1 + ix
                                              x{K,L,M }


which in turn simplifies to

                                                                 x     ix
              dSolowI,t =           i d log Ai +               i i          d log xi .
                               iI                    iI
                                                                     1 + ix
                                                   x{K,L,M }


    To implement the first order approximation, for any variable x, we use discrete
changes x instead of infinitesimal changes dx. Then the first order approximation
is given by


                                                                 x     ix
            SolowI,t                i  log Ai +                i i           log xi .
                               iI                    iI
                                                                     1 + ix
                                                   x{K,L,M }




think of each input wedge for firm i coming from a fictitious middleman firm that buys the input
without a wedge and then sells it with an output wedge to firm i.


                                               47
Appendix B: Estimating the Distribution of the
                           Minimum Wedges
    In this appendix, we show that the difference-in-differences regressions with
heterogeneous effects can be used to estimate the minimum wedge prior to the
policy under the assumptions outlined in the main text. We focus here on es-
            k
timating pre  , where the i subscript is surpressed for notational simplicity. The
reasoning is identical for labor and materials.
    Denote mrpki the true marginal revenue product of capital of firm i (which is
never observed) and MRPK i the marginal revenue product of capital observed in
the data with measurement error, such that we have:

                   log(M RP Kit ) = log(mrpkit ) + µi + t +          it


where it is a firm-period idiosyncratic error, µi is a firm-specific, time-invariant
shock, and t is a time-period specific shock.
    Denote Tj to be the time period of the reform in a disaggregated industry j .
If a firm is in an industry that does not go through a reform (Reform jt = 0t) or
if the firm is in an industry that will be reformed but the reform has not taken
place yet (t < Tj ):

                                               k
                       log(mrpkijt ) = log(1 + it ) + log(pk
                                                           t ).


Under the assumption the policy has eliminated misallocation, if the firm is in
an industry that is reformed and the reform has taken place, Reform jt = 1, then
 k
it = 0 and
                             log(mrpkijt ) = log(pk
                                                  t ).

Hence, if Reform jt = 0:

                                        k
              log(M RP Kijt ) = log(1 + it ) + log(pk
                                                    t ) + µi + t +        it .


For firms where Reform jt = 1:

                     log(M RP Kijt ) = log(pk
                                            t ) + µi + t +    it .


Denote g (Ref ormjt , Cit ) to be a function of the time-varying, reform indicator
variable and time-varying firm-level characteristics Cit . Then, the difference-in-


                                         48
differences regression estimates

             log(M RP Kijt ) = g (Ref ormjt , Cit ) + Xit + i + t +        it .


In this regression, firm fixed effects absorb µi , as well as any time invariant industry
shocks, and time fixed effects absorb t and log(pk         t ). Idiosyncratic shocks it are
independent of Reform jt . Thus, g  ^i (1, Cit ) is an unbiased estimator of E (log(1+it ))
over the pre-period and can be used to predict the average value of log(1 + ik )
over the pre-period.




                                            49
 Appendix C: Identifying Lower Bound Wedges
   and Inputs for Aggregation in Other Settings
    In this appendix, we discuss how researchers can apply the aggregation method-
ology in Section 6 to estimates from a natural experiment or an experiment in a
different setting. As described in Section 6, to apply the lower bound methodology,
the researcher must make two key assumptions: (1) the reform only reduced misal-
location, and (2) spillovers from the unit of treatment (e.g. industries, geographic
entities) to untreated units are either nonexistent or can be measured using ob-
servable characteristics like input-output linkages or with the experimental design.
In our context, the second assumption is the standard difference-in-differences as-
sumption.
    We consider two categories of settings where researchers may want to apply the
aggregation methodology: (1) reductions in misallocation due to changes in the
distribution of inputs within the treated group and (2) reductions in misallocation
due to changes in inputs used by the treated group.
Changes in allocation within the treated group. The natural experiment
studied in this paper falls into this category. In this case, there is a treatment at
the unit j level, which can potentially refer to an industry or a geographic region
but could also refer to the whole treated group of firms. If the researcher believes
that the treatment reduced misallocation by reducing wedges for firms with high
wedges in unit j and/or increasing wedges for firms with low wedges, she can apply
a similar estimation strategy to the one used in Section 6 to estimate firm-level
changes in inputs and wedges. To study cross-industry or cross-geography changes
in misallocation, as opposed to the cross-firm changes in the same industry, as we
do, the researcher can allow g to depend on industry or geographic unit-level
characteristics as well as, or in place of, firm-level characteristics.

Changes in inputs for the treated group versus the control. In some
cases, the design of a policy or an experiment may allow the researcher to as-
sume that the policy/treatment reduced misallocation even if the researcher is not
interested in changes in allocation within the treated group. For example, if a
policy that improves access to inputs is targeted toward firms with ex-ante higher
input wedges and increases input use for these firms, it may be reasonable for the
researcher to assume the policy reduced misallocation. In this case, the researcher
may not need to estimate heterogeneous treatment effects. The researcher could
use the firm-level average treatment effect of the policy as an estimate of the

                                         50
wedges and changes in inputs for the treated group.




                                       51
       Appendix D: Non-Linear Approximation
    This appendix describes how we calculate a non-linear approximation of the
policies' effects on the treated industries' Solow residual. Following Baqaee and
Farhi (2019), we note that a non-linear approximation of the effect of the policies
on the Solow residual ­ given the shocks realized in the economy ­ is a Reimann
sum over the first order approximations of the policies' effects each year. Then,
the non-linear approximation of the culmulative effect at time T is

                                                                         x     ix
   SolowI,T                   it  log Ait +                           it i           log xit ,   (13)
                   tT iI                        tT          iI
                                                                             1 + ix
                                                          x{K,L,M }


where t indexes a year, and the summation begins in the year of the first policy
change. As before, since we did not find the policy had a significant effect on
TFPQ (see Table 4), we set  log Ait = 0, causing the first term of equation (13)
to drop out. We calculate it exactly as we did in Section 6, except that we
now calculate a separate value for each year, instead of only using the Prowess
data from 2000. Similarly, the output elasticities are still given by the production
function estimates.
   To arrive at a time-varying estimate of the policies' effects on inputs, we use
more flexible regressions specifications. For capital, we estimate

                    5
                              sd        sd                      sd
     log Kijtd =         1,s Ijt + 2,s Ijt × IiHigh MRPK + 3,s Ijt × IiHigh M RP L
                   s=1

                   + Xit + i + t +           ijt ,                                               (14)

where d indexes the number of years since a reform occurred in industry j , and
 sd
Ijt  in an indicator variable equal to 1 if it has been more than s years since a
reform occurred in industry j . Therefore, 1,s captures the change in capital that
occurs due to the reform between s - 1 years after the reform and s years after the
reform, and 2,s and 3,s allow these changes to be heterogeneous for high MRPK
and MRPL firms. We allow effects to vary up to 5 years after the policies took
place since the effects of the policies appear to plateau after five years (see Figures
1 and 2). Then, to estimate the firm-level change in capital due to the policy in
year t, we calculate

                    5
     log Kijtd =         ^1,s I d=s + 
                                      ^2,s I d=s × I High MRPK + ^3,s I d=s × I High M RP L ,
                               jt           jt      i                  jt      i
                   s=1



                                                     52
         d=s
where Ijt     is an indicator variable equal to 1 if it is s years after an event in
industry j and time t. We use an analogous approach to estimate the change in
labor by year.
    To estimate the baseline wedges in each year, we replace the outcome variable
in equation (14) with log M RP Kijt and log M RP Lijt . Then, under the lower
bound identifying assumption that the policy eliminated misallocation, the wedge
at time t is the sum of the estimated changes in the wedges that occurred between
t and T . For the wedge on capital, after estimating equation (14) with log M RP K
as the outcome variable, this is given by


                   T    5
log M RP Kijtd =             ^1,s I d=s + 
                                          ^2,s I d=s × I High MRPK + ^3,s I d=s × I High M RP L .
                                   jn           jn      i                  jn      i
                   n=t s=1


The method for identifying the time-varying wedges for labor is analogous.




                                              53
                                                        Appendix Figures

Figure A1: Event Study Graphs for the Relative Effect of Foreign Capital Liber-
alization on High MRPK Firms for Revenues and Wages


                                            Revenues                                                Wages
                .5




                                                                            .5
  Coefficient

                0




                                                                            0
                -.5




                                                                            -.5
                      -5              0                       5   10              -5        0                       5   10
                                          Year Since Reform                                     Year Since Reform




This figure reports event study graphs for the relative effects of the liberalization on firms with
high pre-treatment MRPK relative to those with low pre-treatment MRPK. Year 0 is normalized
to be the year before a reform. All dependent variables are in logs. The confidence intervals are
at the 95% level.


                                Figure A2: Event Study Graphs Excluding the 2001 Reform


                                          Physical Assets                                           MRPK
                1




                                                                            .5
                .5




                                                                            0
                                                                            -.5
                0
                -.5




                                                                            -1




                           -5                       0             5                    -5                 0             5
                                          Year Since Reform                                     Year Since Reform

                                            Baseline                                              Baseline
                                            Excluding 01-Reform                                   Excluding 01-Reform




This figure reports event study graphs for the relative effects of the liberalization on firms with
high pre-treatment MRPK relative to those with low pre-treatment MRPK excluding variation
from the 2001 reform, so that year 1 is normalized to be 2006 for the green lines. All dependent
variables are in logs. Year 0 is normalized to be the year before a reform. The confidence
intervals are at the 95% level.




                                                                       54
                                             Appendix Tables

         Table A1: List of Industries Affected by the 2001 and 2006 Reforms

NIC 5-Digit Industry Classification                                                                                           Reform Year
Manufacture of 'ayurvedic' or 'unani' pharmaceutical preparation                                                                 2001
Manufacture of allopathic pharmaceutical preparations                                                                            2001
Manufacture of medical impregnated wadding, gauze, bandages, dressings, surgical gut string etc.                                 2001
Manufacture of homoeopathic or biochemic pharmaceutical preparations                                                             2001
Manufacture of other pharmaceutical and botanical products n.e.c. like hina powder etc.                                          2001
Manufacture of rubber tyres and tubes n.e.c.                                                                                     2006
Manufacture of essential oils; modification by chemical processes of oils and fats (e.g. by oxidation, polymerization etc.)      2006
Manufacture of various other chemical products                                                                                   2006
Manufacture of rubber tyres and tubes for cycles and cycle-rickshaws                                                             2006
Manufacture of distilled, potable, alcoholic beverages such as whisky, brandy, gin, 'mixed drinks' etc.                          2006
Coffee curing, roasting, grinding blending etc. and manufacturing of coffee products                                             2006
Retreading of tyres; replacing or rebuilding of tread on used pneumatic tyres                                                    2006
Manufacture of chemical elements and compounds doped for use in electronics                                                      2006
Manufacture of country liquor                                                                                                    2006
Manufacture of matches                                                                                                           2006
Manufacture of rubber plates, sheets, strips, rods, tubes, pipes, hoses and profile -shapes etc.                                 2006
Distilling, rectifying and blending of spirits                                                                                   2006
Manufacture of bidi                                                                                                              2006
Manufacture of catechu(katha) and chewing lime                                                                                   2006
Stemming and redrying of tobacco                                                                                                 2006
Manufacture of other rubber products n.e.c.                                                                                      2006
Manufacture of rubber contraceptives                                                                                             2006
Manufacture of other tobacco products including chewing tobacco n.e.c.                                                           2006
Manufacture of pan masala and related products.                                                                                  2006

This table lists 5-digit NIC industries that changed to automatic foreign investment approval for investments up to
(at least) 51% of a firm's capital and the year that the policy reform took place.




                                                                    55
                     Table A2: Composition of Change in Capital


 Dependent Variable           Land       Plants and Equipment         Infrastructure      Other

                                (1)                    (2)                   (3)            (4)

 Reform jt ×I i High MRPK   -0.026***             0.035***                  -0.002         -0.007
                             (0.007)               (0.009)                 (0.003)        (0.010)
 Reform jt                    0.004                   0.002                 -0.002         -0.004
                             (0.012)                 (0.009)               (0.004)        (0.008)

 Fixed Effects
    Firm
    Firm Age
    Size × Year
 Observations                 64,406                 64,406                 64,406        64,406

This table reports estimates of the heterogeneous effects of foreign capital liberalization reforms
on high and low MRPK firms in the Prowess dataset (equation (5)). All dependent variables
are the share of capital in a category. Firms are observed between 1995 and 2015. Firms are
classified as high MRPK if their average MRPK in the pre-treatment period from 1995-2000 is
above the 4-digit industry median. MRPK is calculated as Revenue/K . Size×Year are quartile
fixed effects for firms' average pre-treatment capital interacted with year fixed effects. Standard
errors are two-way clustered at the 4-digit industry and year level. *, **, and *** denote 10, 5,
and 1% statistical significance respectively.




                                                56
Table A3: Heterogeneous Effects of Foreign Capital Liberalization and Mean Re-
version


           Dependent Variable         Revenues         Capital    Wages       MRPK

                                          (1)            (2)        (3)         (4)

                                        Panel A: 1995-1997 Pre-treatment Period

           Reform jt ×I i High MRPK     0.123**        0.408***    0.030     -0.290***
                                        (0.048)         (0.088)   (0.054)     (0.066)
           Reform jt                     0.102          0.157     0.213*       -0.038
                                        (0.092)        (0.105)    (0.112)     (0.095)
           Observations                 49,791          51,788     50,660     48,581


                                        Panel B: 1995-1998 Pre-treatment Period


           Reform jt ×I i High MRPK     0.148**        0.451***   0.187***   -0.341***
                                        (0.066)         (0.076)    (0.058)    (0.084)
           Reform jt                     0.059          0.086      0.102       0.008
                                        (0.102)        (0.101)    (0.099)     (0.115)
           Observations                 54,475          56,647     55,414     53,173


                                                  Panel C: Only 2006 Reform


           Reform jt ×I i High MRPK      0.159         0.462***   0.211**     -0.352**
                                        (0.117)         (0.074)   (0.081)      (0.170)
           Reform jt                     0.001          -0.079     -0.028      0.168
                                        (0.195)        (0.105)    (0.116)     (0.147)

           Fixed Effects
              Firm
              Firm Age
              Size × Year
           Observations                 62,924          65,393     63,999     61,342

This table provides evidence that the results in Table 3 are not driven by mean reversion. Firms
are classified as high MRPK if their average MRPK in a pre-treatment period is above the 4-
digit industry median. In Panel A, the pre-treatment period is defined as 1995-1997. In Panel
B, it is 1995-1998. In Panel C, the pre-treatment period is 1995-2000, but Ref ormjt is only
coded as 1 for industries that have been treated by the 2006 reform. In Panel C, the regressions
control separately for being treated by the 2001 reform and its interaction with high MRPK.
MRPK is calculated as Revenue/K . Size×Year are quartile fixed effects for firms' average pre-
treatment capital interacted with year fixed effects. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the
4-digit industry and year level. *, **, and *** denote 10%, 5%, and 1% statistical significance
respectively.


                                                  57
           Table A4: Robustness: 5-Digit Industry-by-Year Fixed Effects


          Dependent Variable           Revenues       Capital    Wages      MRPK

                                           (1)          (2)        (3)         (4)

         Reform jt ×I i High MRPK       0.397***      0.682***   0.381***   -0.306***
                                         (0.062)       (0.063)    (0.059)    (0.097)

         Fixed Effects
            Firm
            Firm Age
            Size × Year
            5-digit Industry × Year
         Observations                    62,924        65,393     63,999     61,342

This table reports estimates of the heterogeneous effects of the liberalization reforms on high
MRPK firms in the Prowess data set (equation (5)). All dependent variables are in logs. Firms
are observed between 1995 and 2015. Firms are classified as high MRPK if their average MRPK
in the pre-treatment period from 1995-2000 is above the 4-digit industry median. MRPK is
calculated as Revenue/K . Size×Year are quartile fixed effects for firms' average pre-treatment
capital interacted with year fixed effects. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the 4-digit
industry and year level. *, **, and *** denote 10%, 5%, and 1% statistical significance respec-
tively.




                                                 58
          Table A5: Robustness: Inclusion of 2-Digit Industry-by-Year FE


          Dependent Variable            Revenues       Capital    Wages       MRPK

                                            (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)

         Reform jt ×I i High MRPK        0.261***      0.583***   0.275***    -0.340***
                                          (0.064)       (0.057)    (0.053)     (0.097)
         Reform jt                         -0.141       -0.141      -0.099      0.051
                                          (0.124)      (0.111)     (0.076)     (0.123)

         Fixed Effects
            Firm
            Firm Age
            Size × Year
            2-digit Industry × Year
         Observations                     62,924        65,393     63,999      61,342

This table reports estimates of the heterogeneous effects of foreign capital liberalization reforms
on high and low MRPK firms in the Prowess dataset (equation (5)). All dependent variables
are in logs. Firms are observed between 1995 and 2015. Firms are classified as high MRPK if
their average MRPK in the pre-treatment period from 1995-2000 is above the 4-digit industry
median. MRPK is calculated as Revenue/K . Size×Year are quartile fixed effects for firm's
average pre-treatment capital interacted with year fixed effects. Standard errors are two-way
clustered at the 4-digit industry and year level. *, **, and *** denote 10, 5, and 1% statistical
significance respectively.




                                                  59
                Table A6: Robustness: Inclusion of State-by-Year FE


            Dependent Variable        Revenues         Capital    Wages      MRPK

                                          (1)            (2)        (3)         (4)

           Reform jt ×I i High MRPK    0.231***        0.521***   0.241***   -0.329***
                                        (0.082)         (0.064)    (0.065)    (0.105)
           Reform jt                     -0.030         0.031      0.042       -0.016
                                        (0.123)        (0.077)    (0.093)     (0.114)

           Fixed Effects
              Firm
              Firm Age
              Size × Year
              State × Year
           Observations                  62,871         65,340     63,961     61,290

This table reports estimates of the heterogeneous effects of foreign capital liberalization reforms
on high and low MRPK firms in the Prowess dataset (equation (5)). All dependent variables are
in logs. Firms are observed between 1995 and 2015. Firms are classified as high MRPK if their
average MRPK in the pre-treatment period from 1995-2000 is above the 4-digit industry median.
Size×Year are quartile fixed effects for firms' average pre-treatment capital interacted with year
fixed effects. MRPK is calculated as Revenue/K . Standard errors are two-way clustered at
the 4-digit industry and year level. *, **, and *** denote 10, 5, and 1% statistical significance
respectively.




                                                  60
                      Table A7: Robustness: Accounting for Dereservation


 Dependent Variable              Revenues                    Capital                  Wages                MRPK

                               (1)         (2)         (3)             (4)      (5)           (6)       (7)         (8)

Reform jt ×I i High MRPK    0.287***     0.247***   0.680***      0.516***   0.329***     0.266***   -0.438***    -0.303**
                             (0.066)      (0.071)    (0.034)       (0.109)    (0.062)      (0.058)    (0.076)      (0.131)
Reform jt                     0.050        -0.029     0.017         0.010      0.105        0.030      0.066        0.005
                             (0.096)      (0.113)    (0.073)       (0.060)    (0.102)      (0.094)    (0.125)      (0.110)
Fixed Effects
   Firm
   Firm Age
   Size × Year
   Dereservation Controls      --                      --                       --                      --
Observations                 28,804       62,924     30,062        65,393     29,405       63,999     27,984      61,342
Sample                      Restricted     All      Restricted         All   Restricted       All    Restricted     All


This table reports estimates of the heterogeneous effects of foreign capital liberalization reforms
on high and low MRPK firms in the Prowess dataset (equation (5)), accounting for dereser-
vation policies. Firms are observed between 1995 and 2015. In odd columns, we restrict the
sample to firms in industries not affected by a dereservation policy after 2000 (i.e. a change in
regulation specific to small and medium size firms). Data on dereservation events come from
Boehm, Dhingra, and Morrow (2019). In even columns, we include the whole sample but interact
  High M RP K
Ii             with an indicator variable Dereservationjt that is equal to 1 after the industry has
been dereserved. Firms are classified as high MRPK if their average MRPK in the pre-treatment
period from 1995-2000 is above the industry median. MRPK is approximated as Revenue/K .
Size×Year are quartile fixed effects for firms' average pre-treatment capital interacted with year
fixed effects. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the 4-digit industry and year level. *, **,
and *** denote 10, 5, and 1% statistical significance respectively.




                                                             61
    Table A8: Effect of Foreign Capital Liberalization, Controlling for Tariffs


 Dependent Variable           Revenues                  Capital                   Wages                 MRPK

                             (1)        (2)       (3)             (4)       (5)           (6)      (7)         (8)

Reform jt ×I i High MRPK   0.231***    0.134    0.543***       0.512***   0.260***   0.262***   -0.345***   -0.365**
                            (0.071)   (0.096)    (0.069)        (0.051)    (0.057)    (0.064)    (0.095)     (0.132)
Reform jt                   0.025      0.172     0.122          0.135      0.123      0.168       -0.069     0.053
                           (0.121)    (0.233)   (0.091)        (0.145)    (0.101)    (0.144)     (0.113)    (0.119)

Tariff Controls
   Output Tariffs
   Input Tariffs             --                   --                        --                     --
Fixed Effects
   Firm
   Firm Age
   Size × Year
Observations                58,322    46,083     60,730         48,217     59,456     47,255     56,921     45,229


This table reports estimates of the heterogeneous effects of foreign capital liberalization on high
and low pre-treatment MRPK firms (equation (5)) over the period 1995-2015, controlling for
the effects of tariff policies and allowing those tariff policies to have differential effects by high
and low MRPK. All dependent variables are in logs. Ref ormjt is an indicator variable equal
to one if the industry has liberalized access to international capital market. Firms are classified
as high MRPK if their average MRPK in the pre­treatment period from 1995-2000 is above
the 4-digit industry median. Tariff data from 1995-2010 are constructed following Goldberg,
Khandelwal, Pavcnik, and Topalova (2010), and tariff levels are coded at the 2010 level from
2010-2015. Output tariff controls are the average tarriff on an industry and its interaction with
  High M RP K
Ii            . Input tariff controls are the average tariff on the inputs used by an industry and
                       High M RP K
its interaction with Ii            . Standard errors are two-way clustered at the 4-digit industry
and year level. *, **, and *** denote 10%, 5%, and 1% statistical significance respectively.




                                                          62
                     Table A9: Results after Winsorizing the Data


             Dependent Variable        Revenues       Capital     Wages      MRPK


                                        Panel A: Winsorized 5% Across Industries
                                           (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)

            Reform jt ×I i High MRPK     0.172***     0.549***   0.206***    -0.373***
                                          (0.061)      (0.085)    (0.044)     (0.074)
            Reform jt                     -0.019       -0.041      0.019       0.015
                                         (0.086)      (0.065)     (0.076)     (0.103)

            Fixed Effects
               Firm
               Firm Age
               Size × Year
            Observations                  62,924       65,393     63,999      61,342


                                       Panel B: Winzorized 5% Within Industries
                                           (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)

            Reform jt ×I i High MRPK     0.176***     0.550***   0.199***    -0.393***
                                          (0.058)      (0.084)    (0.046)     (0.069)
            Reform jt                     -0.027       -0.041      0.038       0.022
                                         (0.083)      (0.066)     (0.079)     (0.107)

            Fixed Effects
               Firm
               Firm Age
               Size × Year
            Observations                  62,924       65,393     63,999      61,342

This table reports estimates of the heterogeneous effects of foreign capital liberalization on
capital constrained and unconstrained firms after winsorizing the top and bottom 5% of the
sample for each outcome. In Panel A, the sample is winsorized across industries, while in
Panel B, the sample is winsorized within 2-digit industries. All dependent variables are in
logs. Firms are observed between 1995 and 2015. Firms are classified as high MRPK if their
average MRPK in the pre-treatment period from 1995-2000 is above the 4-digit industry median.
MRPK is calculated as Revenue/K . Size×Year are quartile fixed effects for firms' average pre-
treatment capital interacted with year fixed effects. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the
4-digit industry and year level. *, **, and *** denote 10%, 5%, and 1% statistical significance
respectively.




                                                 63
  Table A10: Effects of Foreign Capital Liberalization on Firm Exit and Entry


            Dependent Variable         Number of Exits          Number of Entrants

                                         (1)            (2)              (3)
            Reform jt                   0.058          0.039            -0.029
                                       (0.105)        (0.055)          (0.028)

            Reform jt ×I i High MRPK                   -0.027
                                                      (0.021)

            Fixed Effects
               5-Digit Industry
               Year
            Observations                6,668         11,833            6,668

This table estimates the effect of the foreign capital liberalization on firm exit and entry in the
Prowess data. In columns 1 and 3, an observation is a 5-digit industry-year cell. In column 2,
it is a 5-digit industry-year-MRPK category cell. A firm is counted as exiting in a year if it is
not observed in the data in that year and does not re-enter the data in a later year. A firm is
counted as entering in a year if that is the year of the firm's incorporation. Firms are classified
as high MRPK if their average MRPK in the pre-treatment period from 1995-2000 is above the
4-digit industry median. In column 2, MRPK is calculated as Revenue/K . Standard errors are
two-way clustered at the 4-digit industry and year level.




                                                 64
Table A11: Average Effect of Foreign Capital Market Liberalization, Accounting
for Cross-Industry Spillover Effects


               Dependent Variable     Revenues         Capital    Wages     MRPK

                                          (1)            (2)        (3)       (4)
              Reform jt                  0.109         0.295***   0.165*    -0.172*
                                        (0.088)         (0.099)   (0.090)   (0.089)

              Fixed Effects
                 Firm
                 Firm Age
                 Size × Year
              Observations               62,924         65,393    63,999    61,342

This table reports difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of the foreign capital liberal-
ization in the Prowess data, taking into account cross-industry spillover effects. All dependent
variables are in logs. The regressions include controls for U pstreamjt , which measures the
composite reform shock to an industry from upstream industries, and Downstreamjt , which
measures the composite reform shock from downstream industries. Firms are observed between
1995 and 2015. Size×Year are quartile fixed effects for firms' average pre-treatment capital in-
teracted with year fixed effects. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the 4-digit industry
and year level. *, **, and *** denote 10%, 5%, and 1% statistical significance respectively.




                                                  65
Table A12: Heterogeneous Effects of Foreign Capital Liberalization, Accounting
for Spillovers


           Dependent Variable         Revenues         Capital    Wages      MRPK

                                          (1)            (2)        (3)         (4)

           Reform jt ×I i High MRPK    0.245***        0.562***   0.263***   -0.350***
                                        (0.073)         (0.064)    (0.058)    (0.100)
           Reform jt                     -0.031         -0.017     0.017       0.029
                                        (0.116)        (0.074)    (0.091)     (0.110)

           Fixed Effects
              Firm
              Firm Age
              Size × Year
           Observations                 62,924          65,393     63,999     61,342

This table reports estimates of the heterogeneous effects of foreign capital liberalization on
high and low MRPK firms, controlling for spillovers through the input-output matrix. All
dependent variables are in logs. Firms are observed between 1995 and 2015. The regressions
include controls for U pstreamjt , which measures the composite reform shock to an industry
from upstream industries, and Downstreamjt , which measures the composite reform shock
from downstream industries. Firms are classified as high MRPK if their average MRPK in the
pre-treatment period from 1995-2000 is above the 4-digit industry median. MRPK is calculated
as Revenue/K . Size×Year are quartile fixed effects for firms' average pre-treatment capital
interacted with year fixed effects. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the 4-digit industry
and year level. *, **, and *** denote 10%, 5%, and 1% statistical significance respectively.




                                                  66
               Table A13: Robustness to More Parsimonious Controls

            Dependent Variable        Revenues       Capital    Wages       MRPK

                                          (1)          (2)        (3)         (4)

           Reform jt ×I i High MRPK      0.080       0.544***   0.152***   -0.490***
                                        (0.055)       (0.055)    (0.049)    (0.101)
           Reform jt                     0.071        0.000      0.101       0.110
                                        (0.113)      (0.081)    (0.102)     (0.105)

           Fixed Effects
              Firm
              Year
           Observations                 64,808        67,339     65,912      63,210

This table reports estimates of the effect of foreign capital liberalization on high and low pre-
treatment MRPK firms (equation (5)) over the period 1995­2015. All dependent variables are
in logs. Firms are classified as high MRPK if their average MRPK in the pre-treatment period
from 1995-2000 is above the 4-digit industry median. MRPK is estimated with the Revenue/K
method. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the 4-digit industry and year level. *, **, and
*** denote 10%, 5%, and 1% statistical significance respectively.




                                                67
Table A14: Heterogeneous Effects of Foreign Capital Liberalization, Accounting
for Firm-Risk


          Dependent Variable             Revenues      Capital     Wages      MRPK

                                             (1)          (2)        (3)         (4)

          Reform jt ×I i High MRPK        0.241**      0.512***   0.223***    -0.263**
                                          (0.101)       (0.090)    (0.077)     (0.108)
          Reform jt × Revenue Beta i        -0.004      0.008       0.006       -0.019
                                           (0.014)     (0.021)     (0.014)     (0.015)
          Reform jt                         0.013       0.052       0.089       -0.024
                                           (0.117)     (0.080)     (0.076)     (0.128)

          Fixed Effects
             Firm
             Firm Age
             Size × Year
          Observations                     54,451       56,550      55,397     53,070

This table reports estimates of the heterogeneous effects of foreign capital liberalization on high
and low MRPK firms, controlling for the firm's pre-treatment risk and its intearction with the
reform. All dependent variables are in logs. Firms are observed between 1995 and 2015. Revenue
Beta i is computed as the correlation between firm revenue growth up to 2000 and the average
revenue growth in the economy. Firms are classified as high MRPK if their average MRPK in the
pre-treatment period from 1995-2000 is above the 4-digit industry median. MRPK is calculated
as Revenue/K . Size×Year are quartile fixed effects for firms' average pre-treatment capital
interacted with year fixed effects. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the 4-digit industry
and year level. *, **, and *** denote 10%, 5%, and 1% statistical significance respectively.




                                                68
Table A15: Regression Estimates Used to Estimate the Effect of the Policy on the
Solow Residual

             Dependent Variable         Capital        Wages     MRPK         MRPL

                                           (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)

            Reform jt ×I i High MRPK    0.540***      0.242***   -0.366***     -0.129
                                         (0.081)       (0.061)    (0.108)     (0.080)
            Reform jt ×I i High MRPL    0.323***      0.114*     -0.246***   -0.330***
                                         (0.107)      (0.060)     (0.059)     (0.069)
            Reform jt                   -0.129***      0.008       0.144      0.201*
                                         (0.046)      (0.109)     (0.112)     (0.115)

            Fixed Effects
               Firm
               Firm Age
               Size × Year
            Observations                 59,802        58,898     56,557       46,064

This table reports the difference-in-differences estimates used to estimate the policy's effects
on the manufacturing Solow residual. All dependent variables are in logs. Firms are observed
                            High MRPK
between 1995 and 2015. Ii               is coded as 1 if a firm's average MRPK in the pre-treatment
period from 1995-2000 is above the 4-digit industry median, where MRPK is calculated using
                               High MRPL
sales over physical assets. Ii             is defined analogously for labor. Size×Year are quartile
fixed effects for firms' average pre-treatment capital interacted with year fixed effects. Standard
errors are two-way clustered at the 4-digit industry and year level. *, **, and *** denote 10%,
5%, and 1% statistical significance respectively.




                                                 69
