                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    HOW TO TALK WHEN A MACHINE IS LISTENING:
                     CORPORATE DISCLOSURE IN THE AGE OF AI

                                          Sean Cao
                                          Wei Jiang
                                        Baozhong Yang
                                        Alan L. Zhang

                                      Working Paper 27950
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27950


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2020




The authors have benefitted from discussions with Emilio Calvano (discussant), Kathleen Hanley
(discussant), Tim Loughran, and Song Ma, and comments and suggestions from participants in
seminars and conferences at Georgia State, Peking University, Utah, and the NBER Economics
of Artificial Intelligence Conference. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.¸¸

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Sean Cao, Wei Jiang, Baozhong Yang, and Alan L. Zhang. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How to Talk When a Machine is Listening: Corporate Disclosure in the Age of AI
Sean Cao, Wei Jiang, Baozhong Yang, and Alan L. Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 27950
October 2020
JEL No. G14,G30

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes how corporate disclosure has been reshaped by machine processors,
employed by algorithmic traders, robot investment advisors, and quantitative analysts. Our
findings indicate that increasing machine and AI readership, proxied by machine downloads,
motivates firms to prepare filings that are more friendly to machine parsing and processing.
Moreover, firms with high expected machine downloads manage textual sentiment and audio
emotion in ways catered to machine and AI readers, such as by differentially avoiding words that
are perceived as negative by computational algorithms as compared to those by human readers,
and by exhibiting speech emotion favored by machine learning software processors. The
publication of Loughran and McDonald (2011) is instrumental in attributing the change in the
measured sentiment to machine and AI readership. While existing research has explored how
investors and researchers apply machine learning and computational tools to quantify qualitative
information from disclosure and news, this study is the first to identify and analyze the feedback
effect on corporate disclosure decisions, i.e., how companies adjust the way they talk knowing
that machines are listening.

Sean Cao                                        Baozhong Yang
Georgia State University                        J. Mack Robinson College of Business
scao@gsu.edu                                    35 Broad Street, Suite 1243,
                                                Atlanta GA 30303
Wei Jiang                                       bzyang@gsu.edu
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University                             Alan L. Zhang
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 803                    J.Mack Robinson College of Business
New York, NY 10027                              35 Broad Street NW, Suite 1242
and NBER                                        Atlanta, GA 30303
wj2006@columbia.edu                             lzhang27@gsu.edu




A SSRN is available at https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3683802
I.      Introduction

The annual report (and other regulatory filings) is more than a legal requirement for public

companies; it provides an opportunity to communicate financial health, to promote the culture and

brand, and to engage with a full spectrum of stakeholders. How those readers process the wealth

of information affects their perception of, and hence participation in, the business in significant

ways. Warren Buffet's annual letters to shareholders in Berkshire Hathaway's annual reports

showcase Corporate American writing at its best. "Be fearful when others are greedy and greedy

when others are fearful," Buffett wrote in the 2007 report. "When it's raining gold, reach for a

bucket, not a thimble." He added in 2009. That is an entire business philosophy in 20 words.

        However, there are many reasons why the Buffett writing is an envy but is hard to emulate.

Added to such a list of reasons is the evolving potential readership in the age of AI (Artificial

Intelligence). More and more companies realize that the target audience of their mandatory and

voluntary disclosures no longer consists of just human analysts and investors. A substantial

amount of buying and selling of shares are triggered by recommendations made by robots and

algorithms which process information with machine learning tools and natural language processing

kits. 1 Both the technological progress and the sheer volume of disclosure make the trend

inevitable. 2 Companies who wish to accomplish the desired outcome of communication and

engagement with stakeholders need to adjust how they talk about their finances, brands, and make


1
  For example, Kensho (acquired by S&P in 2018 in the largest AI-driven acquisition deal at the time) developed an
algorithm named Warren (after Warren Buffett) that provides a simple interface allowing investors to ask complex
questions in plain English and provide answers by searching through millions of market data points. (Source: "Wall
Street Tech Spree: With Kensho Acquisition S&P Global Makes Largest A.I. Deal in History," Antoine Gara, Forbes,
March 6, 2018). A leading hedge fund, the Man Group, has begun to manage substantial portions of its assets using
AI and algorithmic trading. (Source: "The Massive Hedge Fund Betting on AI," Adam Satariano and Nishant Kumar,
Bloomberg, September 27, 2017.)
2
  Cohen, Malloy, and Nguyen (2020) document that the length of 10-K increases by five times from 2005 to 2017,
and the number of textual changes over previous filings increases by over 12 times.



                                                        1
forecasts in the age of AI. In other words, they should heed to the unique logic and techniques

underlying the rapidly evolving language- and sentiment-analysis facilitated by large-scale

machine-learning computation, for example, automated computational processes that identify

positive, negative and neutral opinions in a whole corpus of a firm disclosure that is beyond

processing ability of human brains. While the literature is catching up with and guiding investors'

rising aptitude to apply machine learning and computational tools to extract qualitative information

from disclosure and news, there has not been an analysis exploring the feedback effect, i.e., how

companies adjust the way they talk knowing that machines are listening. This paper fills this void.

       Our analysis starts with a diagnostic test that connects the expected extent of AI readership

for a company's SEC filings on EDGAR (measured by Machine Downloads), and how machine-

friendly the company composes its disclosure (measured by Machine Readability). The first

variable Machine Downloads is constructed, using historical information, by tracking IP addresses

that conduct downloads in batches. We deem Machine Downloads a proxy for AI readership, both

because machine request is a precursor and a necessary condition for machine reading, and because

the sheer volume of machine downloads makes it unlikely for them to be processed by human

readers alone. The second variable builds on the five elements, identified by the recent and

burgeoning literature (see Section 2), as affecting the ease for machine parsing, scripting, and

synthesizing.

       We show that, in the cross-section of filings with firm and year fixed effects, a one standard

deviation change in expected machine downloads is associated with 0.24 standard deviation

increase in the Machine Readability of the filing. On the other hand, other (non-machine)

downloads do not bear any meaningful correlation with machine readability validating Machine

Downloads as a proxy for machine readership. We further validate that Machine Downloads and



                                                 2
Machine Readability are reasonable proxies (for the presence of machine readership and the ease

for machines to process) by showing that trades are quicker to follow after a filing becomes public

when Machine Downloads is higher, with even stronger interactive effect with Machine

Readability. Such a result also demonstrates the real impact of machine-process on information

dissemination.

         After establishing a positive association between a high AI reader base and more machine-

friendly disclosure documents, we further explore how firms manage "sentiment" and "tones"

perceived by machines. It is well-documented that corporate disclosures attempt to strike the right

tones with (human) readers by conveying positively-biased sentiments and favorable tones without

being explicitly dishonest or overtly noncompliant (Loughran and McDonald 2011, Kothari, Shu,

and Wysocki 2009). Hence, we expect a similar strategy catered to machine readers. While

researchers and practitioners had long relied on the Harvard Psychosociological Dictionary

(especially the Harvard-IV-4 TabNeg file) to construct "sentiment" as perceived by (mostly human)

readers by counting and contrasting "positive" and "negative" words, the publication of Loughran

and McDonald (2011, "LM" hereafter) presents an instrumental event to test our hypothesis

pertaining to machine readers. This is because not only the paper presented a specialized finance

dictionary of positive/negative words and words that are informative about liability and uncertainty,

but also the word lists that came with the paper has served as a leading lexicon for algorithms to

sort out sentiments in both the industry and academia. 3 The differences in both the timeline and

the context of the new dictionary allow us to identify the impact of AI readership on sentiment

management by corporations.


3
  The LM dictionaries have had a far-reaching influence in the academic literature, e.g., see our discussion of the
literature using the LM dictionary at the end of the introduction. For examples of industry uses, see "Natural Language
Processing in Finance: Shakespeare Without the Monkeys," July 2019, Man Group, and "NLP in the Stock Market,"
Roshan Adusumilli, February 2020, Medium.com.

                                                          3
       As a first step, we establish that firms which expect high machine downloads avoid LM-

negative words but only post 2011 (the year of publication of the LM dictionary). Such a structural

change is absent with respect to words deemed negative by the Harvard Dictionary (which has

served human readers for a long time). As a result, the difference, LM ­ Harvard Sentiment,

follows the same path as the LM Sentiment. For a tighter identification, we further confirm a

parallel pre-trend in the LM ­ Harvard Sentiment between firms with high and low (top and bottom

terciles of) machine downloads up to 2010. Post-2011 saw a clear divergence where the "high"

group significantly reduce their uses of negative words from the LM Dictionary as opposed to

those from the Harvard Dictionary, relative to the "low" group.      Given the quasi-randomness of

the exact timing of publication, the change in the sentiment expression is more likely to be

attributed to firms' catering to its AI readers than an alternative hypothesis that the publication was

a side show of a pre-existing and continuing trend.

       Loughran and McDonald (2011) developed multiple additional dictionaries of "tone"

words aiming at capturing a richer set of annotations of a financial document, including

dictionaries of litigious, uncertain, weak modal, and strong modal words. The authors show that

the prevalence of words in each category predict firm outcomes such as legal liability and reaction

from the capital markets. We find that firms with higher expected machine readership became

more averse to words from these dictionaries following the Loughran and McDonald (2011)

publication. The combined results suggest that managers revise their corporate disclosure in

consideration of multi-dimensional effects of their words to the eyes of the machines.

       While our analyses thus far focus on the textual information, the application of the

underlying theme (i.e., "how to talk when a machine is listening") to the speech setting serves as

an out-of-sample test beyond the textual setting. Earlier work by Mayew and Ventakachalam



                                                  4
(2012) find that managers' vocal expressions can convey incremental information valuable to

analysts covering the firm. Given that machine learning software makes vocal analytics more and

more effective, managers should also recognize the possibility that their speeches need to impress

machines as well as humans. Applying a popular pre-trained machine learning software to extract

two emotional features well-established in the psychology literature, valence and arousal

(correspond to positivity and excitedness of voices) on managerial speeches in conference calls,

we find that managers of firms with higher expected machine readership exhibit more positivity

and excitement in their vocal tones, justifying the anecdotal evidence that managers increasingly

seek professional coaching to improve their vocal performances along the quantifiable metrics. 4

        Our study builds on an expanding literature on information acquisition and dissemination

via SEC filings downloads, 5 opting in a new angle on the consequences of machine downloads

and potentially machine processing. Our paper also contributes to the rapidly growing literature

on textual analysis with a central theme that qualitative information from, and writing quality of,

texts predicts asset returns and corporate performance. 6 The computational textual analyses have

been steadily advanced by more modern machine learning techniques, 7 and have been extended to



4
  Sources: "Listening Without Prejudice: How the Experts Analyze Earnings Calls for Lies, Bluffs, and Other Flags",
Sterling Wong, Minyanville, April 18, 2012. "How to listen for the hidden data in earnings calls", Alina Dizik,
Chicago Booth Review, May 25, 2017.
5
  Recent studies analyzing downloads of SEC filings include Bernard, Blackburne, and Thornock (2020), Cao, Du,
Yang, and Zhang (2020), Chen, Cohen, Gurun, Lou, and Malloy (2020), and Crane, Crotty, and Umar (2020).
6
  Tetlock (2007), Tetlock, Saar-Tsechanksy, and Macskassy (2008), and Hanley and Hoberg (2010) pioneered
applying psychological dictionaries to financial texts to given content to sentiments. LM (2011) developed capital-
market specific dictionaries which have since been applied to large-scale computation of tones and sentiment in
financial texts, e.g., Dow Jones newswires (Da, Engelberg, and Gao, 2011), New York Times financial articles (Garcia,
2013), 10-K and IPO prospectuses (Jegadeesh and Wu, 2013), corporate press releases (Ahern and Sosyura, 2014),
earnings conference calls (Jiang, Lee, Martin, and Zhou, 2019), and all wired news from Factiva (Huang, Tan, and
Wermers, 2020). Hwang and Kim (2017) directly connect the writing quality of filings to valuation in the context of
close-end funds. See also the survey article Loughran and McDonald (2016).
7
  Applications of more recent techniques in finance research include support vector regressions (Manela and Moreira,
2017), word embedding and Latent Dirichlet Analysis (Li, Mai, Shen, and Yan, 2020; Hanley and Hoberg, 2019;
Cong, Liang, and Zhang, 2019), and neural networks (Chen, Wu, Yang, 2019). See also the survey article Cong, Liang,
Yang and Zhang (2020).

                                                         5
non-text data such as the audios of conference calls (Mayew and Ventakachalam, 2012) and videos

of startup pitch presentations (Hu and Ma, 2020). Our study departs from the existent literature as

we explore managerial disclosure strategies in response to the growing presence of AI analytical

tools in both the industry and academia.

        Our study thus connects to a distinct literature on the "feedback effect," that is, while the

financial markets reflect firm fundamentals, the market perception also influences manager's

information set and decision making (see a survey by Bond, Edmans, and Goldstein, 2012). Our

study uncovers a novel "feedback effect" of machine learning about firm fundamentals on

corporate decisions in the era of AI. As long as the encoded rules are not completely opaque--

because such rules are transparent, observable, or reverse-engineerable to at least some degree,

agents who are impacted by the decisions have the incentive to manipulate the inputs to machine

learning in order to game at a more desirable outcome. Though a relation between metrics and

behavior is not new, 8 it is fairly recent that the machine learning community formalizes the matter

as one of "strategic classification" (Hardt, Megiddo, Papadimittriou, and Wootters, 2016; Dong,

Roth, Schutzman, and Waggoner, 2018; Milli, Miller, Dragan, and Hardt, 2019). We present the

first empirical evidence of the feedback effect from algorithmic assessment to corporate behavior. 9

While some adaptive behavior, such as making disclosure more machine-reading friendly, is

innocuous or even welcome, other algorithm-induced changes, such as the expression of sentiment,

highlight the increasing challenge on machine learning to be "manipulation proof" in that the

algorithms will learn to anticipate the strategic behavior of informed agents without observing it

in the training samples (see a theoretical analysis in Bjorkegren, Blumenstock, and Knight, 2020).


8
  In their classical work, Goodhart's (1975) Law and Lucas (1976) Critique generalize the phenomenon in the setting
of macro policy interventions.
9
  LM (2011) acknowledged the theoretical possibility that "[k]nowing that readers are using a document to evaluate
the value of a firm, writers are likely to be circumspect and avoid negative language" without providing evidence.

                                                        6
II.        Data, Variable Construction, and Sample Overview

A. Data sources

The primary data source of this study is the Securities and Exchange Commission's (SEC)

Electronic Data Gathering, Analysis, and Retrieval (EDGAR) system and the associated Log File

Data Set. Since 1994, the SEC has provided the public with access to securities filings containing

value-relevant and market-moving information through its EDGAR system, available through the

SEC's website and WRDS SEC Analytics Suite.

           While EDGAR is a content archive, its Log File tracks the traffic of requests and downloads.

More specifically, it comprises all records of the requests of SEC filings on EDGAR system since

January 2003. Each observation in the original dataset contains information on the visitor's

Internet Protocol (IP) address, timestamp, and the unique accession number of the filing that the

visitor downloads. In pre-processing the raw Log File, we exclude requests that land on index

pages because such requests do not download actual company filings. We then match the accession

number with the SEC master filing index to select all the 10-K and 10-Q filings. 10 This procedure

yields a total of 438,752 filings (119,135 10-K and 319,617 10-Q). After matching to

CRSP/Compustat, our final sample of raw filings consists of 359,819 filings (90,437 10-K and

269,382 10-Q), filed by 13,763 unique CIKs, between 2003 and 2016.

           Needless to say, regulatory filings are one of the venues through which firms can

communicate to the marketplace.                 Alternatively, firms can host corporate events such as



10
     We do not include amendments and other variant filings because these documents likely mirror the original filings.

                                                            7
conference calls, corporate presentations, and non-deal roadshows. Regulatory filings have the

advantage that the composition of the audience is mostly exogenous to firms' own decisions, which

is less true in the other settings. For example, managers can invite selected audience in corporate

events, while regulatory filings are open to everyone (Cohen, Lou, and Malloy, 2019). For this

reason, this paper focuses on the two most important SEC filings for public companies.




B. Construction of main variables

B1. Machine Downloads

        Several constructed variables are instrumental in our analyses, which we describe in detail.

The first key variable measures the frequency of machine downloads of corporate filings, which

serves as an upper bound as well as a proxy for the presence of "machine readers." Despite the

advent of multiple data sources, the SEC EDGAR website remains the earliest and most

authoritative source for company filings to be publicly released. 11 With the advances in computing

power and availability of data, some large hedge funds and asset managers have started big-data

driven programs to process and analyze unstructured data including corporate filings and news. 12

Recent academic studies also provide evidence that investment companies rely on machine

downloads of EDGAR filings for some of their trading strategies. Crane, Crotty, and Umar (2020)

find that hedge funds that employ robotic downloads perform better than those that do not. Cao,




11
   There was a multi-year episode of early leakage, which was largely resolved in mid-2015. See Bolandnazar, Jackson,
Jiang, and Mitts (2020).
12
   See, e.g., "Cohen's Point72 Hires 30 People for Big Data Investing," Simone Foxman, Bloomberg, March 10, 2015,
and "BlackRock Uses Big Data for Big Gains," Sarah Max, Barron's, December 26, 2015.

                                                         8
Du, Yang, and Zhang (2020) show that machine downloaders exhibit skills in identifying

profitable copycat trades from their peers' disclosure.

         To measure machine downloads, we identify an IP address downloading more than 50

unique firms' filings on any given date as a machine (i.e., robot) visitor and classify its requests on

that day as machine downloads, the same criterion as used by Lee, Ma, and Wang (2015). 13 In

addition, we include requests that are attributed to web crawlers in the SEC Log File Data as

machine-initiated. All remaining requests are labeled as "other" requests. Finally, we aggregate

machine requests and other requests, respectively, for each filing within seven days (i.e., days [0,7])

after it becomes available on EDGAR. 14

         Figure 1 shows the exponential growth of machine downloads since 2003. The number of

machine downloads of corporate 10-K and 10-Q filings increased from 360,861 in 2003 to

165,318,719 in 2016. 15 During the same period, machine downloads have also become the

predominant force among all EDGAR requests: the number of machine downloads as a fraction of

all downloads increased from 39% in 2003 to 78% in 2016.

                                              [Insert Figure 1 here.]

         The variable Machine Downloads measures the propensity of machine downloads of a

particular filing using ex ante information only. For a firm's (indexed by i) filing (indexed by j)



13
   Loughran and McDonald (2017) proposed an alternative and more aggressive approach to classify those daily IP
addresses having more than 50 requests as robot visitors. Because this approach tends to classify almost all downloads
as machine-driven in the most recent years, we resort to the more stringent measure by Lee, Ma, and Wang (2015).
We nevertheless presented the results using the Loughran and McDonald (2017) classification, which are qualitatively
similar, in sensitivity checks.
14
   We use seven days because the majority of requests happened within the first week. Results are robust under
alternative cutoffs including 14 days and 30 days.
15
   There are other filings, notably 8-K, that are of strong interest to the market. We do not include 8-K filings mainly
because 8-Ks, unlike 10-K/Qs, do not follow a standard structure, making it difficult to compare readability and
writing styles in the cross section.

                                                           9
on day t, Machine Downloads is the natural logarithm of the average number of machine

downloads of firm i's historical filings that were filed during days [t ­ 390, t ­ 30] (we only include

the machine downloads of a historical filing within seven days of posting on EDGAR, as explained

earlier). Other Downloads (the remainder) and Total Downloads (the sum) are constructed

analogously. Further, %Machine Downloads is defined as the ratio of Machine Downloads to

Total Downloads.

B2. Machine Readability

           The second key variable pertains to the "machine readability" of a 10-K or 10-Q filing,

which measures the ease at which a filing can be "understood," i.e., processed and parsed, by an

automated program. Recent literature in Accounting and Finance has studied various concepts

(e.g., Hodge, Kennedy, and Maines, 2004, Blankespoor, 2019, Blankespoor, deHaan, and

Marinovic, 2020, Gao and Huang, 2020) and proposed metrics (Allee, DeAngelis and Moon, 2018)

of information processing costs, related to either machine or human processing costs (or both).

After reviewing the existing research, especially Allee, DeAngelis and Moon (2018), we

summarize the most important attributes distinctly related to machine readability as follows: 16 (i)

Table Extraction, the ease of separating tables from text; (ii) Number Extraction, the ease of

extracting numbers from text; (iii) Table Format, the ease of identifying the information contained

in the table (e.g., whether a table has headings, column headings, row separators, and cell

separators); (iv) Self-Containedness, whether a filing includes all needed information (i.e., without

relying on external exhibits); and (v) Standard Characters, the proportion of characters that are

standard ASCII (American Standard Code for Information Interchange) characters. In our main




16
     We thank Robbie Moon for sharing part of the data used in the paper.

                                                          10
specification, each attribute is standardized to a Z-score before being averaged to form a single-

index Machine Readability. We present sensitivity checks using the first principal component of

the five attributes as well as the individual underlying attributes.

         Figure 2 shows the trend of Machine Readability from 2004 to 2015. Machine Readability

saw steep ascendance till 2008, followed by modest growth before leveling off around 2011. The

increasing trend per se is prima facie evidence that companies are not following a fixed template

for financial filings, but instead have been adapting the format of their filings to a changing

environment. 17

                                               [Insert Figure 2 here.]

         Appendix B provides some intuition behind the Machine Readability variable by showing

two sample filings: one with a low score (-1.09, or 1.90 standard deviation below the mean)

APPLEBEES INTERNATIONAL INC in 2005, and one with a high readability score (0.31, or

0.57 standard deviation above the mean) by VIASAT INC in 2012. A comparison of the two

filings is revealing.

         In the excerpt for the first filings, the first "table" is surrounded by text rather than enclosed

with the "<Table>... </Table>" tags, making it computationally difficult to recognize the location

of a "table." Next, the filing refers to more than ten external exhibits (e.g.,

"form10kexhf_032905.htm"), which are not included in the filing. The excerpt of the second filing,




17
   On April 13, 2009, SEC released a mandate on "Interactive Data to Improve Financial Reporting" (see
https://www.sec.gov/info/smallbus/secg/interactivedata-secg.htm). This mandate applies to financial reports of all
companies and was implemented over the period 2009-2011. It requires companies to provide financial statements in
interactive data format using the eXtensible Business Reporting Language (XBRL). The release states that "The new
rules are intended not only to make financial information easier for investors to analyze, but also to assist in automating
regulatory filings and business information processing." The mandate represents a regulatory effort in adapting
disclosure to the machine readers.

                                                            11
in contrast, contains tags such as <Table>, <TR> (tag for row), and <TD> (tag for data cell),

making it an easier task for machines to identify a table, a row in the table, and a cell in the table.

Furthermore, this filing does not refer to an external exhibit.

B3. (Negative) sentiment

        The third class of key variables aims at measuring "sentiments," which broadly refer to the

use of natural language processing, text analysis and computational linguistics to systematically

identify, extract, and quantify subjective information. Because a primary interest of this study is

to contrast the sentiment as perceived by human and machine readers, we resort to two established

lexica that guide the classification of sentiments by the two types of readers. The first lexicon is

the Harvard General Inquirer IV-4 psychological dictionary. This comprehensive dictionary

assigns 77 psychological intonations or categories to English words. For each corporate filing, we

count the number of words that fall into the "Negative" category and normalize it by the length of

the document, which is the total number of words in the textual part of a 10-K/Q filing, with all

tags, tables, and exhibits removed, following the standard procedure of processing full 10-K

documents in the literature (e.g., Loughran and McDonald, 2011; and Cohen, Malloy, and Nguyen,

2020). The resulting measure, expressed in percentage points, is termed Harvard Sentiment. The

average filing in our sample contains four Harvard General Inquirer negative words per 100 words.

The second lexicon is developed by Loughran and McDonald (2011), who create dictionaries of

positive and negative words that are specific to the context of financial documents. We count the

number of LM negative words and scale it by the length of the document. The resulting measure,

expressed in percentage points, is the LM Sentiment. 18 An average (median) filing uses 1.63 (1.54)


18
  We consider only the negative sentiment related to both dictionaries because the previous literature, including
Tetlock (2007), LM (2011), and Cohen, Malloy, and Nguyen (2020), find that positive sentiment is not as informative.
Replacing the negative sentiment measure by a net sentiment measure does not change our results qualitatively.

                                                        12
LM negative words in every 100 words. The interquartile range is from 1.19 to 1.98 words per 100

words. Finally, we form the difference, LM ­ Harvard Sentiment, to capture the contrast.

B4. Additional sentiment measures

         The fourth class of key variables build on Loughran and McDonald (2011)'s list of

measures for broader sentiment, including litigiousness, uncertainty, weak modal and strong modal

words, all in financial contexts. We extend sentiment measures to these additional attributes

because Loughran and McDonald (2011) find that the frequency of words falling into these

categories in firm filings is associated with stock market reactions. More specifically, Litigious is

the number of litigation-related words (such as "claimant" and "tort") divided by the length of the

document, expressed in percentage points. The other measures are constructed analogously.

Uncertainty words capture a general notion of imprecision (such as "approximate" and

"contingency"), Weak Modal and Strong Modal words convey levels of confidence (such as

"always" and "must" as strong, and "possibly" and "could" as weak). In an average filing, every

100 words contain 0.97 (1.43, 0.52, and 0.30) litigious (uncertainty, weak modal, and strong modal)

words.

B5. Vocal emotions

         Though the focus of this study rests on 10-K and 10-Q filings, we extend to conference

calls between firms and the public. The last set of key variables thus concerns audio quality. We

build a web-crawler using Selenium-Python to obtain the audios of conference calls from 2010 to




                                                 13
2016 from EarningsCast. 19 After matching with CRSP/Compustat, our sample consists of 43,462

audio files from 3,290 unique firms (gvkey).

        Anecdotal evidence suggests that executives have become aware that their speech patterns

and emotions, evaluated by human or software, impact their assessment by investors and

analysts. 20 A pioneer academic study by Mayew and Venkatachalam (2012) finds that analysts

incorporate managers' emotions during conference calls when they make stock recommendations.

One of the most prominent models of emotion, the Circumplex model, originally developed by

Russell (1980), suggests that emotions are distributed in a two-dimensional space defined by

valence and arousal. Following Hu and Ma (2020), we rely on a pre-trained Python machine
                                         21
learning package pyAudioAnalysis              (Giannakopoulos, 2015) to code the vocal emotion of each

conference call. Emotion Valence described the extent to which an emotion is positive or negative,

with a larger value indicating greater positivity. Emotion Arousal refers to the intensity or the

strength of the associated emotion state. Both measures are bounded between ­1 and 1, and a

greater (lower) value suggests that the speaker is more excited (calmer).

B6. Firm characteristics

        As usual, the firm characteristics variables (serving as control variables) are retrieved or

based on information from standard databases accessed via WRDS, such as CRSP/Compustat, and

Thomson Reuters Ownership Database.                 In this category of variables, Size is the market



19
   EarningsCast is a commercial aggregator for company earnings calls, calendar feed and podcast feed. Its website
is https://earningscast.com/. Selenium-Python, Selenium-Python is an open-source software package that allows us to
program a specific mouse-clicking sequential pattern for a particular website so that we can automate web browsing
and internet data retrieval from the website, see https://selenium-python.readthedocs.io/.
20
   Sources: "Can Executives' Speech Patterns Provide a Good Investment Guide?" Katherine Heires, Institutional
Investors, March 22, 2012. "Listening Without Prejudice: How the Experts Analyze Earnings Calls for Lies, Bluffs,
and Other Flags", Sterling Wong, Minyanville, April 18, 2012.
21
   The open-source pyAudioAnalysis is available at https://github.com/tyiannak/pyAudioAnalysis.

                                                        14
capitalization in logarithm. Tobin's Q is the natural logarithm of the ratio of the sum of market

value of equity and book value of debt to the sum of book value of equity and book value of debt.

ROA is the ratio of EBITDA to assets. Leverage is the ratio of total debt to assets. Growth is the

average sales growth of the past three years. IndAdjRet is the monthly average SIC3-adjusted stock

returns over the past year. InstOwnership is the ratio of the total shares of institutional ownership

to shares outstanding. Log(#analyst) is the natural log of one plus the number of IBES analyst

covering the stock. IdioVol is the annualized idiosyncratic volatility (using daily data) from Fama-

French three factor model. Turnover is the monthly average of the ratio of trading volumes to

shares outstanding. Segment is the number of business segments and measures the complexity of

business operations, following Cohen and Lou (2012). All control variables are constructed

annually using information available at the previous year-end. All potentially unbounded variables

are winsorized at the 1% extremes.

       The summary statistics are reported in Table 1. Because multiple variables require

historical information, the sample for our regression analyses start in 2004 and consists of a total

of 324,607 filings (81,075 10-K and 243,532 10-Q).

                                       [Insert Table 1 here.]




III.   AI Readership and Machine Readability of Corporate Disclosure

A. Determinants of machine downloads

       Since Machine Download is a key variable in our analysis, we first try to understand what

factors drive its variation. For this purpose, we estimate a regression with Machine Downloads

(or % Machine Downloads) as the dependent variable, and various firm characteristics as

                                                 15
independent variables. Table 2 reports the regressions all of which include year fixed effects, as

well as progressively industry and firm fixed effects. Unless otherwise stated, we use the 5% level

as criterion for statistical significance.

                                             [Insert Table 2 here.]

        We find that in the cross section (columns (1) and (2)), firms with larger size, lower

valuation (Tobin's Q), higher leverage, lower asset growth, more segments, high trading turnover,

higher idiosyncratic volatility, and firms that underperform their peers in the same industry tend

to have greater Machine Downloads. This suggests that machines tend to download filings from

more mature firms with more firm-specific developments. These relations pertain to within-firm

(column (3)), except that firms attract more machine downloads when it exhibits lower than usual

idiosyncratic volatility and have lower analyst coverage.

        Using % Machine Downloads reaches the opposite inferences regarding Size, Leverage,

IndAdjRet, Turnover, and Segment. That is, small firms with high recent returns have a higher

concentration of machine downloads. The contrast highlights the different determinants for the

scale and concentration of machine downloads. Because our research question concerns the

consequence of machine readership, the magnitude of machine downloads is the more pertinent

metric and hence Machine Downloads is our default measure. Moreover, to the extent that firm

characteristics are correlated with machine downloads, we include this list of variables in future

regressions as controls.




B. Relation between machine downloads and machine readability of reports




                                                      16
       As more and more investors use AI tools such as natural language processing and sentiment

analyses, we hypothesize that companies adjust the way they talk in order to communicate

effectively and predictably. A diagnostic test is thus to relate Machine Readability to Machine

Downloads in the cross section and over time. Table 3 reports the results from the following

regression at the filing level, indexed by firm(i)-filing(j)-date(t), with both year and firm (or

industry) fixed effects:

        ,, =   ,, +   ,, +

                                     , +  (3 ) +  + ,, .                                      (1)


                                      [Insert Table 3 here.]

       Table 3 Panel A shows that higher machine downloads expected for a filing of a company,

whether measured as the volume or percentage of machine downloads, significantly (at the 1%

level) predicts more machine-reading friendly reports across all specifications. The first four

columns show that a one-standard deviation increase in Machine Downloads is associated with

0.18 to 0.24 standard deviation increase in Machine Readability. The effects are almost invariant

with or without the control variables, indicating that other firm characteristics have little

confounding effect. The last two columns show that % Machine Downloads bears a very similar

relation to machine readability, where a one-standard deviation increase in % Machine Downloads

predicts a 0.04 to 0.05 standard deviation increase in Machine Readability.

       For the hypothesis that firms accommodate machine readers to be supported it is equally

important that the data show an absence of correlation between Machine Readability and Other

Downloads. That is, the other, presumably non-machine downloads serve as a natural placebo test.




                                               17
Indeed, all four coefficients on Other Downloads (columns (1) to (4)) turn out to be

indistinguishable from zero, economically and statistically.

       Panel B of Table 3 presents results from specifications using alternative definitions of

Machine Readability. In the first two columns, the dependent variable is the principal component

of the five attributes characterizing machine readability. The last two columns of Panel B adopt

the Loughran and McDonald (2017) definition of machine downloads, which classifies more

downloads as machine-driven.         All four specifications show that Machine Downloads is

significantly (at the 1% level) associated with, but Other Downloads exhibits no positive relation

with, Machine Readability. In fact, higher Other Downloads is negatively and significantly

associated with machine-friendly format in reporting.

       Panel C of Table 3 breaks down Machine Readability into its five components: Table

Extraction, Number Extraction, Table Format, Self-Containedness, and Standard Characters.

Results show that high expected machine downloads increase all five sub-metrics of machine

readability significantly (at the 1% level). Again, the coefficients of Other Downloads do not have

consistent signs across the five attributes.




C. Cross validation of Machine Downloads and Machine Readability as empirical proxies

       Our analyses to follow critically depend on Machine Downloads and Machine Readability

being effective proxies for the presence of machine readership and the ease with which machine

can process the filings. We thus conduct multiple tests that support the validity of the two key

empirical proxies. First, we connect Machine Downloads to its primary suspect, hedge funds who

adopt AI strategies. Following Guo and Shi (2020), we classify a hedge fund to be AI-prone if


                                                18
there is at least one employee who has been involved in AI projects based on their LinkedIn

profiles. 22 We then define AI Hedge Fund to be the percentage of shares outstanding that is held

by such hedge funds at the firm-quarter level, based on the 13F filings via Thomson Reuters

Ownership database. The last two columns of Table 2 include AI Hedge Fund as an additional

variable to predict Machine Downloads. Indeed, the coefficients are positive and significant.

        Second, we conjecture and test that machine readers should lead to faster trades after a

filing is posted, given their natural advantage in the capacity and speed processing information.

Moreover, such an advantage should be elevated when the files are composed to be machine

friendly. Such a hypothesis is operationalized into a duration analysis connecting "time to trade"

and the key independent variables.          Using high-frequency data, we conduct the following

regression at the filing level, indexed by firm(i)-filing(j)-date(t), with year and firm (or industry)

fixed effects:

  ,, = 1  ,, ×  ,, +

             2  ,, + 3  ,, +

              ,, +  , +  (3 ) +  + , .                                                             (2)


        There are two versions for the dependent variable: Time to the First Trade and Time to the

First Directional Trade, the construction of which follow Bolandnazar, Jackson, Jiang, and Mitts

(2020). Time to the First Trade is the length of time, in seconds, between the time stamps of

EDGAR posting and the first trade of the issuer's stock afterwards. Time to the First Directional

Trade adds a requirement that the trade needs to be profitable (before any transaction cost) based

on the price at the end of the 15th minute post filing. That is, the first directional trade is the first


22
  We thank Xuxi Guo and Zhen Shi for sharing the data of hedge funds with AI-experienced employees. AI
projects are identified based on both job title and descriptions of experience/responsibility.

                                                     19
buy (sell) trade at a price below (above) the terminal value, where buy- and sell-initiated trades are

classified by the Lee and Ready (1991) algorithm. As in Bolandnazar et al. (2020), we focus on

the 15-minute window in order to isolate the effect of the filing; and hence both variables are

censored at the end of the time window.

       The results, reported in Table 4, support the prediction that high Machine Downloads are

associated with faster trades after a filing becomes publicly available. A one-standard deviation

increase in Machine Downloads saves 8.56 to 14.73 seconds for the first trade and 13.29 to 21.80

seconds for the first directional trade. All coefficients associated with directional trades (in the

last four columns) are significant at the 1% level, while the coefficients lose significance with Time

to the First Trade when firm fixed effects are included. Moreover, the relation between Machine

Downloads and Time to Trade is indeed significantly stronger when Machine Readability is higher.

The test, in addition to serving as a joint validation of the two key empirical proxies, but also

demonstrates the real impact of AI adoption in trading. To the extent that faster market reaction

to corporate disclosure is a sign of effective communication of firms' financial health, which

results in efficient information dissemination, the result also justifies the need to firms to cater to

the machines.

                                        [Insert Table 4 here.]




IV. Managing Sentiment and Tones with Machine Readers

A. Textual sentiment

       While truthfulness in disclosure reports is expected and required, it is well known that

corporate disclosures are usually positively biased without necessarily crossing the line of law and

                                                  20
compliance (Loughran and McDonald, 2011; Kothari, Shu, and Wysocki, 2009). Company

executives usually want to portray their business activity in the most positive light to attract or

gain from stakeholders (creditors, employees, suppliers, and customers). The messages from the

top management may also include the sentiment that these people truly believe but are based on

unintentional misconceptions, which, though, still end up being self-serving.

         For this reason, the prior literature has documented that "positive" words are far more

common than "negative" words in corporate reports, based on respectable lexicons such as the

Harvard Psychosociological Dictionary, specifically, the Harvard-IV-4 TagNeg (H4N) file. Such

a list of words were originally developed for human readers and for general purposes, and over

time they serve as an objective standard for researchers to analyze the sources and consequences

of tones and sentiments in corporate disclosures and new media as perceived by the general

readership (Tetlock, 2007, Tetlock, Saar-Tsechansky, and Macskassy, 2008, Hanley and Hoberg,

2010).

         However, the meaning and tone of English words are highly context and discipline specific,

and a general word categorization scheme might not translate effectively into a specialized field

such as finance. This motivated the influential work by Loughran and McDonald (2011), which

presented a specialized dictionary of positive and negative words that fits the unique text of

financial situations. In fact, according to Loughran and McDonald (2011), almost three-fourth of

the words identified by the Harvard Dictionary as negative (such as "liability") are words typically

not considered negative in financial contexts. The dictionary has since become the leading lexicon

used in algorithms for sentiment calibration. 23



23
   For example, as of May 2020, the LM paper has been cited more than 2,300 times by researchers. And their word
list has been adopted by the WRDS SEC Sentiment Data. The dictionary has been frequently featured in industry

                                                      21
        The timeline of Harvard General Inquirer dictionary (existed since 1996) and the

Loughran-McDonald dictionary (since 2011) 24 and their differential adoption by human versus

machine readers, provide a unique setting for us to test how the writing of corporate filings adjusts

to AI readers. We consider the following regression at the filing level, indexed by firm(i)-filing(j)-

date(t), with year and firm (or industry) fixed effects:

         ,, = 1  ,, ×  +

                       2   ,, +   ,, +

                         , +  (3 ) +  + , .                                                                 (3)


        There are three versions of the dependent variable Negative Sentiment in the equation

above: the LM Sentiment, the Harvard Sentiment, and their difference LM ­ Harvard Sentiment,

as defined in Section II.B3.      We consider the prevalence of negative words only because earlier

research (Tetlock, 2007; Loughran and McDonald, 2011; Cohen, Lou, and Malloy, 2020) indicate

that positive words are not informative of firm future outcomes or stock returns. Post is an

indicator variable for years that came after the publication of Loughran and McDonald (2011),

which is equal to one for filings in 2012 and onwards, and zero otherwise. Filings in 2011 are

excluded from the analysis. The year fixed effect subsumes the variable Post on its own.

        Under the hypothesis that AI readers employed by algorithmic investors shape the style

and quality of corporate writing, we expect coefficient 1 to be significantly negative for LM

Sentiment but not for Harvard Sentiment, and the relation between LM Sentiment and Machine




white papers and technical reports, such as in "Natural Language Processing in Finance: Shakespeare Without the
Monkeys" by the Man Group in July 2019.
24
   The paper was in public distribution, e.g., posted on the SSRN, since 2009. Google citation counts show that
Loughran and McDonald (2011) was cited 10 times prior to 2011, 243 times by 2013, and has grown exponentially to
2,483 times as of September 2020.

                                                      22
Downloads should be present primarily during the Post period (after the publication of Loughran

and McDonald (2011)). Such an exclusive set of effects is confirmed by results in Table 5.

                                       [Insert Table 5 here.]

       Table 5 shows an unambiguous contrast before and after 2011 on the effect of measures

related to Loughran and McDonald (2011), the year when the paper was published. Post 2011, a

one-standard deviation increase in Machine Downloads is associated with a 9-11 basis points

incremental decrease in LM Sentiment, on top of an insignificant (column (3) with industry fixed

effect) or much smaller (column (4) with firm fixed effects) effect during the pre-2011 period. The

incremental effect post-2011 represents about 5% of the sample mean of LM Sentiment, or 0.15

standard deviations, and is significant at the 1% level. In contrast, Harvard Sentiment does not

bear any negative relation with Machine Downloads (columns (5) and (6)). Finally, columns (1)

and (2) show that the relation between LM ­ Harvard Sentiment and Machine Downloads

conforms to that of LM Sentiment, confirming that the differential effect is mainly driven by

reduced LM Sentiment.

       Results in Table 5 keep the possibility open that the publication of Loughran and

McDonald (2011) merely reflects a general trend of a strengthening relation between the machine

downloads and avoiding using words that are perceived to have negative annotations in the finance

context. Such a possibility still supports the general thesis that machine readership impacts

disclosure quality; nevertheless, a "parallel pre-trend" would allow a sharper identification on the

impact of a new lexicon available to machine reading. Figure 3 illustrate the structural break,

instead of a pre-existing and continuing trend, around 2011. More specifically, we aggregate the

LM ­ Harvard Sentiment at the annual level, separately for filings that are in the top and bottom

terciles of Machine Downloads in each year. Figure 3 Panel A plots the time series of the

                                                23
incremental tendency to use LM-negative words (for finance context) over Harvard-negative

words (for general context) by the two groups of filings.

                                      [Insert Figure 3 here.]

       Panel A of Figure 3 shows a parallel pre-trend of the two groups till 2011 and then a clear

divergence afterward. Before 2011, filings in the top and bottom terciles of Machine Downloads

exhibit clustered movements in the LM ­ Harvard Sentiment. Afterwards, the sentiment of the top

tercile trends down relative to that of the bottom tercile. Panel B of Figure 3 takes a different

sorting method by separating filings into the top quartile of Machine Downloads from the rest. The

resulting graph confirms the parallel pre-trend and then divergence around 2011, suggesting that

disclosures with the highest expected machine readership are driving the results.

       Given the quasi-randomness of the exact year of publication, it is unlikely that the

publication of Loughran and McDonald (2011) made the perfect timing on the structural break. In

other words, it is implausible that the LM dictionary summarizes the practice that was already in

place, and that it serves as an exactly timed concurrent side-show. Table 5 and Figure 3 thus

support the hypothesis that corporate writing has been adjusted to serve machine readers, which

was impacted by the availability of the LM dictionary.




B. Managing other textual tones with machine readers

       In addition to providing lists of sentimental words, Loughran and McDonald (2011) also

construct lists of "tone" words aiming to capture litigiousness, uncertainty, and weak and strong

modality that are tailored to the financial context. The expanded dictionary allows machines to

assess more dimensions of the annotations of a document. Loughran and McDonald (2011)

                                                24
discover that stock market respond more positively to disclosure using fewer negative, uncertain,

modal strong, and modal weak words; and that firms with a high proportion of negative or strong

modal words are more likely to report material weakness. Given the market perception, it is

curious to see whether managers also adjust tones along these dimensions after the methodology

became publicly known. We re-estimate Equation (3) by replacing the dependent variable by

Litigious, Uncertainty, Weak Modal, and Strong Modal, which are all defined in Section II.B4 as

well as in Appendix A:

       ,, = 1  ,, ×  + 2  ,, +

             ,, +  , +  ( 3 ) +  + , .                                                          (4)

To the extent that managers have adjusted the frequency of LM-negative words based on their

knowledge about investor reaction to sentiment they should, then, also understand the impact of

other tones documented in Loughran and McDonald (2011). Given Loughran and McDonald's

(2011) discovery that the frequency of all four tones were met with negative stock market reactions,

we conjecture that managers of firms with high expected machine readership should tone down

these words after 2011. Results in Table 6 support such a prediction. The coefficients associated

with Machine Downloads × Post are significant (at 5% level or less) for all four dependent

variables. That is, post-2011 corporate reports that are expected to be read by machines avoid

convey a sentiment, which could come out of an algorithm, that is predictive of legal liabilities,

that is indicative of uncertain prospects, and that exhibit too little or too much confidence and

surety. For example, a one-standard deviation increase in Machine Downloads predicts a 0.19

standard deviation decrease in the Litigious tone.

                                      [Insert Table 6 here.]



                                                25
C. Managing audio quality in conference calls with machine readers

       Though the textual quality of disclosures is the focus of this study, voice analytics, enabled

by the development of modern machine learning methods, provides an out-of-sample test. Starting

around 2008, voice analytic software, such as the commercial Layered Voice Analysis (LVA)

software and open-source software on GitHub, have gained attention among investors looking for

an edge in information processing. Such software has enabled researchers to study the vocal

expressions of managers and their implications on capital markets (Mayew and Ventakachalam,

2012; and Hu and Ma, 2020). If managers are aware that their disclosure documents could be

parsed by machines, then they should also expect that their machine readers may also be using

voice analyzers to extract signals from vocal patterns and emotions contained in managers'

speeches.

       This section explores whether the management adjust the way they talk (on conference call)

when they expect that machines are listening, based on a sample of audio data of conference calls

from 2010 to 2016, as described in Section II.B5. Since there are no data on downloads of

conference calls, we keep Machine Downloads of a firm's filings as the proxy for the prevalence

of "machine listeners," based on the premise that Machine Downloads represents the propensity

of investors to deploy AI tools in analyzing corporate disclosure. Table 7 reports the results from

the following regression at the conference call level, indexed by firm (i)-call (k)-date (t), with both

year and firm (or industry) fixed effects:

        ,, =  ,, +  ,, +

                           , +  (3 ) +  + ,, .                                                     (5)


                                                  26
We measure emotion along two dimensions developed in psychology, Valence and Arousal, that

captures and positivity and intensity of vocal tones (Russell, 1980).

                                             [Insert Table 7 here.]

        The first four columns of Table 7 show that higher Machine Downloads is associated with

higher Valence, or positivity in vocal emotion. A one-standard deviation increase in Machine

Downloads is associated with a 0.28 standard deviation higher Valence. Last four columns of Table

7 indicate a positive, but much weaker, relation between Machine Downloads and Arousal, i.e., a

more exciting emotion in conference calls. Note that tone of positivity or excitement could be

driven by the fundamentals, the health of the earnings in this case. For this reason, we further

include EarningsSurprise, defined as the difference between actual earnings and median analyst

forecast, in columns (4) and (8) as an additional control variable. 25 The coefficients associated

with Machine Downloads barely change.

        Based on videos of entrepreneurs pitching investors for funding, Hu and Ma (2020) show

that venture capitalists are more likely to invest in start-ups whose founders give pitches that are

rated high in valence and arousal. It is plausible that reactions of VC investors to vocal emotion

also apply to the general capital markets. Our findings support the hypothesis that managers may

manipulate their vocal expressions to achieve a more favorable effect on investors that rely on

machine processing, and also justifies the anecdotal evidence that managers increasingly seek

professional coaching in order to improve vocal performances. 26




25
   Calculating the EarningsSurprise variable requires analyst coverage (tracked by the I/B/E/S analyst data), which
results in a much smaller sample.
26
   Sources: "Listening Without Prejudice: How the Experts Analyze Earnings Calls for Lies, Bluffs, and Other Flags",
Sterling Wong, Minyanville, April 18, 2012. "How to listen for the hidden data in earnings calls", Alina Dizik,
Chicago Booth Review, May 25, 2017.

                                                        27
IV.    Concluding Remarks

This paper presents the first study showing how corporate disclosure in writing and speaking has

been reshaped by machine readership employed by algorithmic traders and quantitative analysts.

Our findings indicate that increasing AI readership motivates firms to prepare filings that are more

friendly to machine parsing and processing, highlighting the growing roles of AI in the financial

markets and their potential impact on corporate decisions. Firms manage sentiment and tone

perception that is catered to AI readers by differentially avoiding words that are perceived as

negative by algorithms, as compared to those by human readers. While the literature has shown

how investors and researchers apply machine learning and computational tools to extract

information from disclosure and news, our study is the first to identify and analyze the feedback

effect, i.e., how companies adjust the way they talk knowing that machines are listening. Such a

feedback effect can lead to unexpected outcomes, such as manipulation and collusion (Calvano,

Calzolari, Denicolo, and Pastorello, 2019). The technology advancement calls for more studies to

understand the impact of and induced behavior by AI in financial economics.




                                                28
Appendix A: Definitions of Variables
 Variable                        Definition
 Machine Downloads               For a firm's filing on day t, Machine Downloads is the natural logarithm
                                 of the average number of machine downloads of the firm's historical filings
                                 that were filed during days [t ­ 390, t ­ 30] days. To measure machine
                                 downloads, we identify an IP address downloading more than 50 unique
                                 firms' filings daily as a machine (i.e., robot) visitor, the same criterion as
                                 used by Lee, Ma, and Wang (2015). In addition, we include requests that
                                 are attributed to web crawlers in the SEC Log File Data as machine-
                                 initiated. Machine requests are aggregated for each filing within seven days
                                 (i.e., days [0,7]) after it becomes available on EDGAR.
 Other Downloads                 For a firm's filing on day t, Other Downloads is the natural logarithm of
                                 the average number of non-machine downloads of the firm's historical
                                 filings that were filed during days [t ­ 390, t ­ 30] days.
 Total Downloads                 For a firm's filing on day t, Total Downloads is the natural logarithm of the
                                 average number of total downloads of the firm's historical filings that were
                                 filed during days [t ­ 390, t ­ 30] days.
 %Machine Downloads              Machine Downloads/Total Downloads
 Machine Readability             Machine Readability is the average of five filing attributes, including (i)
                                 Table Extraction, the ease of separating tables from text; (ii) Number
                                 Extraction, the ease of extracting numbers from text; (iii) Table Format,
                                 the ease of identifying the information contained in the table (e.g., whether
                                 a table has headings, column headings, row separators, and cell separators);
                                 (iv) Self-Containedness, whether a filing includes all needed information
                                 (i.e., without relying on external exhibits); and (v) Standard Characters,
                                 the proportion of characters that are standard ASCII (American Standard
                                 Code for Information Interchange) characters. In our main specification,
                                 each attribute is standardized to a Z-score before being averaged to form a
                                 single-index Machine Readability.
 PCA Machine Readability         PCA Machine Readability is the first principal component of the five
                                 underlying filing attributes from Machine Readability.
 Time to the First Trade         Time to the First Trade is the length of time, in seconds, between the
                                 EDGAR publication time stamp and the first trade of the issuer's stock,
                                 censored at the end of a 15-minute window.
 Time to the First Directional   Time to the First Directional Trade is the length of time, in seconds,
 Trade                           between the EDGAR publication time stamp and the first directional trade
                                 after a filing is publicly released, and it is censored at the end of the 15-
                                 minute window. The first directional trade is the first buy (sell) trade at a
                                 price below (above) the terminal value at the end of the window, where
                                 buy- and sell-initiated trades are classified by the Lee and Ready (1991)
                                 algorithm.
 LM Sentiment                    The number of Loughran-McDonald (LM) finance-related negative words
                                 in a filing divided by the total number of words in the filing, expressed in
                                 percentage points.
 Harvard Sentiment               The number of Harvard General Inquirer negative words in a filing divided
                                 by the total number of words in the filing, expressed in percentage points.
 LM ­ Harvard Sentiment          LM Sentiment minus Harvard Sentiment.




                                                    29
Litigious         The number of Loughran-McDonald (LM) litigation-related words in a
                  filing divided by the total number of words in the filing, expressed in
                  percentage points.
Uncertainty       The number of Loughran-McDonald (LM) uncertainty-related words in a
                  filing divided by the total number of words in the filing, expressed in
                  percentage points.
Weak Modal        The number of Loughran-McDonald (LM) weak modal words in a filing
                  divided by the total number of words in the filing, expressed in percentage
                  points.
Strong Modal      The number of Loughran-McDonald (LM) strong modal words in a filing
                  divided by the total number of words in the filing, expressed in percentage
                  points.
Post              Post is an indicator variable equal to one for filings in 2012 and onwards,
                  and zero for filings in 2010 and before (filings in 2011 are excluded from
                  the analysis).
Emotion-Valence   The positivity of speech emotion, calculated from a pre-trained Python
                  machine learning package pyAudioAnalysis.
Emotion-Arousal   The excitedness of speech emotion, calculated from a pre-trained Python
                  machine learning package pyAudioAnalysis.
Size              The natural logarithm of the market capitalization.
Tobin's Q         The natural logarithm of the ratio of the sum of market value of equity and
                  book value of debt to the sum of book value of equity and book value of
                  debt.
ROA               The ratio of EBITDA to assets
Leverage          The ratio of total debt to assets.
Growth            The average sales growth of the past three years.
IndAdjRet         The monthly average SIC3-adjusted stock returns over the past year.
InstOwnership     The ratio of the total shares of institutional ownership to shares
                  outstanding.
AIHedgeFund       The percentage of shares outstanding owned by AI hedge funds, classified
                  based on employees work experience in AI-related projects disclosed on
                  their LinkedIn profiles.
Log(#analyst)     The natural log of one plus the number of IBES analyst covering the stock
IdioVol           The annualized idiosyncratic volatility (using daily data) from Fama-
                  French three factor model.
Turnover          The monthly average of the ratio of trading volumes to shares outstanding.
Segment           The number of business segments and measures the complexity of business
                  operations, following Cohen and Lou (2012).
EarningSurprise   The difference between the actual quarterly earnings and the median
                  earnings forecast of IBES analysts scaled by price.




                                     30
Appendix B. Excerpts of Two 10-K Filings
This figure shows two sample fillings, one with a low Machine Readability score (-1.09, or 1.90 standard
deviation below the mean) by APPLEBEES INTERNATIONAL INC in 2005 and one with a high Machine
Readability score (0.31, or 0.57 standard deviation above the mean) by VIASAT INC in 2012. Machine
Readability is the average of five standardized filing attributes, including (i) Table Extraction, the ease of
separating tables from text; (ii) Number Extraction, the ease of extracting numbers from text; (iii) Table
Format, the ease of identifying the information contained in the table (e.g., whether a table has headings,
column headings, row separators, and cell separators); (iv) Self-Containedness, whether a filing includes
all needed information (i.e., without relying on external exhibits); and (v) Standard Characters, the
proportion of characters that are standard ASCII (American Standard Code for Information Interchange)
characters.
Excerpt 1. APPLEBEES INTERNATIONAL INC, CIK: 0000853665, March 30, 2005




(omitted)




                                                     31
Excerpt 2. VIASAT INC, CIK: 0000797721, May 25, 2012
Text format for machine processing:




                                                       32
HTML as in a web browser (for the reader's convenience, the following picture shows the contents of the above scripts if shown as an HTML in a
web browser):




                                                                      33
References


Ahern, Kenneth R., and Denis Sosyura, 2014, Who writes the news? Corporate press releases
       during merger negotiations, Journal of Finance 69, 241­291.

Allee, Kristian D., Matthew D. DeAngelis, and James R. Moon Jr, 2018, Disclosure
       "scriptability", Journal of Accounting Research 56, 363­430.

Bernard, Darren, Terrence Blackburne, and Jacob Thornock, 2020, Information flows among
       rivals and corporate investment, Journal of Financial Economics 136, 760­779.

Björkegren, Daniel, Joshua E. Blumenstock, and Samsun Knight, 2020, Manipulation-Proof
       Machine Learning, Working paper, Brown University and U.C. Berkeley.

Blankespoor, Elizabeth, 2019, The impact of information processing costs on firm disclosure
      choice: Evidence from the XBRL mandate, Journal of Accounting Research 57, 919­967.

Blankespoor, Elizabeth, Ed deHaan, and Ivan Marinovic, 2020, Disclosure processing costs,
      investors' information choice, and equity market outcomes: A review, Journal of
      Accounting and Economics forthcoming.

Bolandnazar, Mohammadreza, Robert J. Jackson Jr, Wei Jiang, and Joshua Mitts, 2020, Trading
      against the random expiration of private information: A natural experiment, Journal of
      Finance 75, 5­44.

Bond, Philip, Alex Edmans, and Itay Goldstein, 2012, The real effects of financial markets, Annual
       Review of Financial Economics 4, 339­360.

Calvano, Calzolari, Denicolo, and Pastorello, 2019, Artificial intelligence, algorithm pricing and
      collusion, American Economic Review forthcoming

Cao, Sean, Kai Du, Baozhong Yang, and Alan L. Zhang, 2020, Copycat skills and disclosure costs:
       Evidence from peer companies' digital footprints, Working paper, Georgia State
       University and Pennsylvania State University.

Chen, Huaizhi, Lauren Cohen, Umit Gurun, Dong Lou, and Christopher Malloy, 2020, IQ from
      IP: Simplifying search in portfolio choice, Journal of Financial Economics forthcoming.

Chen, Mark A., Qinxi Wu, and Baozhong Yang, 2019, How valuable is FinTech innovation?
      Review of Financial Studies 32, 2062­2106.

Cohen, Lauren, and Dong Lou, 2012, Complicated firms, Journal of Financial Economics 104,
      383­400.

Cohen, Lauren, Dong Lou, and Christopher Malloy, 2019, Playing favorites: How firms prevent
      the revelation of bad news, Management Science forthcoming.


                                               34
Cohen, Lauren, Christopher Malloy, and Quoc Nguyen, 2020, Lazy prices, Journal of Finance
      forthcoming.

Cong, Lin William, Tengyuan Liang, Baozhong Yang, and Xiao Zhang, 2020, Analyzing textual
       information at scale, Information to Facilitate Efficient Decision Making: Big Data,
       Blockchain and Relevance (ed. Kashi Balachandran), World Scientific Publishers,
       forthcoming

Cong, Lin William, Tengyuan Liang, and Xiao Zhang, 2019, Textual factors: A scalable,
      interpretable, and data-driven approach to analyzing unstructured information, Working
      paper, Chicago University and Cornell University.

Crane, Alan D. and Kevin Crotty and Tarik Umar, 2020, Public and private information:
       complements or substitutes? Working paper, Rice University.

Da, Zhi, Joseph Engelberg, and Pengjie Gao, 2011, In search of attention, Journal of Finance 66,
       1461­1499.

Dong, Jinshuo, Aaron Roth, Zachary Schutzman, Bo Waggoner, and Zhiwei Steven Wu, 2018,
      Strategic classification from revealed preferences, Proceedings of the 2018 ACM
      Conference on Economics and Computation, 55­70.

Gao, Meng, and Jiekun Huang, 2020, Informing the market: The effect of modern information
      technologies on information production, Review of Financial Studies 33: 1367­1411.

Garcia, Diego, 2013, Sentiment during recessions, Journal of Finance 68, 1267­1300.

Giannakopoulos, Theodoros, 2015, pyAudioAnalysis: An open-source python library for audio
      signal analysis, PloS one 10, e0144610.

Goodhart, Charles, 1975, Problems of monetary management: the UK experience in papers in
      monetary economics, Monetary Economics 1.

Guo, Xuxi, and Zhen Shi, 2020, The impact of AI talents on hedge fund performance, Working
      paper, Georgia State University.

Hanley, Kathleen Weiss, and Gerard Hoberg, 2010, The information content of IPO prospectuses,
      Review of Financial Studies 23, 2821­2864.

Hanley, Kathleen Weiss, and Gerard Hoberg, 2019, Dynamic interpretation of emerging risks in
      the financial sector, Review of Financial Studies 32, 4543­4603.

Hardt, Moritz, Nimrod Megiddo, Christos Papadimitriou, and Mary Wootters, 2016, Strategic
       classification, Proceedings of the 2016 ACM conference on innovations in theoretical
       computer science, 111­122.




                                              35
Hodge, Frank D., Jane Jollineau Kennedy, and Laureen A. Maines, 2004, Does search-facilitating
      technology improve the transparency of financial reporting? The Accounting Review 79:
      687­703.

Hu, Allen, and Song Ma, 2020, Human interactions and financial investment: A video-based
      approach, Working paper, Yale University.

Huang, Alan Guoming, Hongping Tan, Russ Wermers, 2020, Institutional Trading around
      Corporate News: Evidence from Textual Analysis, Review of Financial Studies,
      Forthcoming.

Hwang, Byoung-Hyoun, and Hugh Hoikwang Kim, 2017, It pays to write well, Journal of
     Financial Economics 124, 373­394.

Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, and Di Wu, 2013, Word power: A new approach for content
       analysis, Journal of financial economics 110, 712­729.

Jiang, Fuwei, Joshua Lee, Xiumin Martin, and Guofu Zhou, 2019, Manager sentiment and stock
        returns, Journal of Financial Economics 132, 126­149.

Kothari, Sabino P., Susan Shu, and Peter D. Wysocki, 2009, Do managers withhold bad
       news? Journal of Accounting Research, 47, 241­276.

Lee, Charles MC, Paul Ma, and Charles CY Wang, 2015, Search-based peer firms: Aggregating
       investor perceptions through internet co-searches, Journal of Financial Economics 116,
       410­431.

Lee, Charles MC, and Mark J. Ready, 1991, Inferring trade direction from intraday data, Journal
       of Finance 46, 733­746.

Li, Kai, Feng Mai, Rui Shen, and Xinyan Yan, 2020, Measuring corporate culture using machine
        learning, Review of Financial Studies, Forthcoming.

Loughran, Tim, and Bill McDonald, 2011, When is a liability not a liability? Textual analysis,
      dictionaries, and 10Ks, Journal of Finance 66, 35­65.

Loughran, Tim, and Bill McDonald, 2016, Textual analysis in accounting and finance: A
      survey, Journal of Accounting Research 54, 1187­1230.

Loughran, Tim, and Bill McDonald, 2017, The use of EDGAR filings by investors, Journal of
      Behavioral Finance 18, 231­248.

Lucas, Robert E, 1976, Econometric policy evaluation: A critique, Carnegie-Rochester
      Conference Series on Public Policy 1, 19­46.

Manela, Asaf, and Alan Moreira, 2017, News implied volatility and disaster concerns, Journal of
      Financial Economics 123, 137­162.


                                              36
Mayew, William J., and Mohan Venkatachalam, 2012, The power of voice: Managerial affective
     states and future firm performance, Journal of Finance 67, 1­43.

Russell, James A, 1980, A circumplex model of affect, Journal of Personality and Social
       Psychology 39, 1161­1178.

Milli, Smitha, John Miller, Anca D. Dragan, and Moritz Hardt, 2019, The social cost of strategic
        classification, Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and
        Transparency, 230­239.

Tetlock, Paul C, 2007, Giving content to investor sentiment: The role of media in the stock market,
       Journal of Finance 62, 1139­1168.

Tetlock, Paul C, Maytal Saar-Tsechansky, and Sofus Macskassy, 2008, More than words:
       Quantifying language to measure firms' fundamentals, Journal of Finance 63, 1437­1467.




                                                37
Figure 1. Trend of Machine Downloads
This figure plots the annual number of machine downloads (blue bars and left axis) and the annual
percentage of machine downloads over total downloads (red line and right axis) across all 10-K and 10-Q
filings from 2003 to 2016. Machine downloads are defined as downloads from an IP address downloading
more than 50 unique firms' filings daily. The number of machine downloads and the number of total
downloads for each filing are recorded as the respective downloads within seven days after the filing
becomes available on EDGAR.



                                         1,000                                                                           100%
   Machine Downloads (in million, log-




                                                                                                                         90%




                                                                                                                                % Machine Downloads
                                          100                                                                            80%

                                                                                                                         70%
               scaled)




                                           10
                                                                                                                         60%

                                                                                                                         50%
                                            1
                                                                                                                         40%

                                            0                                                                            30%
                                                 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

                                                     Machine Downloads (in million)         % Machine Downloads




                                                                               38
Figure 2. Trend of Machine Readability
This figure plots the annual Machine Readability across all 10-K and 10-Q filings from 2004 to 2015.
Machine Readability is the average of five standardized filing attributes, including Table Extraction,
Number Extraction, Table Format, Self-Containedness, and Standard Characters. All attributes are defined
in Appendix A.



              0.1



               0



             -0.1



             -0.2



             -0.3
                    2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015

                                              Machine Readability




                                                  39
Figure 3. Sentiment Trend and Machine Downloads
This figure plots LM ­ Harvard Sentiment of 10-K and 10-Q filings and compares sentiment of firms with
high machine downloads with that of the low group. LM ­ Harvard Sentiment is the difference of LM
Sentiment and Harvard Sentiment. LM Sentiment is defined as the number of Loughran-McDonald (LM)
finance-related negative words in a filing divided by the total number of words in the filing. Harvard
Sentiment is defined as the number of Harvard General Inquirer negative words in a filing divided by the
total number of words in the filing. In Panel A, filings are sorted into top tercile or bottom tercile based on
Machine Downloads, defined in Appendix A. In Panel B, filings are sorted into top quartile or the rest based
on Machine Downloads. In all panels, LM Sentiment and Harvard Sentiment sentiments are normalized to
one in 2010 within each group, one year before the publication of Loughran and McDonald (2011). The
dotted lines represent the 95% confidence limits.
Panel A: Top tercile machine downloads vs. bottom tercile machine downloads

                0.1



               0.05



                 0



              -0.05



               -0.1
                      2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

                        Top Terceile Machine Downloads         Bottom Tercile Machine Downloads


Panel B: Top quartile machine downloads vs. the rest

                0.1



               0.05



                 0



              -0.05



               -0.1
                      2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

                        Top Quartile Machine Downloads        Non-Top Quartile Machine Downloads



                                                         40
Table 1. Summary Statistics
This tables provide summary statistics. Filing level variables are based on the sample of SEC EDGAR 10-
K and 10-Q filings from 2004 to 2016. Conference call level variables are based on the sample of the audio
of corporate conference calls from 2010 to 2016. Firm-year level control variables are calculated annually
using information available at the previous year-end. Variables are defined in Appendix A.

 Variables                     Mean         Median             Std          P25      P75          N
                                                  Filing level
 Machine Downloads            4.729          4.508           1.763         3.296    6.377      324,607
 Other Downloads              3.448          3.474           1.378         2.615    4.363      324,607
 Total Downloads               5.09          4.915           1.609         3.829    6.535      324,607
 %Machine Downloads           0.742          0.775           0.179         0.623    0.892      324,231
 Machine Readability          -0.020         0.125           0.584         -0.224   0.359      199,421
 LM ­ Harvard Sentiment       -2.413         -2.385          0.544         -2.747   -2.047     324,589
 LM Sentiment                 1.625          1.543           0.599         1.185    1.982      324,589
 Harvard Sentiment            4.038          4.021           0.697         3.561    4.492      324,589
 Litigious                    0.965           0.82           0.537         0.593    1.177      324,589
 Uncertainty                  1.425          1.377           0.398         1.146    1.652      324,589
 WeakModal                    0.521          0.427           0.304         0.314    0.634      324,589
 StrongModal                  0.295          0.271           0.133         0.202    0.359      324,589
                                            Conference call level
 Emotion_Valence               0.331         0.375           0.261         0.227    0.498       43,462
 Emotion_Arousal               0.647         0.650           0.138         0.557    0.740       43,462
                                       Firm-year level control variables
 Size                         6.238           6.22           2.022         4.804    7.617       43,764
 Tobin's Q                    0.672          0.557           0.718         0.178    1.064       43,764
 ROA                          0.0491         0.101           0.271         0.028    0.163       43,764
 Leverage                     0.221           0.16           0.244         0.008    0.337       43,764
 Growth                       0.152         0.0736            0.42         -0.005   0.191       43,764
 IndAdjRet                    0.000          -0.001          0.039         -0.021   0.019       43,764
 InstOwnership                0.482          0.528           0.359         0.080    0.816       43,764
 Log(#analyst)                1.498          1.609           1.193            0     2.485       43,764
 IdioVol                      0.463          0.386           0.289         0.263    0.576       43,764
 Turnover                     2.150          1.619           1.960         0.826    2.791       43,764
 Segment                      5.323             5            3.564            2       7         43,764




                                                      41
Table 2. Determinants of Machine Downloads
This tables reports the determinants of Machine Downloads and % Machine Downloads. Variables are defined in Appendix A. t-statistics, in
parentheses, are based on standard errors clustered by firm. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels (two-tailed),
respectively.

                                   (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)             (6)       (7)           (8)
 Dependent Variable                         Machine Downloads                               % Machine Downloads               Machine Downloads

 Size                           0.135***         0.139***        0.040***        -0.028***       -0.029***    -0.008***      0.139***       0.040***
                                 (40.29)           (45.62)         (7.05)          (-26.71)        (-28.91)      (-6.01)       (45.62)         (7.05)
 Tobin's Q                     -0.048***        -0.066***       -0.022***        0.010***         0.011***        0.002     -0.066***      -0.022***
                                  (-9.41)         (-13.24)        (-3.38)            (6.51)          (8.09)       (1.25)      (-13.24)        (-3.38)
 ROA                              -0.011        -0.031***          -0.002        -0.013***        0.012***     0.013***     -0.031***         -0.002
                                  (-0.94)          (-2.68)        (-0.14)           (-3.78)          (3.15)       (3.46)       (-2.68)        (-0.14)
 Leverage                       0.085***         0.122***        0.055***        -0.019***       -0.020***     -0.010**      0.122***       0.055***
                                  (6.58)            (9.39)         (3.37)           (-5.25)         (-5.75)      (-2.48)        (9.39)         (3.37)
 Growth                        -0.078***        -0.068***       -0.024***         -0.004**       -0.008***    -0.011***     -0.068***      -0.024***
                                 (-13.69)         (-12.21)        (-3.63)           (-2.50)         (-5.31)      (-6.76)      (-12.21)        (-3.63)
 IndAdjRet                     -0.847***        -0.729***       -0.322***        0.217***         0.188***     0.084***     -0.729***      -0.322***
                                 (-15.75)         (-13.97)        (-6.00)           (15.44)         (14.22)       (7.31)      (-13.97)        (-6.00)
 InstOwnership                    -0.005          -0.024*          -0.026        0.038***         0.045***     0.028***       -0.024*         -0.026
                                  (-0.32)          (-1.66)        (-1.24)            (8.47)         (11.19)       (6.48)       (-1.66)        (-1.24)
 Log(#analyst)                    -0.008            -0.008      -0.021***         -0.004**       -0.005***        0.000         -0.008     -0.021***
                                  (-1.52)          (-1.54)        (-2.92)           (-2.46)         (-3.38)       (0.07)       (-1.54)        (-2.92)
 IdioVol                        0.091***         0.060***       -0.062***        -0.080***       -0.073***    -0.028***      0.060***      -0.062***
                                  (6.07)            (4.32)        (-4.37)          (-17.94)        (-18.71)      (-8.68)        (4.32)        (-4.37)
 Turnover                       0.022***         0.019***        0.022***        -0.006***       -0.005***    -0.006***      0.019***       0.022***
                                 (13.20)           (12.08)        (12.11)          (-12.11)        (-10.90)     (-14.55)       (12.08)       (12.11)
 Segment                        0.007***         0.007***        0.007***            -0.000      -0.001***    -0.001***      0.007***       0.007***
                                  (6.81)            (6.97)         (3.89)           (-0.55)         (-3.06)      (-2.94)        (6.97)         (3.89)
 AIHedgeFund                                                                                                                 0.728***        0.417**
                                                                                                                                (4.52)         (2.54)

 Observations                   171,296          171,296        171,234           171,244         171,244         171,182    171,296        171,234


                                                                            42
R-squared     0.924   0.926   0.941        0.658   0.690   0.808   0.926   0.941
Company FE     No      No      Yes          No      No      Yes     No      Yes
Industry FE    No      Yes     No           No      Yes     No      Yes     No
Year FE        Yes     Yes     Yes          Yes     Yes     Yes     Yes     Yes




                                      43
Table 3. Machine Downloads and Machine Readability
This table examines the relation between the machine readability of a firm's filing and the machine
downloads of the firm's past filings. Variables are defined in Appendix A. In Panel B, Machine Downloads
(Alt. def.) and Other Downloads (Alt. def.) are alternative definitions of Machine Downloads and Other
Downloads based on a criterion to classify machine visits in Loughran and McDonald (2017). Panel C
reports the underlying components of Machine Readability, including Table Extraction (the ease of
separating tables from text), Number Extraction (the ease of extracting numbers from text), Table Format
(the ease of identifying the information contained in the table), Self-Containedness (whether a filing
includes all needed information, i.e., without relying on external exhibits), and Standard Characters (the
proportion of characters that are standard ASCII characters). Each attribute is standardized. In all panes, t-
statistics, in parentheses, are based on standard errors clustered by firm. ***, **, * denote statistical
significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels (two-tailed), respectively.
Panel A: Machine readability

                                (1)           (2)            (3)         (4)           (5)           (6)
 Dependent Variable                                         Machine Readability

 Machine Downloads           0.076***      0.075***        0.060***    0.078***
                              (13.89)       (17.45)         (10.33)     (15.93)
 Other Downloads               0.005         0.002           -0.007      -0.006
                               (1.15)        (0.47)         (-1.44)     (-1.33)
 % Machine Downloads                                                                 0.121***     0.173***
                                                                                       (3.91)       (6.39)
 Total Downloads                                                                     0.053***     0.074***
                                                                                      (10.27)      (16.26)
 Size                                                         0.004     0.021***       0.004      0.021***
                                                              (1.05)      (2.66)       (0.90)       (2.64)
 Tobin's Q                                                   -0.006       -0.008       -0.006       -0.008
                                                             (-0.92)      (-1.00)     (-0.91)       (-0.99)
 ROA                                                        0.056***       0.009     0.057***        0.010
                                                              (3.15)      (0.49)       (3.19)       (0.52)
 Leverage                                                  -0.087***     -0.037*    -0.086***      -0.037*
                                                             (-4.62)      (-1.67)     (-4.60)       (-1.67)
 Growth                                                     -0.017**       0.010     -0.017**        0.010
                                                             (-2.34)      (1.27)      (-2.34)       (1.26)
 IndAdjRet                                                    0.033        0.013       0.038         0.015
                                                              (0.52)      (0.20)       (0.60)       (0.24)
 InstOwnership                                              0.050***      -0.038     0.051***       -0.039
                                                              (2.69)      (-1.50)      (2.73)       (-1.54)
 Log(#analyst)                                                0.005        0.000       0.005         0.000
                                                              (0.79)      (0.02)       (0.81)       (0.06)
 IdioVol                                                   -0.072***       0.015    -0.074***        0.015
                                                             (-3.81)      (0.86)      (-3.90)       (0.85)
 Turnover                                                    -0.002    -0.007***       -0.002    -0.007***
                                                             (-1.17)      (-3.16)     (-1.12)       (-3.06)
 Segment                                                    0.004***      -0.003     0.004***       -0.003
                                                              (3.05)      (-1.42)      (3.03)       (-1.43)

                                                      44
Observations   198,358   199,241        150,425   150,346   150,377   150,298
R-squared       0.082     0.363          0.084     0.357     0.084     0.357
Company FE       No        Yes            No        Yes       No        Yes
Industry FE      Yes       No             Yes       No        Yes       No
Year FE          Yes       Yes            Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes




                                   45
Panel B: Alternative specifications

                                                (1)           (2)        (3)         (4)
                                                 PCA Machine
             Dependent Variable                    Readability         Machine Readability

             Machine Downloads               0.131***      0.162***
                                              (11.18)       (16.14)
             Other Downloads                 -0.047***    -0.046***
                                               (-4.75)      (-5.88)
             Machine Downloads (Alt. def.)                            0.052***     0.064***
                                                                         (9.51)     (13.72)
             Other Downloads (Alt. def.)                                -0.010       -0.000
                                                                        (-1.51)     (-0.05)
             Size                            -0.036***       0.019       0.005     0.021***
                                               (-4.02)       (1.34)      (1.20)      (2.65)
             Tobin's Q                         -0.013       -0.022      -0.007       -0.008
                                               (-0.90)      (-1.43)     (-0.97)     (-0.98)
             ROA                             0.245***        0.054    0.056***       0.010
                                               (6.15)        (1.52)      (3.15)      (0.54)
             Leverage                        -0.171***      -0.040    -0.085***     -0.038*
                                               (-4.60)      (-0.98)     (-4.55)     (-1.70)
             Growth                          -0.092***      -0.002     -0.017**      0.009
                                               (-5.80)      (-0.12)     (-2.34)      (1.21)
             IndAdjRet                       0.432***        0.144       0.031       0.015
                                               (3.66)        (1.28)      (0.48)      (0.24)
             InstOwnership                   0.108***        0.009    0.051***       -0.037
                                               (2.75)        (0.19)      (2.71)     (-1.44)
             Log(#analyst)                     -0.012       -0.005       0.005       0.000
                                               (-0.88)      (-0.35)      (0.77)      (0.01)
             IdioVol                         -0.360***      -0.044    -0.072***      0.014
                                              (-10.11)      (-1.53)     (-3.78)      (0.80)
             Turnover                        -0.018***    -0.015***     -0.002    -0.007***
                                               (-4.06)      (-3.47)     (-1.07)     (-3.25)
             Segment                         0.012***       -0.001    0.004***       -0.003
                                               (3.78)       (-0.21)      (3.06)     (-1.46)

             Observations                    139,436       139,330    150,425      150,346
             R-squared                        0.089         0.336      0.084        0.357
             Company FE                        No            Yes        No           Yes
             Industry FE                       Yes           No         Yes          No
             Year FE                           Yes           Yes        Yes          Yes




                                                    46
Panel C: Components of Machine Readability

                          (1)            (2)                  (3)                 (4)           (5)
                                                       Machine Readability
                         Table         Number                                    Self-        Standard
 Dependent Variable    Extraction     Extraction          Table Format       Containedness   Characters

 Machine Downloads     0.051***        0.028***             0.026***           0.161***      0.125***
                          (6.02)         (3.47)                (2.88)           (21.80)        (14.68)
 Other Downloads        0.018**         -0.011               0.022**          -0.036***      -0.040***
                          (2.37)        (-1.49)                (2.51)            (-6.69)       (-6.08)
 Size                  0.037***        0.043***                0.012           0.033***       -0.032**
                          (2.67)         (3.50)                (0.85)             (3.44)       (-2.53)
 Tobin's Q               -0.015       -0.054***                0.010             -0.006       0.028**
                         (-1.00)        (-3.97)                (0.63)            (-0.52)        (2.26)
 ROA                      0.031          0.030                -0.006             -0.038         0.040
                          (0.92)         (0.88)               (-0.15)            (-1.55)        (1.30)
 Leverage                 0.015          0.020                -0.060             -0.018      -0.117***
                          (0.37)         (0.62)               (-1.36)            (-0.63)       (-3.29)
 Growth                   0.010          0.005                 0.022              0.007         -0.007
                          (0.71)         (0.38)                (1.51)             (0.58)       (-0.47)
 IndAdjRet               -0.051          0.088                -0.075          -0.197***      0.253***
                         (-0.48)         (0.85)               (-0.61)            (-2.63)        (2.81)
 InstOwnership         -0.095**         -0.017                -0.063             -0.015         0.046
                         (-2.05)        (-0.44)               (-1.24)            (-0.47)        (1.15)
 Log(#analyst)            0.003          0.006                 0.009             -0.009         -0.009
                          (0.20)         (0.44)                (0.57)            (-0.96)       (-0.81)
 IdioVol                  0.005         -0.020                 0.054            0.043**         -0.018
                          (0.17)        (-0.70)                (1.51)             (2.12)       (-0.76)
 Turnover              -0.008**         -0.003                -0.006           -0.007**      -0.012***
                         (-2.07)        (-0.81)               (-1.36)            (-2.19)       (-3.26)
 Segment                 -0.002          0.006             -0.011***             0.004*      -0.013***
                         (-0.67)         (1.55)               (-2.75)             (1.75)       (-3.98)

 Observations           149,484        150,346              149,484            150,245        140,061
 R-squared               0.471          0.389                0.439              0.306          0.344
 Company FE               Yes            Yes                  Yes                Yes            Yes
 Industry FE              No             No                   No                 No             No
 Year FE                  Yes            Yes                  Yes                Yes            Yes




                                                  47
Table 4. Consequences of Machine Reading: Time to the First Trade
This table examines the relation between the time to the first trade after a firm's filing is publicly released the machine downloads of the firm's past
filings, and how the machine readability of the filings affects such a relation. All variables are defined in Appendix A. The t-statistics, in parentheses,
are based on standard errors clustered by firm. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels (two-tailed), respectively.

                                                 (1)           (2)            (3)         (4)           (5)            (6)            (7)           (8)
 Dependent Variable                                         Time to the First Trade                           Time to the First Directional Trade

 Machine Downloads                            -8.353**      -4.857*       -7.347**        -3.398    -12.365***     -7.540***    -12.374***       -7.258**
                                               (-2.56)       (-1.68)        (-2.19)       (-1.14)     (-3.94)        (-2.71)       (-3.87)         (-2.55)
 Machine Downloads ×                                                      -3.761**     -3.887***                                  -2.815*         -2.127*
    Machine Readability                                                     (-2.46)       (-2.84)                                  (-1.87)         (-1.67)
 Machine Readability                                                        -6.540        -5.980                                   -5.695          -8.709
                                                                            (-0.99)       (-0.92)                                  (-0.91)         (-1.46)
 Other Downloads                            15.342***         3.499      15.151***         1.304     13.961***       3.885*      13.436***          2.336
                                               (5.29)        (1.42)          (5.06)       (0.51)       (4.95)         (1.72)       (4.67)          (1.00)
 Size                                       -50.806***    -38.789***    -51.227***    -38.997***    -48.121***    -35.627***    -48.908***     -35.923***
                                              (-23.29)      (-10.29)       (-22.35)       (-9.82)     (-21.67)       (-9.93)      (-21.06)         (-9.49)
 Tobin's Q                                    -6.457*     -12.396***        -5.779    -12.621***       -4.747     -13.633***       -3.847      -13.359***
                                               (-1.76)       (-2.99)        (-1.54)       (-2.89)      (-1.34)       (-3.57)       (-1.07)         (-3.30)
 ROA                                        -34.069***       -4.892     -30.756***        -4.168    -34.933***       -6.956     -33.623***         -5.071
                                               (-4.13)       (-0.50)        (-3.61)       (-0.40)      (-4.50)       (-0.86)       (-4.23)         (-0.59)
 Leverage                                      12.422         8.196          7.754        -0.451        6.006         4.097         3.909          -0.921
                                               (1.30)        (0.75)          (0.77)       (-0.04)      (0.66)         (0.41)       (0.42)          (-0.09)
 Growth                                     16.116***        -1.510      15.103***        -0.341     17.820***       -1.199      17.403***          0.218
                                               (4.53)        (-0.36)         (3.99)       (-0.08)      (5.52)        (-0.31)       (5.09)          (0.05)
 IndAdjRet                                      2.186        -7.888         -8.375         0.315        0.160       -13.379       -16.519         -17.567
                                               (0.06)        (-0.23)        (-0.23)       (0.01)       (0.00)        (-0.42)       (-0.49)         (-0.52)
 InstOwnership                              -39.142***       14.042     -41.458***        10.546    -33.161***        5.286     -34.708***          4.926
                                               (-3.62)       (1.07)         (-3.72)       (0.76)       (-3.09)        (0.41)       (-3.16)         (0.37)
 Log(#analyst)                                -6.209*      -8.422**         -5.999      -8.360**       -5.698        -4.882        -5.421          -4.682
                                               (-1.74)       (-2.18)        (-1.63)       (-2.07)      (-1.61)       (-1.31)       (-1.49)         (-1.22)
 IdioVol                                      15.150*        -8.231         12.112       -11.668        0.438      -19.451**       -1.904       -19.783**
                                               (1.73)        (-0.96)         (1.34)       (-1.29)      (0.05)        (-2.46)       (-0.23)         (-2.40)


                                                                            48
Turnover       -14.489***   -7.802***   -14.536***   -7.706***   -11.946***   -6.787***   -11.854***   -6.668***
                 (-12.25)     (-6.55)     (-11.77)     (-6.19)     (-9.65)      (-5.91)     (-9.25)      (-5.51)
Segment           -0.588       0.984       -0.122       0.476      -0.945        1.220      -0.484        0.278
                  (-0.76)     (1.07)       (-0.15)     (0.48)      (-1.23)       (1.36)     (-0.61)      (0.29)

Observations    161,749     161,664      144,281     144,193      161,749     161,664      144,281     144,193
R-squared        0.116       0.269        0.118       0.272        0.120       0.285        0.122       0.286
Company FE        No          Yes          No          Yes          No          Yes          No          Yes
Industry FE       Yes         No           Yes         No           Yes         No           Yes         No
Year FE           Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes




                                           49
Table 5. Machine Downloads and Sentiment: Loughran and McDonald (2011) Publication
This table reports the impact of the publication of Loughran and McDonald (2011) on the relation between the sentiment of a firm's filing and the
machine downloads of the firm's past filings. Control variables include Other Downloads, Size, Tobin's Q, ROA, Leverage, Growth, IndAdjRet,
InstOwnership, Log(#analyst), IdioVol, Turnover, and Segment. All variables are defined in Appendix A. The t-statistics, in parentheses, are based
on standard errors clustered by firm. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels (two-tailed), respectively.

                                                    (1)              (2)              (3)                  (4)         (5)             (6)
 Dependent Variable                                LM ­ Harvard Sentiment                   LM Sentiment                Harvard Sentiment

 Machine Downloads × Post                        -0.072***        -0.079***       -0.062***          -0.050***        0.010          0.029***
                                                   (-6.95)          (-8.94)         (-4.98)            (-4.99)        (0.76)           (2.65)
 Machine Downloads                                 -0.007          -0.011**         -0.009           -0.019***       -0.002           -0.008
                                                   (-1.17)          (-2.46)         (-1.18)            (-3.72)       (-0.23)          (-1.43)

 Observations                                     158,578          158,515         158,578            158,515        158,578         158,515
 R-squared                                         0.217            0.568           0.241              0.632          0.208           0.590
 Control Variables                                  Yes              Yes             Yes                Yes            Yes             Yes
 Company FE                                         No               Yes             No                 Yes            No              Yes
 Industry FE                                        Yes              No              Yes                No             Yes             No
 Year FE                                            Yes              Yes             Yes                Yes            Yes             Yes




                                                                       50
Table 6. Machine Downloads and Other Tones: Loughran and McDonald (2011) Publication
This table reports the impact of the publication of Loughran and McDonald (2011) on the relation between the various tones of a firm's filing and
the machine downloads of the firm's past filings. Control variables include Other Downloads, Size, Tobin's Q, ROA, Leverage, Growth, IndAdjRet,
InstOwnership, Log(#analyst), IdioVol, Turnover, and Segment. All variables are defined in Appendix A. The t-statistics, in parentheses, are based
on standard errors clustered by firm. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels (two-tailed), respectively.

                                       (1)               (2)       (3)                 (4)      (5)             (6)         (7)          (8)
 Dependent Variable                          Litigious                   Uncertainty                  Weak Modal              Strong Modal

 Machine Downloads × Post          -0.056***        -0.057***   -0.016**        -0.021***    -0.028***       -0.034***   -0.008***    -0.007***
                                     (-5.38)          (-6.02)    (-2.01)          (-3.49)      (-4.85)         (-8.86)     (-4.39)      (-4.39)
 Machine Downloads                   0.011*            0.007     -0.006         -0.009***    -0.018***       -0.021***    -0.003**    -0.004***
                                      (1.71)           (1.44)    (-1.33)          (-3.05)      (-5.39)        (-10.05)     (-2.19)      (-4.98)

 Observations                       158,578          158,515    158,578          158,515     158,578          158,515    158,578       158,515
 R-squared                           0.188            0.509      0.196            0.600       0.238            0.624      0.277         0.571
 Control Variables                    Yes              Yes        Yes              Yes         Yes              Yes        Yes           Yes
 Company FE                           No               Yes        No               Yes         No               Yes        No            Yes
 Industry FE                          Yes              No         Yes              No          Yes              No         Yes           No
 Year FE                              Yes              Yes        Yes              Yes         Yes              Yes        Yes           Yes




                                                                          51
Table 7. Machine Downloads and Managers' Emotion during Conference Calls
This table examines the relation between the manager's speech emotion during conference calls and the machine downloads of the firm's past filings.
Control variables include Other Downloads, Size, Tobin's Q, ROA, Leverage, Growth, IndAdjRet, InstOwnership, Log(#analyst), IdioVol, Turnover,
and Segment as in the previous tables. Columns (4) and (8) further include EarningsSurprise as an additional control. All variables are defined in
Appendix A. The sample consists of audio of conference calls between January 2010 and December 2016. The t-statistics, in parentheses, are based
on standard errors clustered by firm. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels (two-tailed), respectively.

                                      (1)           (2)           (3)             (4)          (5)           (6)           (7)            (8)
 Dependent Variable                                  Emotion-Valence                                          Emotion-Arousal

 Machine Downloads                 0.043***      0.035***      0.042***        0.042***       0.004*        0.003        0.005**        0.007**
                                    (11.40)        (8.13)       (11.14)          (8.84)        (1.79)       (0.94)         (2.28)         (2.49)
 Other Downloads                   -0.017***     -0.014***     -0.017***       -0.012***    -0.006***       0.000       -0.006***      -0.006***
                                     (-5.74)       (-4.32)       (-5.67)         (-3.12)      (-3.65)       (0.19)        (-3.71)        (-2.92)

 Observations                       43,336        41,340         41,224         27,437       43,336         41,340        41,224        27,437
 R-squared                           0.389         0.189          0.383          0.388        0.395          0.132         0.395         0.469
 Control Variables                    No            Yes            Yes            Yes          No             Yes           Yes           Yes
 Company FE                           Yes           No             Yes            Yes          Yes            No            Yes           Yes
 Industry FE                          No            Yes            No             No           No             Yes           No            No
 Year FE                              Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes




                                                                          52
