                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  UNCERTAINTY, WAGES, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE

                                        Matteo Cacciatore
                                        Federico Ravenna

                                       Working Paper 27951
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27951


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2020




For very helpful comments, we thank Morten Ravn, Martin Andreasen, Nicholas Bloom, Susanto
Basu, Luca Dedola, Bart Hobijn, Giovanni Lombardo, Sylvain Leduc, Francisco Ruge-Murcia,
Nora Traum, Markus Riegler, Felix Wellschmied, Francesco Zanetti, and audiences at various
seminars and conferences. We are indebted to Giovanni Pellegrino for providing the codes to
estimate the Interacted VAR and to Gabriel Züllig for invaluable research assistance. Financial
support from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada and from HEC
Montréal Direction de la Recherche is gratefully acknowledged. The viewpoints stated are the
responsibility of the individual contributors, and do not necessarily reflect the views of Danmarks
Nationalbank or the NBER.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Matteo Cacciatore and Federico Ravenna. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Uncertainty, Wages, and the Business Cycle
Matteo Cacciatore and Federico Ravenna
NBER Working Paper No. 27951
October 2020
JEL No. E2,E32

                                          ABSTRACT

We show that limited wage flexibility in economic downturns generates strong and state-
dependent amplification of uncertainty shocks. It also explains the cyclical behavior of empirical
measures of uncertainty. Central to our analysis is the existence of matching frictions in the labor
market and an occasionally binding constraint on downward wage adjustment. The wage
constraint enhances the concavity of firms' hiring rule, generating an endogenous profit-risk
premium. In turn, uncertainty shocks increase the profit-risk premium when the economy
operates close to the wage constraint. This implies that higher uncertainty can severely deepen a
recession, although its impact is weaker on average. Non-linear local projections and VAR
estimates support the model predictions. Additionally, the variance of the unforecastable
component of future economic outcomes always increases at times of low economic activity.
Thus, measured uncertainty rises in a recession even in the absence of uncertainty shocks.


Matteo Cacciatore
HEC Montreal
Institute of Applied Economics
3000 Côte-Sainte-Catherine
Montreal, QC H3T 2A7
CANADA
and NBER
matteo.cacciatore@hec.ca

Federico Ravenna
Research Unit
Danmarks Nationalbank
Havnegade 5
Copenhagen
Denmark
fera@nationalbanken.dk




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27951
1       Introduction

The cyclical behavior of wages and its implications for the propagation of business cycle shocks are
central questions in macroeconomics. Since Keynes (1936), a vast literature suggests wage setting
frictions have important implications for aggregate dynamics. For instance, sluggish wage adjust-
ment plays a key role for the transmission of monetary policy shocks (e.g., Christiano, Eichenbaum,
and Evans, 2005, and Huang and Liu, 2002); accounts for the largest share of cyclical uctuations
in the labor wedge (Gali, Gertler, and Lopez-Salido, 2007); and, by preventing su¢ cient downward
wage adjustment, may have exacerbated the fall in employment during the Great Recession in the
U.S. (Daly, Hobijn, and Lucking, 2012, Shimer, 2012, and Yellen, 2014).
        Less is known about the consequences of wage setting frictions at times of high macroeconomic
uncertainty, a potential factor shaping the depth and duration of recessions as suggested by recent
research.1 This paper shows occasionally binding downward wage rigidity has important implica-
tions for the propagation of uncertainty shocks and the cyclical behavior of empirical measures of
uncertainty. First, the existence of an occasionally binding constraint (OBC) on wage adjustment
generates strong and state-dependent ampli...cation of uncertainty shocks. The impact of an ex-
ogenous increase in uncertainty is an order of magnitude larger at times of low economic activity
relative to economic expansions. Second, the OBC on wage adjustment implies empirical measures
of aggregate uncertainty can display marked countercyclicality even in the absence of any exoge-
nous change in uncertainty (i.e., absent second-moment shocks). This result is consistent with the
empirical ...nding in Ludvigson, Ma, and Ng (2018) that heightened macroeconomic uncertainty can
be an endogenous response to business cycle uctuations.
        We cast the analysis in the context of a general equilibrium model featuring search and matching
frictions in the labor market. Firms and workers bargain over wages in every period subject to an
occasionally binding constraint: downward wage adjustment becomes unfeasible when wages fall
enough relative to their trend. When the constraint is not binding, the wage payment splits the
match surplus according to e¢ cient Nash bargaining, accounting for the possibility that the wage
constraint may be binding in the future.
        The ...rst contribution of the paper is to the literature on the propagation of second-moment
    1
    Heightened uncertainty has been suggested as a major contributor to the magnitude of the slump experienced by
the U.S. economy over the period 2007-2012, including the dramatic increase in the spell of unemployment duration,
the historically low vacancy yield, and the fall in recruiting intensity. Stock and Watson (2012) and Baker, Bloom,
and Davis (2012) estimate that the increase in uncertainty explains a substantial portion in the fall of U.S. GDP
during the Great Recession. Leduc and Liu (2013) ...nd that increased policy uncertainty accounts for two-thirds of
the shifts of the Beveridge curve over the same period.


                                                        1
shocks. The OBC on downward wage adjustment implies higher uncertainty can severely deepen
a recession. By contrast, both exible wage setting and wage rigidity that binds at all times imply
a negligible propagation of uncertainty shocks (barring the introduction of additional sources of
ampli...cation of second-moment shocks in the model). Assuming the wage constraint binds only
5% of the time, we ...nd the mean increase in uncertainty observed in the data leads to an output
decline equal to 0:25% at the trough. However, this average e¤ect masks substantial heterogeneity.
When output is 4% below its trend level, the same uncertainty increase induces an average output
loss equal to 0:5%. If the uncertainty increase is of a magnitude comparable to what was observed
in the Great Recession, the output loss is about 1%. Analogous uncertainty shocks have near-
zero e¤ects in economic expansions. Overall, the e¤ects of uncertainty shocks operating through
downward wage rigidity can be sizable and long-lasting. The average cumulative output loss over
a one-year horizon is equal to 0:6% for the uncertainty mean increase. In a deep recession, this
...gure can be as high as 2%. Non-linear local projections and VAR estimates support the model
predictions.
       The second contribution of the paper adds to an important debate on the origins of the cyclicality
of several empirical measures of economic uncertainty documented in post-war U.S. data. Our
theoretical framework implies that the variance of the unforecastable component of future economic
outcomes-- a well-documented countercyclical measure of uncertainty-- always increases at times of
low economic activity, reecting the endogenous response of the economy to ...rst-moment shocks.2
Thus, measured uncertainty increases in recessions, even in the absence of uncertainty shocks.
       The intuition for our results is the following: when a match is formed and agents enter into
multi-period employment contracts, the constraint on wage bargaining inuences job creation by
a¤ecting the present discounted value of the stream of wage payments. As we illustrate in a simple
three-period model, the OBC enhances the concavity of ...rm pro...ts with respect to productivity,
generating a large pro...t-risk premium. The closer the economy operates to the constraint, the
larger the di¤erence between the expected stream of pro...ts and the pro...t stream from expected
productivity. At times of low aggregate demand and employment, an increase in the probability of
more extreme productivity realizations leads to a sizable increase in the pro...t-risk premium, since
the wage constraint is expected to bind with higher probability in the future. In turn, the sharp
   2
    The aggregate measures of uncertainty considered in the empirical literature include the volatility of stock and
bond markets, the volatility of output and exchange rates, measures of disagreement among professional forecasters,
their self-reported subjective forecast uncertainty, the variance of future output growth conditional on current infor-
mation (see Bloom, 2014) and the conditional variance of the forecast error from an econometric forecasting model
(Jurado, Ludvigson, and Ng, 2015 and Ludvigson, Ma, and Ng, 2018).


                                                          2
reduction in the ...rm'
                      s expected surplus leads to an immediate reduction in job creation.
       When wages are unconstrained or unconditionally rigid, the propagation of uncertainty shocks
through the labor market is negligible. Eliminating the OBC leaves little nonlinearity in the ...rms'
pro...t function for risk consideration to have a substantial impact through the wage channel. Thus,
the impact of uncertainty shocks does not depend only on the size of the deviations of wages and
pro...t from their e¢ cient levels, but on the amount of concavity wage adjustment generates in the
pro...t function.3
       Turning to the behavior of measured uncertainty, our model implies the forecast error variance
of output and employment display pronounced countercyclical movements already in response to
...rst-moment shocks. Agents anticipate job creation responds more strongly to productivity shocks
when the economy operates close to the wage constraint. By contrast, when the constraint binds
with low probability, e¢ cient surplus splitting results in cyclical wages, lowering the volatility of
output and employment for any given realization of productivity. Accordingly, the forecast error
variance becomes less sensitive to aggregate conditions.
       Our paper provides a methodological contribution using a novel implementation of the penalty
function method to solve a model with an occasionally binding constraint and stochastic volatility.
In contrast to the previous literature, we do not rely on a local approximation of a given di¤eren-
tiable (non-polynomial) function, since Taylor approximations do not necessarily inherit properties
such as monotonicity and convexity of the postulated functional form. We assume instead that
the penalty function is a fourth-order polynomial and then approximate the model equilibrium
conditions with a fourth-order Taylor approximation.


Related Literature          A large and growing literature studies the relationship between macro-
economic uncertainty and business cycle dynamics. Our results encompass and complement the
two main explanations for the cyclical behavior of measured uncertainty proposed thus far. One
strand of the literature focuses on the transmission of uncertainty shocks. Mechanisms explored
in the literature include ...xed costs and investment irreversibility (e.g., Bloom, 2009, Bloom, Floe-
totto, Jaimovich, Eksten, and Terry, 2018, Schaal, 2017); nominal rigidities (Basu and Bundick,
2017, Fernandez-Villaverde, Guerron-Quintana, Kuester, and Rubio-Ramirez, 2015, Fernandez-
Villaverde, Guerron-Quintana, Rubio-Ramirez, and Uribe, 2011, Leduc and Liu, 2016); ...nancial
   3
    Ilut, Kehrig, and Schneider (2018) document empirically that concave establishment-level responses of employ-
ment to TFP shocks induce signi...cant skewness, movements in volatility, and ampli...cation of negative aggregate
shocks.



                                                        3
frictions (Arellano, Bai, and Kehoe, 2019, Christiano, Motto, and Rostagno, 2014, Gilchrist, Sim,
and Zakrajsek, 2014); and ambiguity aversion (Ilut and Schneider, 2014). These models explain
the countercyclicality of measured uncertainty in one of two ways. Either uncertainty shocks ex-
plain a large share of the variance of output or, when the variance of output is mostly driven
by ...rst-moment shocks, uncertainty shocks are ex-post negatively correlated with ...rst-moment
shocks. An alternative approach suggests that time-varying uncertainty is an equilibrium outcome
resulting from agents'optimal decisions during recessions, reecting a variety of mechanisms such
as time-variation in risk-incentives, information availability, or cross-sectional capital allocation
(Bachmann and Moscarini, 2011, Fajgelbaum, Schaal, and Taschereau-Dumouchel, 2017, Saijo,
2017, and Van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp, 2006).
       Our results closely relate to previous studies addressing the role of labor-market adjustment for
the transmission of uncertainty shocks. Basu and Bundick (2017) show in real business cycle models
with frictionless labor markets, higher uncertainty can be expansionary, since precautionary saving
induces a negative wealth e¤ect that increases hours supply; however, with price stickiness output
becomes demand-determined, and the reduction in aggregate demand ultimately results in lower
output and labor.4 Leduc and Liu (2016), our closest antecedent, incorporate search and matching
frictions and real wage rigidity that binds at all times in a New Keynesian model. They show search
frictions provide a mechanism for uncertainty shocks to generate an increase in unemployment via
an option-value channel. With search frictions, a job match represents a long-term employment
relationship that is irreversible. When times are uncertain, the option value of waiting increases
and the match value declines. The authors show this option-value channel has small e¤ects on
vacancy posting and employment unless nominal rigidities are present. Our model highlights a
related, yet hitherto, unexplored channel that is quantitatively important in models with long-term
employment relationships. Occasionally binding downward wage rigidity ampli...es the impact of
uncertainty shocks because the one-sided constraint introduces a pro...t-risk premium that increases
when uncertainty rises. This mechanism operates regardless of the presence of nominal rigidities.5
       Our work is also related to a strand of the literature that studies how occasionally binding
constraint and ...nancial frictions a¤ect the propagation of ...rm-level volatility shocks. Arellano,
   4
     When prices cannot fully accommodate the drop in demand, ...rms bias their prices upward in response to higher
uncertainty, lowering demand and output in equilibrium (Fernandez-Villaverde, Guerron-Quintana, Kuester, and
Rubio-Ramirez, 2015).
   5
     Nakata (2013) ...nds that higher uncertainty is more recessionary when the economy is at the zero lower bound
(ZLB), while Plante, Richter, and Throckmorton (2018) show that the output forecast error variance increases
endogenously when the economy is at or close to the ZLB.



                                                        4
Bai, and Kehoe (2019) consider a model where producers face a credit constraint that a¤ects their
ability to ...nance the cost of labor. When the variance of the idiosyncratic shocks increases, the
probability of default increases at a given level of employment. As a result, ...rms become more
cautious and decrease employment, leading to a fall in aggregate output. Gilchrist, Sim, and
Zakrajsek (2014) discuss the role of limited liability for the impact of changes in uncertainty on
...rms'investment decision. Christiano, Motto, and Rostagno (2014) show that volatility shocks to
the quality of capital account for a signi...cant portion of output uctuations.
       Our paper builds on an extensive empirical literature documenting the existence of constraints
on downward wage adjustment in a large number of countries (for an overview, see Dickens, Goette,
Groshen, Holden, Messina, Schweitzer, Turunen, and Ward, 2007). While we model a constraint on
the level of wages (in deviation from their trend), macroeconomic models with spot labor markets
typically assume a constraint on the growth rate of wages relative to the previous-period (e.g.,
Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe, 2016). In this case, wage cuts are capped (or even precluded) irrespective
of the past history of wage changes and business cycle dynamics. In contrast, our approach implies
the maximum feasible size of successive wage cuts becomes progressively smaller as the economy
approaches the constraint.
       The key message of the paper does not hinge on the speci...c modeling of downward wage
rigidity. What matters is that asymmetric wage exibility introduces a concavity in the ...rm'
                                                                                            s pro...t
function. As a result, the implications for the transmission of uncertainty shocks are qualitatively
the same.6 We favour our formulation for the following reasons. First, it imposes a milder constraint
on wage adjustment, taking a conservative view with respect to the frequency of wage cuts and
freezes-- an issue that remains debated empirically.7 Second, our approach directly captures the
notion that labor market institutions de jure introduce a oor on downward wage adjustment.
For instance, since the early 1990s, several European countries have adopted two-tier bargaining
structures in which plant-level bargaining supplements national or industry-wide agreements (Boeri,
2014). In plant-level negotiations, wages cannot fall below the base level established at the national
or industry level in a given time period (e.g., Fougere, Gautier, and Roux, 2018).8 Finally, the
   6
     With a lower bound on wage-growth, our results about the state-dependent e¤ects of uncertainty shocks relate
to the growth-rate of output, rather than its level relative to trend.
   7
     In a recent survey of the literature, Elsby and Solon (2019) conclude that wage cuts from one year to the next
appear quite common, typically a¤ecting 15­   25 percent of job stayers in periods of low ination. Nominal wage freezes
are less frequent, a¤ecting about 8 percent of job stayers. See also Kurmann and McEntarfer (2019) and Grigsby,
Hurst, and Yildirmaz (2019). Kudlyak (2014) ...nds evidence of procyclicality in the user cost of labor, while various
studies ...nd the wage of new hires is more   exible than the wages of incumbent workers (e.g., Pissarides (2009)).
   8
     Carneiro, Guimar, and Portugal (2012) show that in Portugal and Germany ...rms adopt a wage cushion-- a
premium over the wage agreed upon in the collective bargaining agreement-- which is highly cyclical for new hires.


                                                          5
quanti...cation of the e¤ects of uncertainty shocks would be more challenging with a constraint on
wage growth. For a search-and-matching model with Nash bargaining and TFP-level shocks it
is di¢ cult to generate empirically-plausible wage-growth dynamics.9 While introducing additional
shocks (e.g., trend shocks) could address this issue, it would also render the analysis less comparable
relative to the existing literature without adding much additional insight.


2       Model

In this section, we introduce an OBC on wage adjustment in a real business cycle model that
features search frictions and random matching in the labor market.


Household Preferences

The economy is populated by a unit mass of atomistic, identical households. Each household is
thought of as a large extended family containing a continuum of members along a unit interval. The
measure of family members who work is determined by a random-matching process. We assume
full consumption insurance between employed and unemployed individuals. The representative
household maximizes the expected intertemporal utility function
                                              "1                        #
                                               X
                                         Et          s t   ~s
                                                           C 1
                                                                 = (1   ) ;
                                               s=t


      ~t is aggregate consumption,
where C                                        2 (0; 1) is the subjective discount factor, and          > 0 is the
inverse of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution. As is standard practice in the literature
(e.g., Ravenna and Walsh, 2011), aggregate consumption includes both consumption of market
goods, Ct , and home production from unemployed workers, hp (1                    Lt ), where Lt is the mass of
employed household's members. Unemployment workers also receive unemployment bene...ts from
the government, b, ...nanced by lump-sum taxes, Tt .10
        The household accumulates physical capital and rents it to producers in a competitive capital
market. Households also choose the rate of utilization of the installed physical capital, !t , which in
turn a¤ects its depreciation rate,      t.   E¤ective capital rented to ...rms, Kt , is the product of physical
    9
     When TFP follows an AR(1) process, Nash bargaining implies that wage growth inherits the underlying dynamics
of TFP growth, which is weakly autocorrelated. As a result, expansions (periods in which TFP is above trend) are
associated to negative wage growth after the impact period. The opposite is true in a recession. These counterfactual
dynamics would bias the quantitative assessment of the e¤ects of second-moment shocks.
  10
     The distinction between home production and unemployment bene...ts follows Mortensen and Pissarides (2002).




                                                            6
         ~ t and the utilization rate: Kt = !t K
capital, K                                     ~ t . Physical capital obeys a standard law of motion:


                                            ~ t+1 = (1
                                            K                    ~ + It :
                                                              t ) Kt



Depreciation depends on utilization via a quadratic functional form:


                                    t   = +    2 (!t    ! ) + ( 2 =2) (!t            ! )2 .


The household maximizes welfare subject to the resource constraint:


                              Ct + It = wt Lt + rK;t Kt + b (1              Lt ) +     t   + Tt ;


where wt denotes the real wage, rK;t is the rental rate of capital, and                        t    are pro...ts rebated to the
household. The ...rst-order conditions for capital and investment leads to a standard Euler equation:


                                     1 = Et   t;t+1 (rK;t+1 !t+1   +1           t+1 ) ;



where    t;t+1
                     ~t+1 =C
                     C     ~t       denotes the stochastic discount factor of households.


Production

A unit mass of symmetric, perfectly competitive ...rms uses labor and capital as inputs of production.
To hire new workers, ...rms need to post vacancies, incurring a cost of                                units of consumption
per vacancy posted. The probability of ...nding a worker depends on a constant-return-to-scale
matching technology which converts unemployed workers, Ut , and aggregate vacancies, Vt , into the
total number of new matches per period Mt = Ut" Vt1                    "
                                                                           ; where         > 0 and 0 < " < 1. Each ...rm
meets unemployed workers at a rate qt            Mt =Vt . As in Krause and Lubik (2007) and other studies,
we assume that newly created matches become productive only in the next period. The inow of
new hires in t + 1 is therefore qt Vt .
    Firms and workers separate exogenously with probability                           2 (0; 1).11 Since separations can
occur for existing productive matches or for matches which have not yet started production, the
  11
     Hall (2005) and Shimer (2005) argue that the separation rate varies little over the business cycle, although part
of the literature disputes this position; see Davis, Haltiwanger, and Schuh (1998) and Fujita and Ramey (2009).




                                                          7
law of motion for employment is given by


                                           Lt = (1            ) (Lt     1   + qt       1 Vt 1 ) :                                    (1)


The number of unemployed workers searching for jobs is Ut = 1                                        Lt . Each ...rm produces output
                                                                   1
according to the constant-returns to scale technology Yt = eZt Kt Lt                                      , where Zt denotes aggregate
productivity (in logs). We assume that Zt follows a stationary autoregressive process:


                                                     Zt =     z Zt 1    +e       Zt
                                                                                      uzt ;

              i:i:d
where uzt             N (0; 1) is an exogenous shock to the level of technology, and                             Zt   captures exogenous
second-moment or "uncertainty" shocks. When the variance of productivity increases, there is
higher uncertainty about the future time path of the stochastic process Zt . The standard deviation

 Zt   (in logs) follows a stationary autoregressive process:


                                          Zt   =       Zt 1    + (1              )    Z   +      u t;

              i:i:d
where u   t           N (0; 1) represents second-moment shocks. Producers choose the number of vacancies
and employment to maximize the expected present discounted value of their real pro...t stream:

                                               1
                                               X
                                     t    Et          t;t+s (Ys       ws Ls           rK;s Ks           Vs ) :
                                               s=t


The ...rst-order condition for Lt and Vt imply the following job creation equation:


                                                                                Yt+1
                                   = (1    )Et        t;t+1    (1           )                 wt+1 +             :                   (2)
                              qt                                                Lt+1                    qt+1

Equation (2) states that, at the optimum, the expected cost of ...lling a vacancy is equal to the
expected discounted pro...t from the time-t match, (1                                 ) Yt =Lt      wt , plus the expected discounted
value of the vacancy creation cost per future match.


Wage Bargaining

In the benchmark search-and-matching model, the real wage splits the match surplus according to
                  f lex
Nash-bargaining: wt     = arg max Jt1                   Wt , where Jt and Wt represent, respectively, the ...rm'
                                                                                                               s
and worker's surplus;              2 (0; 1) identi...es the bargaining power of the worker. The ...rm surplus


                                                                    8
from an additional hire is


                             Jt = (1       ) Yt =Lt    wt + (1       )Et (   t;t+1 Jt+1 ) :



Intuitively, Jt is the per-period marginal value product of the match, net of the current wage bill,
plus the expected present discounted continuation value of the match. The worker'
                                                                                s surplus, Wt ,
is the di¤erence between the worker'
                                   s asset value of being employed, Ht , and the value of being
unemployed, Uu;t (see Appendix A for their de...nitions):


                          W t = wt       (b + hp ) + (1       ) (1   pt ) Et (   t;t+1 Wt+1 ) ;



where pt      Mt =Ut is the probability of ...nding a job in period t. Intuitively, the worker's surplus
is the present discounted value of the di¤erence between the stream of wage payment minus ow
value of unemployment (the value of non-market activity plus unemployment bene...ts).
    The optimal sharing rule implies leads to the following wage schedule:

                               f lex                  Yt   pt
                              wt     =     (1     )      +    + (1           ) (hp + b) :                         (3)
                                                      Lt   qt

    We now introduce the constraint wt > wm at the bargaining stage. With a balanced growth
path, wm can be interpreted as a wage oor relative to trend-level of wages.12 The OBC implies that
standard perturbation methods cannot be applied to obtain the rational expectations solution of the
model. The reason is that local approximations require the model equations to be di¤erentiable over
the state space, at least to an order commensurate with the degree of accuracy of the approximation.
To accommodate the use of perturbation methods, we solve the Nash bargaining problem subject
to the OBC by adding to the objective function a term that prescribes a high cost for the violation
of the constraint. This approach follows a well-established methodology in the ...eld of applied
mathematics-- the penalty function method-- which converts an optimization problem containing
an inequality constraint into an unconstrained problem.13 Under fairly general conditions, it is
   12
      With steady-state growth, wt represents wages in deviation from trend, denoted by At : wt     w~t =At , where w
                                                                                                                    ~t
is the non-stationary level of wages. Denote with wt       wAt the value of steady-state wages along the balanced
growth path and with w  ~m;t = wm At the trending wage-level below which wages cannot fall. Then w ~t > w ~m;t implies
wt > wm . Notice that w ~m;t =wt = , where 0 < < 1. This implies that w    ~t > wt , a constraint on the deviation of
wages from their long-run trend, even if wages w~t are growing at a positive rate in each period.
   13
      Recent contributions that use a penalty function approach in dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models
include, among others, Kim, Kollmann, and Kim (2010), Preston and Roca (2007), and Rotemberg and Woodford
(1999).




                                                          9
possible to prove that for a given objective function f (x), a constrained set of the vector x, and
a given penalty function (x; ), the sequence of solutions to the optimization problem converges
to the solution of the original problem when                                      ! 1 (Luenberger, 1973). Intuitively, the term
parameterizes the speed at which the penalty function increases as x gets closer to the boundary
of the feasible set. Since the penalty term in the unconstrained problem is a smooth function of
the model variables, it is possible to apply standard perturbation techniques to approximate the
model solution up to an arbitrary degree of accuracy.
      We modify the Nash bargaining problem by assuming that the Nash surplus is equal to Jt1                                        Wt

 t,   where     t             (wt ; ) is a continuous and di¤erentiable penalty function that satis...es the fol-
lowing requirement:                                                         8
                                                                            < 0 wt > wm
                                                      lim         (wt ; ) =             ;                                              (4)
                                                       !1                   : & w <w
                                                                                 t    m

where & is a value such that any wt < wm results in a non-positive Nash surplus and lies outside the
feasible bargaining set. This implies that while any wage in the bargaining set is ex ante feasible,
the penalty function                   t   changes the Nash surplus in such a way that the ...rm and the worker
never stipulate a wage payment that violates the constraint. As discussed in the next section, we
approximate             w;t   using a fourth-order polynomial.
      The ...rst-order condition of the constrained Nash bargaining problem implies the following
sharing rule:
                                                     Jt + (            1) Wt          w;t Jt   Wt1    = 0;                             (5)

where     w;t           @   t =@wt .       As shown in Appendix A, the sharing rule results in the following wage
schedule:
                                                 f lex
                                           wt = wt                t   + (1        ) (1    pt ) Et (   t;t+1   t+1 ) ;                  (6)

       f lex
where wt     is de...ned as in (3) and                        t         w;t Jt    Wt1    . The presence of the OBC a¤ects the wage
payment in two ways. First, productivity outcomes that imply a violation of the constraint result
in large negative values of                     t,   since    w;t      takes increasingly larger negative values for wage-levels
wt close to wm . The corresponding surplus loss implies that in equilibrium, the wage is above the
unconstrained Nash wage. Second, the forward-looking term                                              t+1    shows that wt can di¤er from
                                                                        f lex
the unconstrained Nash bargaining wage,                                wt     ,   even when the constraint is not binding at time t
(i.e., when         t   = 0). The simple three-period model presented in Section 5 shows analytically that
this result holds even when the OBC is not approximated with a penalty function. The reason is


                                                                                 10
that the worker'
               s and ...rm'
                          s surplus depend on the present discounted value of the expected stream
of future wage payments. As long as there is a positive probability that the wage constraint will
bind in the future, the Nash surplus accounts for this change in the continuation value of the match
relative to the unconstrained wage scenario. For instance, when the ...rm and the worker expect
that the economy will be operating closer to the wage constraint at time t + 1, wt falls relative
to its unconstrained Nash-bargained level other things equal. In such circumstances, the ...rm and
the worker stipulate a lower wage today to account for the fact that the wage constraint may be
binding in the future.14


Equilibrium

In equilibrium, pro...ts are equal to       t   = Yt wt Lt rK;t Kt         Vt , while the government collect taxes
to ...nance unemployment bene...ts: Tt =           b (1   Lt ). The aggregate resource constraint implies that
total output is equal to the sum of market consumption, investment in physical capital, and the
costs of posting vacancies: Yt = Ct + It + Vt .


3        Solution Method and Parameterization

We approximate the model policy functions by computing a fourth-order Taylor expansion of the
equilibrium conditions around the deterministic steady state. Below, we refer to this approximation
as the "unpruned" state space. We rely on a fourth-order approximation for two reasons. First,
up to the third order, the approximated policy functions do not preserve important properties of
the non-linear equilibrium conditions of the model. In particular, as shown in Appendix C, the
history of past shocks does not a¤ect the impact response of endogenous variables following second-
moment shocks. The second reason is that a fourth-order Taylor expansion markedly improves the
accuracy of the approximation of the OBC relative to a third-order approximation. We discuss the
computational approach below.
         Since local approximations can produce explosive simulations when the order of approximation
is greater than one, we resort to pruned policy functions when computing second moments. Pruning
discards the solution terms that have a higher order relative to the approximation order. The prun-
ing algorithm follows Andreasen, Fernandez-Villaverde, and Rubio-Ramirez (2018)-- see Appendix
    14
    While the way in which the penalty terms t and t+1 enter the ...rst-order condition (6) have a clear economic
intuition, their interpretation can only be qualitative. This is the case since the actual values of w;t and w;t+1 depend
on the parameter and on the adopted polynomial speci...cation for w;t .




                                                           11
C for the analytical details about pruned and unpruned policy functions.15 Unless otherwise noted,
simulations are computed using the unpruned policy functions.16


Parameterization

We parameterize the model at quarterly frequencies and choose parameter values to match features
of the U.S. economy. We set the discount factor,               , equal to 0:994, the risk-aversion coe¢ cient,
 , equal to 2, and the capital share in the production function to 0:33, conventional values in the
business cycle literature. We set           =   1    1 + based on steady-state relationships and calibrate
                                        1

 2   such that the elasticity of capital utilization with respect to the rental rate of capital matches
the value from Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005).
     We set the elasticity of matches to unemployment, ", equal to 0:4, in line with Blanchard and
Diamond (1989). To maintain comparability with much of the existing literature, we assume the
worker'
      s bargaining power,          , is equal to ". This value is also consistent with the evidence in
Flinn (2006), who estimates         = 0:38 for the U.S. We set the unemployment bene...ts replacement
rate, b=w, equal to 0:3. Following Hagedorn and Manovskii (2008), we set the value of non-market
activity hp so that (hp + b) =w = 0:95. This parameterization of the ow value of unemployment
is su¢ cient to generate plausible employment dynamics even when the wage constraint is not
binding (e.g., during economic expansions).17 We set the exogenous separation rate, , equal to
10% (Shimer, 2005). Finally, we choose the cost of vacancy posting, , and the matching e¢ ciency
parameter,      , such that the steady-state job-...nding probability and the probability of ...lling a
vacancy are 83% and 70%, respectively (Shimer, 2005 and den Haan, Ramey, and Watson, 2000).
     Following a consolidated approach in the literature (e.g., Fernandez-Villaverde, Guerron-Quintana,
Kuester, and Rubio-Ramirez, 2015, Fernandez-Villaverde, Guerron-Quintana, Rubio-Ramirez, and
Uribe, 2011, and Born and Pfeifer, 2014), we estimate the exogenous stochastic processes for Zt and

 t   with likelihood methods. We use data on quarterly TFP adjusted for capital utilization from
the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco following Fernald (2012) from 1954:Q1 to 2015:Q1. We
overcome the nonlinear interaction between productivity and volatility innovations by estimating
  15
     Lombardo and Uhlig (2018) show that this pruned approximation can be interpreted as a standard Taylor
approximation taken with respect to an appropriately chosen perturbation parameter. Lan and Meyer-Gohde (2013)
also show that pruning can be understood as a Taylor expansion in an appropriate domain.
  16
     A limitation of pruned approximations in models with stochastic volatility is that, even at the fourth-order,
pruning eliminates several terms accounting for state dependence of second-moment shocks. Appendix C provides a
detailed discussion of this issue.
  17
     When Nash bargaining is unconstrained, low values of the worker'    s outside option result in a counterfactually
low volatility of employment relative to output. Thus, both ...rst- and second-moment shocks would have no e¤ects
on employment unless when the wage constraint is binding.


                                                         12
the stochastic process with a particle ...lter as in Fernandez-Villaverde, Guerron-Quintana, and
Rubio-Ramirez (2010). We choose Beta priors for the autoregressive coe¢ cients                       Z     and    with
mean 0:5 and standard deviation 0:2. We choose an Inverse-Gamma distribution for the standard
deviation of ...rst- and second-moment shocks. We set the mean of the (log) TFP volatility,                         Zt ,

equal to         5:3 and the variance equal to 0:1. We set the mean of            at 0:5 and the variance equal to
2.18 Appendix B reports the posterior estimates and summarizes the model parameters. Appendix
D plots the prior distributions and provides additional details about the estimation procedure. We
use posterior-median estimates when simulating the model.


Penalty Function

The penalty function            t   can be any di¤erentiable function that can be parameterized to approach
arbitrarily close the non-di¤erentiable function in (4). However, when the model is solved with a
Taylor expansion, the model policy functions are a polynomial approximation. Thus, regardless
of the choice of the penalty function, the law of motion of its ...rst derivative                 w;t --   the function
entering the model equilibrium condition-- will be a polynomial of the same order as the order of
the Taylor expansion.
       In contrast to the previous literature, we do not rely on a local approximation of a given
di¤erentiable (non-polynomial) function              w;t .   The reason is that Taylor approximations do not
necessarily inherit properties such as monotonicity and convexity of the postulated functional form
for     w;t .   Even a fourth-order Taylor expansion of the penalty function can be inaccurate in regions
of the state space that are of economic interest (Den Haan and De Wind, 2012 and Brzoza-Brzezina,
Kolasa, and Makarski, 2015). For this reason, we propose an alternative approach that directly
selects a fourth-order polynomial for the ...rst-derivative           w;t   in the approximated law of motion of
the model.
       To illustrate our procedure, notice ...rst that a nth -order Taylor expansion of a di¤erentiable
function         w;t   would guarantee that the approximation error is of order n + 1 within the radius of
convergence to the approximation point. However, alternative nth -order polynomials can provide
a more accurate approximation in regions of the state space that are of economic interest (i.e.,
further away from the approximation point), yet preserving a su¢ cient degree of accuracy in the
neighborhood of the approximation point. We assume that                        w;t ,   is a fourth-order polynomial
  18
    We use the Sequential Importance Resampling particle ...lter to evaluate the likelihood. We use a Tailored
Randomized Block Metropolis-Hastings algorithm to maximize the posterior. We obtain similar results when using
the priors in Born and Pfeifer (2014). Results are available upon request.


                                                             13
parameterized by the vector of coe¢ cients . We choose                 such that     w;t   satis...es selected global
properties discussed below. We then approximate the equilibrium law of motion of the model with
a fourth-order Taylor expansion of the equilibrium conditions.19 Appendix E presents the details
of the procedure. Here we highlight the key features of our approach.
       We choose the elements of        to match properties of the unconditional wage distribution. The
procedure is iterative and requires solving the model with a given candidate polynomial                         w;t   at
every step, verifying ex post whether the equilibrium of the model meets the speci...ed criteria. We
parameterize     w;t   to match the following properties. First, we require that            w;t   is su¢ ciently small
for any wage such that wt > w, where w is the steady-state wage. Since we assume w > wm , this
criterion ensures that       w;t   is approximately equal to zero in the region of the state space where
wt       wm .20 Second, we require that the OBC eliminates a given fraction of wage outcomes in the
left-tail of the ergodic wage distribution of the unconstrained model. We conservatively assume
that the OBC eliminates 5% of wage outcomes. This choice is informed by an extensive literature
assessing the extent of downward wage rigidity using micro wage-data. For instance, Kurmann
and McEntarfer (2019) using state-payroll data ...nd that excess zero spikes-- de...ned as the mass of
year-over-year zero log-hourly wage changes relative to what a symmetric wage change distribution
would predict-- ranges from 3% to 10:5% between 1999 and 2014. Using British payroll data, Elsby,
Shin, and Solon (2016) ...nd that in most years since the late 1970s the share of zero-nominal wage
changes in the hourly wage distributions ranged from 0:9% to 9:1%. In a panel of OECD countries,
Dickens, Goette, Groshen, Holden, Messina, Schweitzer, Turunen, and Ward (2007) document, that
an average of 26% of wage adjustments are subject to downward real wage rigidity, in the sense
that 26% of real wage cuts that would have taken place in an unconstrained economy are prevented
by the rigidity in wage contracting. In Appendix E, we consider a higher fraction of wage outcomes
eliminated by the OBC.
  19
     Appendix F compares our approach relative to the case in which w;t is approximated by a fourth-order Taylor
expansion of a benchmark exponential function.
  20
     For wt < w, the function w;t can take values below 0, depending on the vector . In turn, the iterative
procedure selects these values so that the unconditional wage distribution meets the speci...ed targets. As the order
of the polynomial for w;t increases, these values get arbitrarily close to 0 for wt > wm .




                                                         14
4   Model Properties and First-Moment Shocks

Wage Dynamics and Ergodic Wage Distribution

Although our calibration strategy only targets ...rst moments of the data, the model successfully
accounts for the cyclical behavior of key macroeconomic time series. In particular, the model
reproduces well the volatility of employment, investment, capital utilization, and wages relative to
output. The contemporaneous correlation between output and the remaining macro variables is
also in line with the data (see Appendix D for details).
    Figures 1 and 2 present the ergodic wage distribution for the model with the OBC and the model
with unconstrained wages, respectively. Each ...gure also reports the hypothetical distribution that
would be obtained if wage outcomes below the median followed a distribution symmetric to the
outcomes above the median. This counterfactual distribution makes it is possible to assess whether
outcomes depend on the OBC relative to any other nonlinearity of the model. The existence
of a wage lower-bound has two implications. First, it prevents the wage from falling below wm .
Second, it skews the wage distribution towards the wage oor. The skewness of the constrained-
wage distribution is equal to 0:3, approximately 3 times larger relative to the unconstrained-wage
distribution.
    The skew in the wage distribution results from the impact of the OBC on wages at low values of
productivity. Figure 3 illustrates this point, presenting a scatter plot of wage outcomes against the
corresponding productivity level (both in percentage deviations from steady state). Circles refer
to the model with the OBC, while diamonds refer to the model with exible wages. The ...gure
shows that far away from the OBC, the relationship between wages and productivity is virtually
identical to the one implied by the model with unconstrained Nash bargaining. By contrast, for
su¢ ciently low values of productivity, the wage never falls more than 2%, the oor implied by our
parameterization. Notice that, since wages depend on the total surplus of the match (which in
                                                                                        et
turn depends on expected future wages), wt is di¤erent from the unconstrained-Nash wage w nash


already when productivity Zt is approximately 1:5% below the steady state.


First-Moment Shocks

We now discuss how the OBC on wage adjustment a¤ects the propagation of ...rst-moment shocks,
i.e., shocks to the level of productivity Zt . To build intuition, we consider three alternative wage-
setting protocols: (i) OBC on wage adjustment, (ii) unconstrained Nash bargaining, and (iii) wage

                                                 15
rigidity that binds at all times. In the model with the OBC, the wage is determined as in equation
(6) and wt > wm . Unconstrained Nash bargaining implies that wt = wt
                                                                   f lex
                                                                         . To study the role of
unconditional wage rigidity, we follow Hall (2005), and assume that wt is a weighted average of the
                                                                                  f lex
unconstrained Nash wage and the steady-state wage: wt = (1                     ) wt     + w. We set        = 0:25 for
illustrative purposes. Wage rigidity that binds at all times increases the volatility of employment
by approximately 30% relative to the OBC economy; the volatility of wages falls by 20%.
       Figure 4 plots the response of key macroeconomic variables following a reduction in Zt equal
to one standard deviation. We generate impulse responses at the ergodic mean in the absence of
shocks, labeled by Juillard and Kamenik (2005) the "stochastic steady state."21 Lower productivity


reduces the present discounted value of new and existing matches, reducing, other things equal,
vacancy posting. As pointed out by Shimer (2005) and Hall (2005), the response of employment is
larger the smaller the elasticity of wages to productivity. As shown in Figure 4, this elasticity is small
in the presence of wage rigidity (solid line), leading to the strongest response in unemployment,
and larger with unconstrained Nash bargaining (dashed line).
       Consider now the economy with the OBC (continuous line). The negative productivity shock
increases the likelihood that the wage constraint will bind in the future. Relative to the model
with unconstrained bargaining, this would require lowering the time-t wage by a larger amount to
                                                                                            f lex
compensate for the risk that future wages may be constrained by the OBC, thus setting wt < wt     .
However, since wage setting at time t is also constrained, the equilibrium wage ends up being close to
the one in the unconstrained-Nash case. The di¤erence in the response of employment is somewhat
more pronounced. The reason is that the impact on Lt is driven by the present discounted value
of the stream of wage payments, and not just by the per-period wage. The OBC implies that
the negative productivity shock lowers the expected value of a match by more relative to the
unconstrained Nash bargaining scenario. As a result, vacancy posting responds more strongly,
leading to lower employment and output. However, the OBC implies a smaller drop in employment
relative to the case in which wages are unconditionally rigid. In the latter case, the wage constraint
is binding in all periods, further reducing the expected pro...t from a match and vacancy posting. As
we show next, the more powerful ampli...cation of ...rst-moment shocks implied by unconditionally
rigid wages does not carry over to the transmission of second moment shocks.
  21
     The ergodic mean in the absence of shocks is the ...xed point of the fourth-order approximated policy functions. It
is obtained by simulating the system with all shocks set to 0 for all time periods iterating forward until convergence.




                                                          16
5        The Transmission of Uncertainty Shocks

This section discusses how the OBC on wage adjustment a¤ects the propagation of uncertainty
shocks. To build intuition, we ...rst discuss a simpli...ed version of the model that abstracts from
endogenous physical capital accumulation. Next, we quantify the e¤ects of downward wage rigidity
using the general equilibrium model of section 2. Finally, we provide empirical evidence supporting
the model predictions.


Building Intuition: A Three-Period Model

We begin by studying a ...nite-horizon, partial-equilibrium version of the model22 . We provide all the
mathematical details in Appendix G. The mechanism we highlight is the following. Search frictions
in the labor market imply that current job creation depends on the expected present discounted
value of the stream of pro...ts generated by a match over its tenure. The existence of an OBC on
wage adjustment generates concavity in the ...rm's pro...t function, resulting in a pro...t-risk premium:
the expected stream of pro...ts is smaller than the pro...t stream from the expected productivity.
An increase in the dispersion of future productivity realizations increases the pro...t-risk premium,
inducing ...rms to optimally reduce current hiring and employment.
         Consider the following simplifying assumptions. First, the economy only lasts three periods,
t = [0; 1; 2]. Second, employee-...rm matches are formed at the end of period t = 0 and are productive
at time t = 1; 2. Third, the ow value of unemployment is zero (b = h = 0) and the surplus share
    is 0:5. Fourth, each match produces output yt = 2Zt , where the c.d.f. F (Zt ) is uniform. At the
time of the hiring decision, the expected stream of revenues and wage payments are, respectively:
        P                       P2
y 0 = E0 2 t=1 yt and w 0 = E0    t=1 wt .

         Under these assumptions, we can prove the following two propositions:

Proposition 1 With unconstrained Nash bargaining or ...xed wages, an increase in the variance of
Z2 for given E (Z2 ) does not a¤ ect period-2 expected pro...ts. When a lower bound wm constraints
wage bargaining, period-2 expected pro...ts fall. The fall is larger the higher the increase in variance
of Z2 .

Proposition 2 When an increase in the variance of Z2 for given E (Z2 ) lowers period-2 expected
pro...ts, the total stream of expected pro...ts falls with constrained Nash bargaining.
    22
    In a similar framework, Cabrales and Hopenhayn (1997) discuss the impact of downward wage rigidity on job
creation.


                                                     17
   As previously discussed, wage rigidity increases the sensitivity of ...rms'pro...ts to productivity--
a ...xed wage makes the ...rms'surplus more procyclical, resulting in more procyclical pro...ts, hiring,
and employment. By contrast, Proposition 1 establishes that both with exible Nash bargaining
and ...xed wages, the variance of Z2 is irrelevant for period-2 expected pro...ts. Intuitively, both
wage protocols imply the pro...t function is linear in productivity. Accordingly, higher moments of
the productivity distribution do not a¤ect expected pro...ts. The result is very di¤erent when Nash
bargaining is constrained by wm . In this case, the pro...t function is concave, and the ...rms'surplus
share is procyclical only when wt < wm . Thus, an increase in        Z2   lowers the expected pro...t for
the period t = 2.
   Setting wm equal to a higher value will increases the productivity value Z m for which the
wage-setting constraint becomes binding. We show in Appendix G that as Z m gets closer to
the average productivity E fZ g, and [E fZt g       Z m ] gets smaller, the same marginal increase in
uncertainty will result in a larger reduction in expected pro...ts. This mechanism explains why in
the full general-equilibrium model, the impact of uncertainty on pro...ts and employment becomes
larger in a recession. When Zt is a persistent process, low values of Zt result in low values of
[E fZt+1 g   Z m ]. In turn, this implies that an increase in the variance of TFP shocks will have a
larger impact on expected pro...ts. The opposite is true in an expansion, implying that uncertainty
shocks have a smaller e¤ect. Finally, notice that an increase in the variance of productivity may
also lead to higher pro...ts if the pro...t function is not concave over the whole domain, a result
known as the "Oi-Hartman-Able e¤ect." (See Appendix G for a discussion.)
   Proposition 2 establishes that not only period-2 pro...ts, but the total value of a match y 0      w0
is concave in Z2 . This is the consequence of two results, which also apply to the general-equilibrium
model. First, the constrained-Nash wage in t = 1 di¤ers from the unconstrained Nash wage even
when the constraint is not binding. This happens since the period-1 wage depends on the entire
expected value of the match, which includes future outcomes in which wage adjustment could be
precluded. Second, the possibility that the constraint will be binding at t = 1 implies that at time
t = 0 the stream of expected pro...ts, y 0   w0 , is a¤ected by a change in the variance of Z2 . Only if
wage adjustment were unconstrained at t = 1, wages could be set to undo the e¤ects of the wage
constraint at t = 2. In this case, a change in the variance of Z2 would have no consequences for
job creation.




                                                   18
Quanti...cation

The E¤ ects of Uncertainty at the Stochastic Steady State

We now show that the intuition from the three-period model extends to the general equilibrium
model. We ...rst consider the response to a one-standard deviation increase in                 Zt   when the economy
is at the stochastic steady state. The shock implies that the standard deviation of TFP increases
from 0:006 (its unconditional mean level) to 0:0085. Following Basu and Bundick (2017), Born and
Pfeifer (2014), and Fernandez-Villaverde, Guerron-Quintana, Rubio-Ramirez, and Uribe (2011), we
measure the pure uncertainty e¤ects of a change in the distribution of future shocks. This amounts
to setting to zero the direct e¤ect that a change in                Zt   has on the realization of ...rst moment
shocks.23
    Figure 5 compares aggregate dynamics under the three wage protocols: (i) OBC on Nash bar-
gaining (cross-marked lines), (ii) unconstrained wages (dashed lines), and (iii) Hall's wage rigidity
(dashed-dotted lines). The uncertainty shock is recessionary in all three cases: Employment and
output fall when       Zt   increases. However, the quantitative impact is very modest both with un-
constrained wage adjustment and wage rigidity that binds at all times (output declines at most by
0:05%). Consistent with the intuition from the three-period model, an increase in the likelihood of
more extreme ...rst-moment shocks does not induce a large change in expected ...rm's pro...ts, since
both wage protocols have little impact on the concavity of the pro...t function.
    By contrast, Figure 5 shows the uncertainty increase has a stronger e¤ect in the presence of the
OBC on wage adjustment. In relative terms, the response of output is ...ve times larger (output
declines by approximately 0:25%). The reason is that the OBC results in a sizable pro...t-risk
premium which is increasing in the variance of future shocks. Higher TFP volatility leads to more
extreme output outcomes, and the fall in expected pro...ts associated with the increased likelihood
of negative TFP innovations is larger than the expected gain associated to more likely positive TFP
innovations. As a result, higher uncertainty reduces the ...rm's surplus, lowering vacancy posting
even when the wage constraint is not binding. To summarize, while the employment response to
...rst-moment shocks is smaller in the model with the OBC relative to the unconditionally rigid-wage
scenario, the opposite is true for second-moment shocks.
  23
     This e¤ect can be traced in the policy functions through the multiplicative terms in uZ;t+s and   Z;t 1 ,   as discussed
in Appendix C.




                                                          19
Business Cycle Dynamics

We now quantify the e¤ect of uncertainty shocks on output and unemployment over the business
cycle. The goal is twofold. First, we want to measure the average e¤ect of time-varying volatility.
Second, we want to assess whether existing macroeconomic conditions matter for the transmission,
i.e., whether and how the sensitivity of the pro...t-risk premium varies over the business cycle.
   Since we are interested in the "pure e¤ect"of uncertainty shocks, we cannot simply compare ag-
gregate dynamics with and without second-moment shocks-- as previously discussed, results would
be partly driven by realized uncertainty (a ...rst-moment shock). We therefore resort to a model
counterfactual that extends the approach commonly used to construct generalized impulse re-
sponses. We perform N = 1000 simulations with length T = 250. In each simulation, we draw
shocks from time t = 1 to time j 2 [1; T ] and draw an uncertainty shock in the absence of ...rst-
moment shocks at time j + 1. The net e¤ect of the uncertainty shock is the the di¤erence relative
to what observed at time j + 1 in the absence of both ...rst- and second-moment shocks. Thus, the
approach measures the net impact of stochastic volatility conditional on the endogenous evolution
of the state variables over the cycle. It accounts for the nonlinear dynamics in the size of the shock,
the point in the state space where the shock occurs, and the distribution of future random shocks.
It is also straightforward to construct impulse response functions for each of the uncertainty shock
in the simulation.
   We ...rst compute generalized impulse responses for the mean increase in the TFP volatility
shock observed in the simulations (approximately equal to a one-standard deviation shock). The
...rst row in Figure 6 (continuous lines) plots the average response of output and unemployment
when initial output is in the interval [ 5% ;      3%]. The initial output mean is approximately
 4%, consistent with the trough in U.S. output during the Great Recession. Cross-lines plot the
average response when initial output is in the interval [3% ;5%]. As shown by the ...gure, the OBC
results in strong state-dependence: In the recession, the increase in uncertainty reduces output by
0:55% (at the trough) while unemployment increases up to 0:4 percentage points. The impact is
approximately ten times smaller during the expansion, where output on average falls by 0:05%.
   These results are explained by the dynamics of the pro...t-risk premium. In the expansion, the
likelihood the wage constraint will be binding in the future is small. As a result, higher dispersion
of future productivity shocks has a negligible impact on the expected pro...t from a match. By
contrast, in the recession, the economy is already close to the wage constraint. Therefore, higher



                                                  20
uncertainty induces a sizable drop in the ...rm'
                                               s expected pro...ts, leading to a stronger fall in job
creation.
   The second row in Figure 6 considers the average e¤ect of larger positive uncertainty shocks.
Speci...cally, we consider innovations that are greater than one-standard deviation. The average
shock is approximately an 80% increase relative to the steady state (two-standard deviations).
This magnitude is comparable to the increase in various measures of uncertainty observed in the
third quarter of 2008, including an estimate of TFP volatility for the U.S. economy, as discussed
in the next subsection-- see also Appendix H. Considering the same range of initial output levels
discussed above, the output loss is on average 0:9% in the recessionary states. The average e¤ect
remains very modest in the expansions (output declines on average by 0:15%).
   Finally, the third row in Figure 6 generalizes the results, presenting the average, cumulative one-
year response of output and investment for a broader range of initial output levels-- from     5% to
5% relative to the steady state. We consider again the two uncertainty shocks discussed above-- the
uncertainty mean shock (continuous line) and the average of uncertainty shocks greater than one-
standard deviation (dashed line). After one year, the cumulative output e¤ect of the uncertainty
mean increase ranges between        1:25% (in the deepest recession) and zero. The cumulative decline
in investment is between        3% and zero. Across the whole distribution, the average cumulative
output loss after one year is    0:65%. These ...gures more than double when considering uncertainty
shocks greater than one standard deviation. These result obtain assuming zero correlation between
...rst- and second-moment shocks. If shocks happened to be negatively correlated, i.e., if positive
uncertainty shocks were more likely to occur after negative realizations of ...rst-moment shocks, the
average impact of the OBC on wage adjustment measured over the business cycle would be even
stronger.
   To summarize, our results show that occasionally binding downward wage rigidity can be an
important source of ampli...cation of uncertainty shocks. In particular, lack of exible wage adjust-
ment implies that heightened uncertainty can substantially deepen a recession. At the same time,
downward wage rigidity becomes progressively less important when the constraint is binding with
low probability.




                                                   21
Empirical Evidence

A few recent contributions test whether uncertainty shocks have asymmetric e¤ects over the busi-
ness cycle.24 We provide novel evidence of the state-dependent e¤ects of uncertainty shocks by
estimating smooth-transition local projections. Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2012a) and Ten-
reyro and Thwaites (2016) popularized this method and we follow their approach. In addition, we
also consider a speci...cation where the state of the business cycle is identi...ed with a dummy variable
based on NBER recession dates (e.g., Ramey and Zubairy, 2018). While local projections have the
advantage of not imposing any dynamic restriction, in Appendix H, we con...rm the robustness of
the results by estimating a non-linear Interacted VAR (I-VAR). We measure aggregate uncertainty
using the TFP volatility series estimated in Section 3 to parameterize the exogenous uncertainty
process in the model.
       Let yt+h denote the outcome variable of interest. We estimate the following set of h-steps ahead
predictive regressions, for h = 0; ::; H :
                                      0                                               1
                                                                p
                                                                X
                        yt+h = F ( t ) @   R
                                           h   +   R
                                                   h Z;t    +          R
                                                                       j;h Xt j
                                                                                A
                                                                j =1
                                               0                                              1
                                                                               p
                                                                               X
                            + [1    F ( t )] @     NR
                                                   h    +   NR
                                                            h  Z;t         +          NR
                                                                                      j;h Xt j
                                                                                               A   + ut+h ;       (7)
                                                                               j =1


where      Z;t   is the measure of exogenous uncertainty, Xt is a vector of controls, and ut+h is the
prediction error term. F ( t ) is a smooth transition function which indicates the state of the
economy (Granger and Terasvirta, 1993):

                                                                   t
                                                    exp
                                     F ( t)                                      2 [0; 1] ;
                                                                       t
                                                   1 + exp

where      t   is the transition variable and        > 0 governs the smoothness of the transition between
states.
       We estimate equation (7) for each forecast horizon via ordinary least squares. The coe¢ cient
 R       NR      gives the time t + h response following a time-t uncertainty shock in the recessionary
 h       h

(non-recessionary) state. Thus, the local projections correspond to the set of coe¢ cients                    R   NR
                                                                                                              h   h
  24
    For instance, Caggiano, Castelnuovo, and Pellegrino (2017) show that the contractionary e¤ects of higher uncer-
tainty are statistically larger at the zero lower bound. Caggiano, Castelnuovo, and Pellegrino (2019) ...nd stronger
uncertainty e¤ects on several indicators of U.S. real economic activity in a recession.


                                                             22
for h = 0; ::; H . If the e¤ects of heightened uncertainty are state dependent, we would expect               R
                                                                                                              h

to be statistically signi...cantly di¤erent than     NR
                                                     h ,   at least at short horizons h.
       We consider two outcome variables (yt ): real GDP and the unemployment rate. We measure
uncertainty,     Z;t ,   using the median estimate from the backward-smoothing version of the particle
...lter on the stochastic volatility model of Section 3.25 We include two lags of the following con-
trols: the uncertainty measure, real GDP, the 4-quarter di¤erence of the log-consumer price index
excluding food and energy, the federal funds rate, and the outcome variable yt . Following Auer-
bach and Gorodnichenko (2012a), the transition variable            t   is the deviation of the output growth
rate from a smooth trend.26 We set           = 1:5, a standard choice for U.S. data (e.g., Auerbach and
Gorodnichenko, 2012a and Auerbach and Gorodnichenko, 2012b).27
       The ...rst row in Figure 7 presents impulse responses following a one-standard deviation increase
in uncertainty. Continuous lines identify the response in the recessionary state, while dashed lines
correspond to the non-recessionary state. We plot 90 percent con...dence bands based on Newey-
West standard errors that account for the serial correlation at horizon h > 0. In the recessionary
state, the increase in uncertainty lowers output by 1% percent at the trough, while unemployment
increases by 0:5 percentage points at the peak. In the non-recessionary state, the response of output
and unemployment is in general statistically not signi...cant. The second row in Figure 7 shows that
the di¤erence between the response in the recessionary and non-recessionary states for output and
unemployment is signi...cant at the 90% con...dence level.
       For robustness, we consider an alternative approach to identify the recessionary and non-
recessionary states. We replace F ( t ) with a dummy variable that takes value equal to one in
quarters that correspond to the NBER recessions dates (approximately 12% of the sample) and
0 otherwise. As shown by the third row of Figure 7, the results are robust to this alternative
speci...cation. The di¤erence between the responses in recessionary and non-recessionary states is
also statistically signi...cant (see the fourth row in Figure 7).
       To summarize, the empirical analysis shows that the impact of uncertainty shocks varies over
the business cycle, consistent with the model. An increase in uncertainty results in a signi...cant
drop in output only in a recession.
  25
     We follow Godsill, Doucet, and West (2004). The smoothed draws are computed using 1,000 draws from the
posterior and 1,000 particles.
  26
     We extract the trend using the Hodrick-Prescott ...lter with smoothing parameter = 10; 000), accounting for
the historical long-run decline in the mean of output growth.
  27
     Granger and Terasvirta (1993) suggest imposing a ...xed value for     (see also Auerbach and Gorodnichenko,
2012a). The estimation of would rely on nonlinear moments and hence estimates may be sensitive to a handful of
observations in short samples.


                                                      23
6      The Dynamics of Measured Uncertainty

A robust conclusion from the empirical literature is that several measures of aggregate uncertainty
are countercyclical, including the volatility of stock and bond markets, the volatility of output
and exchange rates, measures of disagreement among professional forecasters, their self-reported
subjective forecast uncertainty, and the variance of future output growth conditional on current
information (see Bloom, 2014).
    In this section, we show that the OBC on wage adjustment can account for the negative cor-
relation between recessions and empirical measures of uncertainty. We focus on the conditional
volatility of the output forecast error, i.e., the conditional volatility of the unforecastable com-
ponent of
       r the   h step ahead future values of the series (Jurado, Ludvigson, and Ng, 2015):
            h                              i
                                     2
 t+h      E  ( Yt+ h E (Y t+h j It ))  jIt   . The key insight from the analysis is that the OBC im-
plies that   t+h   is time-varying and countercyclical even when the conditional volatility of shocks
does not change, i.e., in the absence of second-moment shocks. This result adds to the literature
on endogenous uncertainty, showing that uctuations in empirical measures of uncertainty can also
stem from from agents'optimal decisions in response to ...rst-moment shocks.
    To illustrate this point, consider the following experiment. Assume that the conditional volatil-
ity of TFP is constant,     Z;t   =r Z . Then compute the conditional volatility of the one-step ahead
                                        h                      i
output forecast error,    t+1       E (Yt+1 E (Yt+1 jIt ))2 jIt , when TFP is either 1% above or 1%
below the ergodic mean. We compute              t+1   by drawing 10; 000 innovations for Zt+1 , obtaining the
conditional distribution of the output forecast error Yt+1              E (Yt+1 jIt ). The conditional volatil-
ity of the output forecast error is       t+1    = 0:0115 when Zt is 1% above its ergodic mean, while

 t+1   = 0:0204 when Zt is at        1%. Thus,         t+1   is time-varying and state dependent even in the
absence of second-moment shocks.
    To understand these results, Figure 8 plots the distribution of Yt+1 E (Yt+1 jIt ) in the economic
expansion and the recession. In the recession, the distribution is more dispersed, and the probability
mass decreases around the median and increases both in the right and left tail. The higher dispersion
reects the stronger response of job creation to future innovations (both positive and negative ones)
when the the wage constraint is binding with a higher probability. Intuitively, negative future shocks
imply that wages will not be able to fully absorb the productivity drop. Positive productivity
realizations will alleviate the wage constraint, stimulating vacancy posting. By contrast, during an
economic expansion, the economy operates far away from the wage constraint. In this case, future


                                                          24
shocks have a smaller impact on the match surplus and job creation, leading to a less dispersed
distribution of outcomes. Notice that in the expansion, the distribution of the forecast error still
displays asymmetric tails. This is also a consequence of the OBC. Intuitively, negative productivity
shocks increase the probability that the wage constraint will bind in the future even in good times,
inducing an asymmetric distribution in t + 1 outcomes.
    These intuitions are con...rmed when inspecting the distribution of Yt+1         E (Yt+1 jIt ) in the
model with unconstrained Nash bargaining. Figure 9 shows that in the absence of the OBC, the
distribution is approximately identical in the recession and in the expansion. Thus, the higher
forecast-error dispersion observed in a recession is the results of the OBC rather than of other
nonlinearities in the model. In addition, with exible wages the distribution has minimal skewness,
both in a recession and in an expansion.


7   Conclusions

We have shown occasionally binding downward wage rigidity in frictional labor markets plays a
central role in propagating uncertainty shocks and in explaining the countercyclicality of empirical
measures of aggregate uncertainty.
    With long-term employment relationships, the constraint on downward wage adjustment intro-
duces a pro...t-risk premium by enhancing the concavity of ...rms'pro...ts with respect to productivity.
In turn, downward wage adjustment generates strong and state-dependent ampli...cation of uncer-
tainty shocks implying higher uncertainty can substantially deepen a recession. Model simulations
show when output is 4% below its trend level, the average increase in TFP volatility observed in
U.S. data induces an average output loss equal to 0:5%. If the uncertainty increase is of a magnitude
comparable to what was observed in the Great Recession, the output loss is about 1%. Analogous
uncertainty shocks have near-zero e¤ects in economic expansions. Estimates from non-linear local
projections provide support for these ...ndings.
    The occasionally binding constraint in wage negotiations also implies the variance of the un-
forecastable component of future economic outcomes always increases at times of low economic
activity. Thus, measured uncertainty increases during recessions even in the absence of exogenous
uncertainty shocks.

References
Andreasen, M. M., J. Fernandez-Villaverde, and J. F. Rubio-Ramirez (2018): "The
 Pruned State-Space System for Non-Linear DSGE Models: Theory and Empirical Applications,"

                                                   25
  Review of Economic Studies, 85(1), 1­49.
Arellano, C., Y. Bai, and P. J. Kehoe (2019): "Financial Frictions and Fluctuations in
 Volatility," Journal of Political Economy, 127(5), 2049­2103.
Auerbach, A. J., and Y. Gorodnichenko (2012a): "Fiscal Multipliers in Recession and Ex-
 pansion," in Fiscal Policy after the Financial Crisis, NBER Chapters, pp. 63­98.
         (2012b): "Measuring the Output Responses to Fiscal Policy," American Economic Jour-
  nal: Economic Policy, 4(2), 1­27.
Bachmann, R., and G. Moscarini (2011): "Business Cycles and Endogenous Uncertainty,"
 Discussion paper.
Baker, S. R., N. Bloom, and S. J. Davis (2012): "Policy Uncertainty: a New Indicator,"
 Discussion Paper 362, Centre for Economic Performance, LSE.
Basu, S., and B. Bundick (2017): "Uncertainty Shocks in a Model of E¤ective Demand," Econo-
 metrica, 85, 937­958.
Blanchard, O., and P. Diamond (1989): "The Aggregate Matching Function," Working papers
 MIT, Department of Economics, (538).
Bloom, N. (2009): "The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks," Econometrica, 77(3), 623­685.
        (2014): "Fluctuations in Uncertainty," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28(2), 153­76.
Bloom, N., M. Floetotto, N. Jaimovich, I. S. Eksten, and S. J. Terry (2018): "Really
 Uncertain Business Cycles," Econometrica, 86(3), 1031­1065.
Boeri, T. (2014): "Two-Tier Bargaining," IZA Discussion Papers 8358, IZA WP 8358.
Born, B., and J. Pfeifer (2014): "Policy Risk and the Business Cycle," Journal of Monetary
 Economics, 68(C), 68­85.
Brzoza-Brzezina, M., M. Kolasa, and K. Makarski (2015): "A penalty function approach
 to occasionally binding credit constraints," Economic Modelling, 51(C), 315­327.
Cabrales, A., and H. Hopenhayn (1997): "Nash Bargaining with Downward Rigid Wages,"
 Economics Letters, 57(2), 213­218.
Caggiano, G., E. Castelnuovo, and G. Pellegrino (2017): "Estimating the real e¤ects of
 uncertainty shocks at the Zero Lower Bound," European Economic Review, 100(C), 257­272.
        (2019): "Uncertainty, Real Activity, and Risk Aversion in Booms and Busts," mimeo.
Carneiro, A., P. Guimar, and P. Portugal (2012): "Real Wages and the Business Cy-
 cle: Accounting for Worker, Firm, and Job Title Heterogeneity," American Economic Journal:
 Macroeconomics, 4(2), 133­52.
Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (2005): "Nominal Rigidities and the
 Dynamic E¤ects of a Shock to Monetary Policy," Journal of Political Economy, 113(1), 1­45.
Christiano, L. J., R. Motto, and M. Rostagno (2014): "Risk Shocks," American Economic
 Review, 104(1), 27­65.
Daly, M., B. Hobijn, and B. Lucking (2012): "Why has wage growth stayed strong?," FRBSF
 Economic Letter, (apr2).
Davis, S. J., J. C. Haltiwanger, and S. Schuh (1998): Job Creation and Destruction, vol. 1
 of MIT Press Books. The MIT Press.

                                             26
Den Haan, W. J., and J. De Wind (2012): "Nonlinear and Stable Perturbation-Based Approx-
 imations," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 36(10), 1477­1497.
den Haan, W. J., G. Ramey, and J. Watson (2000): "Job Destruction and Propagation of
  Shocks," American Economic Review, 90(3), 482­498.
Dickens, W. T., L. Goette, E. L. Groshen, S. Holden, J. Messina, M. E. Schweitzer,
  J. Turunen, and M. E. Ward (2007): "How Wages Change: Micro Evidence from the Inter-
  national Wage Flexibility Project," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(2), 195­214.
Elsby, M. W. L., D. Shin, and G. Solon (2016): "Wage Adjustment in the Great Recession
  and Other Downturns: Evidence from the United States and Great Britain," Journal of Labor
  Economics, 34(S1), S249­S291.
Elsby, M. W. L., and G. Solon (2019): "How Prevalent Is Downward Rigidity in Nominal
  Wages? International Evidence from Payroll Records and Pay Slips," Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 33(3), 185­201.
Fajgelbaum, P. D., E. Schaal, and M. Taschereau-Dumouchel (2017): "Uncertainty
  Traps," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(4), 1641­1692.
Fernald, J. G. (2012): "A quarterly, utilization-adjusted series on total factor productivity,"
  Discussion paper.
Fernandez-Villaverde, J., P. Guerron-Quintana, K. Kuester, and J. Rubio-Ramirez
  (2015): "Fiscal Volatility Shocks and Economic Activity," American Economic Review, 105(11),
  3352­3384.
Fernandez-Villaverde, J., P. Guerron-Quintana, and J. F. Rubio-Ramirez (2010): "For-
  tune or Virtue: Time-Variant Volatilities Versus Parameter Drifting in U.S. Data," NBER WP
  15928.
Fernandez-Villaverde, J., P. Guerron-Quintana, J. F. Rubio-Ramirez, and M. Uribe
  (2011): "Risk Matters: The Real E¤ects of Volatility Shocks," American Economic Review,
  101(6), 2530­61.
Fernandez-Villaverde, J., and J. Rubio-Ramirez (2010): "Macroeconomics and Volatility:
  Data, Models, and Estimation," NBER WP 16618.
Flinn, C. J. (2006): "Minimum Wage E¤ects on Labor Market Outcomes under Search, Matching,
  and Endogenous Contact Rates," Econometrica, 74(4), 1013­1062.
Fougere, D., E. Gautier, and S. Roux (2018): "Wage       oor rigidity in industry-level agree-
 ments: Evidence from France," Labour Economics, 55(C), 72­97.
Fujita, S., and G. Ramey (2009): "The Cyclicality Of Separation and Job Finding Rates,"
 International Economic Review, 50(2), 415­430.
Gali, J., M. Gertler, and J. D. Lopez-Salido (2007): "Markups, Gaps, and the Welfare
 Costs of Business Fluctuations," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(1), 44­59.
Gilchrist, S., J. W. Sim, and E. Zakrajsek (2014): "Uncertainty, Financial Frictions, and
 Investment Dynamics," NBER WP 20038.
Godsill, S. J., A. Doucet, and M. West (2004): "Monte Carlo Smoothing for Nonlinear Time
 Series," Journal of the American Statistical Association, 99, 156­168.
Granger, C. W. J., and T. Terasvirta (1993): Modelling Non-Linear Economic Relationships,
 no. 9780198773207 in OUP Catalogue. Oxford University Press.



                                              27
Grigsby, J., E. Hurst, and A. Yildirmaz (2019): "Aggregate Nominal Wage Adjustments:
 New Evidence from Administrative Payroll Data," NBER Working Papers 25628, National Bu-
 reau of Economic Research, Inc.
Hagedorn, M., and I. Manovskii (2008): "The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment
 and Vacancies Revisited," American Economic Review, 98(4), 1692­1706.
Hall, R. E. (2005): "Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stickiness," American
 Economic Review, 95(1), 50­65.
Huang, K. X. D., and Z. Liu (2002): "Staggered price-setting, staggered wage-setting, and
 business cycle persistence," Journal of Monetary Economics, 49(2), 405­433.
Ilut, C., M. Kehrig, and M. Schneider (2018): "Slow to Hire, Quick to Fire: Employment
  Dynamics with Asymmetric Responses to News," Journal of Political Economy, 126(5), 2011­
  2071.
Ilut, C. L., and M. Schneider (2014): "Ambiguous Business Cycles," American Economic
  Review, 104(8), 2368­99.
Juillard, M., and O. Kamenik (2005): "Solving SDGE Models: Approximation About The
  Stochastic Steady State," Computing in Economics and Finance 2005 106, Society for Compu-
  tational Economics.
Jurado, K., S. C. Ludvigson, and S. Ng (2015): "Measuring Uncertainty," American Economic
  Review, 105(3), 1177­1216.
Keynes, J. M. (1936): The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money. Macmillan
 Cambridge University Press.
Kim, S. H., R. Kollmann, and J. Kim (2010): "Solving the Incomplete Market Model with Ag-
  gregate Uncertainty using a Perturbation Method," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control,
  34(1), 50­58.
Krause, M., and T. A. Lubik (2007): "The (Ir)Relevance of Real Wage Rigidity in the New
 Keynesian Model with Search Frictions," Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(3), 706­727.
Kudlyak, M. (2014): "The cyclicality of the user cost of labor," Journal of Monetary Economics,
 68(C), 53­67.
Kurmann, A., and E. McEntarfer (2019): "Downward Nominal Wage Rigidity in the United
 States: New Evidence from Worker-Firm Linked Data," School of Economics Working Paper
 Series 2019-1, LeBow College of Business, Drexel University.
Lan, H., and A. Meyer-Gohde (2013): "Solving DSGE Models with a Nonlinear Moving Aver-
  age," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 37(12), 2643­2667.
Leduc, S., and Z. Liu (2013): "Uncertainty and the slow labor market recovery," FRBSF Eco-
  nomic Letter, (july22).
        (2016): "Uncertainty shocks are aggregate demand shocks," Journal of Monetary Eco-
  nomics, 82(C), 20­35.
Lombardo, G., and H. Uhlig (2018): "A Theory Of Pruning," International Economic Review,
 59(4), 1825­1836.
Ludvigson, S. C., S. Ma, and S. Ng (2018): "Uncertainty and Business Cycles: Exogenous
  Impulse or Endogenous Response?,"NBER Working Papers 21803, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, Inc.
Luenberger, D. G. (1973): Introduction to Linear and Nonlinear Programming. Wiley.

                                              28
Mortensen, D. T., and C. A. Pissarides (2002): "Taxes, Subsidies and Equilibrium Labor
 Market Outcomes," CEP Discussion Papers dp0519, Centre for Economic Performance, LSE.
Nakata, T. (2013): "Uncertainty at the Zero Lower Bound," Discussion paper.
Pellegrino, G. (2017): "Uncertainty and Monetary Policy in the US: A Journey into Non-
 Linear Territory," Melbourne Institute Working Paper Series wp2017n06, Melbourne Institute
 of Applied Economic and Social Research, The University of Melbourne.
Pissarides, C. A. (2009): "The Unemployment Volatility Puzzle: Is Wage Stickiness the An-
  swer?," Econometrica, 77(5), 1339­1369.
Plante, M., A. W. Richter, and N. A. Throckmorton (2018): "The Zero Lower Bound and
  Endogenous Uncertainty," Economic Journal, 128(611), 1730­1757.
Preston, B., and M. Roca (2007): "Incomplete Markets, Heterogeneity and Macroeconomic
 Dynamics," NBER WP 13260.
Ramey, V. A., and S. Zubairy (2018): "Government Spending Multipliers in Good Times and
 in Bad: Evidence from US Historical Data," Journal of Political Economy, 126(2), 850­901.
Ravenna, F., and C. E. Walsh (2011): "Welfare-Based Optimal Monetary Policy with Un-
 employment and Sticky Prices: A Linear-Quadratic Framework," American Economic Journal:
 Macroeconomics, 3(2), 130­162.
Rotemberg, J. J., and M. Woodford (1999): "Interest Rate Rules in an Estimated Sticky
 Price Model," in Monetary Policy Rules, NBER Chapters, pp. 57­126.
Saijo, H. (2017): "The uncertainty multiplier and business cycles," Journal of Economic Dynamics
  and Control, 78(C), 1­25.
Schaal, E. (2017): "Uncertainty and Unemployment," Econometrica, 85(6), 1675­1721.
Schmitt-Grohe, S., and M. Uribe (2016): "Downward Nominal Wage Rigidity, Currency Pegs,
  and Involuntary Unemployment," Journal of Political Economy, 124(5), 1466­1514.
Shimer, R. (2005): "The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies," Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 95(1), 25­49.
        (2012): "Wage Rigidities and Jobless Recoveries," Journal of Monetary Economics, 59(S),
  S65­S77.
Stock, J. H., and M. W. Watson (2012): "Disentangling the Channels of the 2007-2009 Reces-
  sion," NBER WP 18094.
Tenreyro, S., and G. Thwaites (2016): "Pushing on a String: US Monetary Policy Is Less
 Powerful in Recessions," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 8(4), 43­74.
Van Nieuwerburgh, S., and L. Veldkamp (2006): "Learning asymmetries in real business
 cycles," Journal of Monetary Economics, 53(4), 753­772.
Yellen, J. L. (2014): "Labor Market Dynamics and Monetary Policy : a Speech at the Federal
 Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 22, 2014,"
 Speech 815, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (U.S.).




                                              29
                                                              Wages Distribution: OBC
                                      2.5




                                        2




                                      1.5
                 Relative Frequency




                                        1




                                      0.5




                                        0
                                            -4   -3      -2       -1     0     1        2   3   4
                                                                       Wage

Figure 1. Ergodic wage distribution, model with the occasionally binding constraint on wage adjustment.
Stairs plot: wage distribution that would be obtained if the wage realizations above the 50th percentile were
symmetric around the median.




                                                      Wages Distribution: Flexible Wages
                                      3.5


                                       3


                                      2.5
              Relative Frequency




                                       2


                                      1.5


                                       1


                                      0.5


                                       0
                                            -4   -3      -2       -1     0     1        2   3   4
                                                                       Wage

Figure 2. Ergodic wage distribution, model with unconstrained Nash bargaining. Stairs plot: wage distrib-
ution that would be obtained if the wage realizations above the 50th percentile were symmetric around the
median.



                                                                       30
Figure 3. Scatter plot of wage outcomes, wt , and TFP, Zt . Model with the occasionally binding constraint
on wage adjustment (squares) and model with unconstrained wage bargaining (diamonds).




                                                          1.6

                                                          1.4
                -0.5
                                                          1.2

                  -1                                       1

                                                          0.8
                -1.5
                                                          0.6

                                                          0.4
                  -2
                                                          0.2
                -2.5                                       0
                         5      10      15      20               5       10      15     20

                                                           0

                -0.1
                                                           -1
                -0.2

                -0.3                                       -2
                -0.4
                                                           -3
                -0.5

                -0.6
                                                           -4
                -0.7
                                                           -5
                -0.8
                         5      10      15      20               5       10      15     20




Figure 4. Impulse response function to a one-standard deviation decrease in productivity. Cross-marked
line : OBC on wage adjustment; Dashed line : unconstrained Nash bargaining; Solid line : Hall (2005)'
                                                                                                    s real
wage rigidity. Variables are in percentage deviations from the steady state, except unemployment which is
in percentage points.



                                                     31
                    0
                                                                            0.2
                -0.05

                                                                           0.15
                 -0.1


                                                                            0.1
                -0.15


                 -0.2                                                      0.05


                -0.25
                                                                              0
                        2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20               5   10   15   20


                                                                            40
                -0.01
                                                                            35
                -0.02                                                       30

                -0.03                                                       25

                -0.04                                                       20

                                                                            15
                -0.05
                                                                            10
                -0.06
                                                                              5
                -0.07

                        2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20               5   10   15   20




Figure 5. Impulse responses, one-standard deviation increase in the standard deviation of TFP, Zt . Cross-
marked line : OBC on wage adjustment; Dashed line : unconstrained Nash bargaining; Solid line : Hall (2005)
real wage rigidity. Variables are in percentage deviations from the steady state, except unemployment which
is in percentage points.




                                                                      32
              0                                                                              0 .8




            -0 .2                                                                            0 .6




            -0 .4                                                                            0 .4




            -0 .6                                                                            0 .2




            -0 .8                                                                             0
                  1     2    3        4        5       6       7       8       9   10              1    2    3        4        5       6       7       8       9   10




            -0 .2
                                                                                             0 .6



            -0 .4
                                                                                             0 .4


            -0 .6

                                                                                             0 .2

            -0 .8

                                                                                              0
                  1     2    3        4        5       6       7       8       9   10              1    2    3        4        5       6       7       8       9   10




              0                                                                               0



            -0 .5                                                                             -1



             -1                                                                               -2



            -1 .5                                                                             -3



             -2                                                                               -4



            -2 .5                                                                             -5
                  -5   -4   -3   -2       -1       0       1       2       3   4   5              -5   -4   -3   -2       -1       0       1       2       3   4   5




Figure 6. Average responses of aggregate variables to an increase in TFP uncertainty. First row : Uncertainty
mean increase; average initial output level at 4% relative to steady state (solid line) and +4% (cross-marked
line). Second row : Average of uncertainty shocks greater or equal to one-standard deviation; average initial
output level at 4% relative to steady state (solid line) and +4% (cross-marked line). Third row : average,
cumulative, one-year responses.




                                                                                        33
Figure 7. Local projections (LP) following an increase in TFP uncertainty. First row : smooth-transition LP,
recessionary state (solid line) and non recessionary state (continuous lines); Second row : smooth transition
LP, di¤erence between responses in the recessionary and non-recessionary state; Third row : NBER-dates
LP, recessionary state (solid line) and non recessionary state (continuous lines); Fourth row : NBER-dates
LP, di¤erence between responses in the recessionary and non-recessionary state. Con...dence bands at 90%
signi...cance level.




                                                     34
Figure 8. Time t + 1 output distribution following a negative (dark bars) and positive (light bars) one-
standard deviation TFP shock at time t. Model with unconstrained Nash bargaining. Outcomes are in
percentage deviations from the level of output at time t.




Figure 9. Time t + 1 output distribution following a negative (dark bars) and positive (light bars) one-
standard deviation TFP shock at time t. Model with unconstrained Nash bargaining. Outcomes are in
percentage deviations from the level of output at time t.



                                                  35
