                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           MILLIONAIRES SPEAK:
             WHAT DRIVES THEIR PERSONAL INVESTMENT DECISIONS?

                                      Svetlana Bender
                                       James J. Choi
                                      Danielle Dyson
                                    Adriana Z. Robertson

                                     Working Paper 27969
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27969


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2020




We thank Jeff Scott and UBS for facilitating this research. We thank audiences at Columbia,
Dartmouth, Tilburg, University of Chicago, Vanderbilt, and Yale for helpful comments, and
Charlie Rafkin for assistance in analyzing the Survey of Consumer Finances data. Bender was
formerly employed by an organization that provides financial advice to high net worth
individuals. Dyson is employed by an organization that provides financial advice to high net
worth individuals. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Svetlana Bender, James J. Choi, Danielle Dyson, and Adriana Z. Robertson. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Millionaires Speak: What Drives Their Personal Investment Decisions?
Svetlana Bender, James J. Choi, Danielle Dyson, and Adriana Z. Robertson
NBER Working Paper No. 27969
October 2020
JEL No. G11,G12,G50

                                          ABSTRACT

We survey 2,484 U.S. individuals with at least $1 million of investable assets about how well
leading academic theories describe their financial beliefs and decisions. The most important
factors determining portfolio equity share are professional advice, time until retirement, personal
experiences, rare disaster risk, and health risk. Beliefs about how expected returns vary with stock
characteristics often differ from historical relationships, and more risk is not always associated
with higher expected returns. Those who invest in active equity funds most often do so based on
professional advice and because they expect to earn higher average returns. Only 19% of
respondents agree that high past fund manager performance is strong evidence of stock-picking
skill and that there are diminishing returns to scale in active management. Concentrated equity
holdings are most often motivated by a belief that the overweighted stock has superior risk-
adjusted returns.

Svetlana Bender                                  Danielle Dyson
GuideWell                                        UBS
4800 Deerwood Campus Pkwy                        1000 Harbor Blvd.
Jacksonville, FL 32246                           Weekhawken, NJ 07086
8916464@gmail.com                                ddyson1015@gmail.com

James J. Choi                                    Adriana Z. Robertson
Yale School of Management                        University of Toronto
165 Whitney Avenue                               Faculty of Law
P.O. Box 208200                                  78 Queen's Park
New Haven, CT 06520-8200                         Toronto, ON, M5S 2C5
and NBER                                         adriana.robertson@utoronto.ca
james.choi@yale.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27969
        Financial economists have many theories of what determines investors' asset demand,
which, in conjunction with asset supply, determines asset prices. Testing these theories has proven
challenging. It is seldom possible to run experiments that randomly vary the strength of theorized
motives and beliefs across investors while leaving other determinants of portfolio choice
unchanged.1 The alternative empirical approach of inferring beliefs and motives from endogenous
prices and quantities suffers from the problem that a given set of prices and quantities is usually
consistent with more than one mechanism (Fama, 1970; Cochrane, 2017; Kozak, Nagel, and
Santosh, 2018; Liu et al., 2020).
        As a result, there has been a resurgence of interest in another methodology for identifying
beliefs and motives: asking investors directly about their beliefs, motives, and decision processes.
Despite its distinguished pedigree in finance research (Lintner, 1956), this approach had largely
fallen out of favor in the field. Recent examples of papers returning to survey methods include
Greenwood and Shleifer (2014), Kuhnen and Miu (2017), Kuchler and Zafar (2019), Chinco,
Hartzmark, and Sussman (2020), Choi and Robertson (2020), Das, Kuhnen, and Nagel (2020),
Giglio et al. (2020), and Liu et al. (2020).2
        While surveys are a useful tool for gaining insight into individual investors, they are often
less informative about the determinants of prices and aggregate quantities because very wealthy
investors, who possess a disproportionate share of the economy's assets, are usually a tiny fraction
of survey samples. In 2016, the top 1% of U.S. households held 40% of net worth, 53% of stocks
and mutual funds, and 65% of financial securities (Wolff, 2017).
        In this paper, we report the results of two surveys that measure the investment beliefs and
motives of these economically important but hard-to-access wealthy individuals. The surveys
sample a total of 2,484 U.S. respondents, each of whom has at least $1 million of investable assets,
18% of whom have at least $5 million, and 4% of whom have at least $10 million.



1
  Even when such experiments--naturally occurring or researcher-designed--are available, they rarely estimate the
average effect size in the entire investor population, which is the true parameter of interest (Heckman and Urzúa,
2010; Deaton and Cartwright, 2018). An experiment that randomly assigns a treatment will identify the average
treatment effect only within the population subject to the experiment. If an instrumental variable is employed, the
resulting estimate is, under certain assumptions, a local average treatment effect (Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin, 1996)
for the subpopulation of "compliers." This may differ substantially from the average treatment effect for the entire
investor population.
2
  Graham and Harvey (2001) were early revivers of this methodology in corporate finance, and Cheung and Wong
(2000), Cheung and Chinn (2001), and Cheung, Chinn, and Marsh (2004) among currency traders. Bewley (1999) did
seminal work in interviews exploring why wages don't fall in recessions.

                                                              1
       Our surveys contain four categories of questions. The largest category covers the
determinants of the fraction of the respondent's portfolio that is invested in equities. We ask about
40 factors, including the leading academic theories of what should affect the allocation to risky
assets. One advantage of measuring the importance of a large number of theories in the same
sample with a consistent methodology is that it may make judging the relative importance of each
factor easier than when, for example, comparing various local average treatment effects that are
each estimated within a different population. Such relative judgments then can give guidance on
which theoretical mechanisms might be the most promising for researchers to investigate going
forward.
       We also ask our respondents what they believe about how the expected returns and risks
of stocks vary along four dimensions associated with expected return anomalies: value,
momentum, profitability, and investment expenditure (Fama and French, 1992; Jegadeesh and
Titman, 1993; Fama and French, 2015; Hou, Xue, and Zhang, 2015). Many people choose to invest
through professional asset managers, so we ask our respondents about their beliefs regarding active
stock investment management. Finally, because wealthy households are particularly likely to hold
a large undiversified equity position (Carroll, 2002; Roussanov, 2010), we ask nine questions
about why respondents who have such a position have chosen to forego the benefits of
diversification.
       With respect to equity share, five factors are cited by at least 20% of respondents as very
or extremely important "in determining the total percentage of your net worth that is currently
invested in stocks": advice from a professional financial advisor (33% of respondents), personal
experiences of investing in the stock market (24%) or living through stock market returns (23%),
the risk of an economic disaster like the Great Depression (23%), and the risk of illness or injury
(20%). Among employed respondents, 26% say that the number of years remaining until
retirement is a very or extremely important factor. At the other extreme, the factors that draw the
least support by the "very or extremely important" metric are loss aversion (7%), external habit
(6%), illiquid non-stock investments (6%), advice from peers (6%) or media (5%), and a desire to
become wealthier than other rich people (6%). Return covariance with the marginal utility of
money--the fundamental consideration in most modern asset pricing theories--is very or
extremely important to a modest 15% of respondents. Return covariance with the marginal utility
of consumption does even worse, cited as very or extremely important by only 9% of respondents.


                                                     2
        A unifying theme across the remaining three sections is that many wealthy investors
believe that they can identify superior investment opportunities. Regarding the cross-section of
stock returns, respondents do not collectively believe that higher expected returns are always
associated with higher risk. Their beliefs about the normal relationship between a stock's
characteristics and its expected returns also often do not match historical experience. 3 Our
respondents see high-momentum stocks as having lower expected returns and higher risk than low-
momentum stocks. High-profitability stocks are seen as having higher expected returns and lower
risk than low-profitability stocks. High-investment-expenditure stocks are seen as having lower
expected returns and higher risk than low-investment-expenditure stocks. Only on the value versus
growth dimension do respondents believe there to be a positive expected return-risk relationship,
but slightly more respondents believe value stocks to have lower expected returns compared to
growth stocks than the opposite. A strong plurality believes value stocks to be less risky than
growth stocks. These patterns of responses are not consistent with rational explanations for the
return premia associated with these characteristics.
        Among the 45% of respondents who say that they had ever pursued an active investment
strategy through a fund or a professional manager, 45% say that a professional advisor's
recommendation was very or extremely important in their decision to do so. A belief that such a
strategy would have higher average returns than a passive strategy is cited as a very or extremely
important factor by 44%, while the belief that the active strategy would have lower unconditional
average returns but higher returns in an economic downturn--and hence provide hedging benefits
(Moskowitz, 2000; Glode, 2011; Kosowski, 2011; Savov, 2014)--is very or extremely important
to 23%. Turning to the assumptions underlying the Berk and Green (2004) model of actively
managed mutual funds, we find modest support among our respondents. Forty-two percent of all
respondents agree or strongly agree that a fund having outperformed the market in the past is strong
evidence that its manager has good stock-picking skills, and 33% agree or strongly agree that funds
have a harder time beating the market if they manage more assets, but only 19% agree or strongly
agree with both statements. Among those who had pursued an active investment strategy, these
figures are 49%, 42% and 26%, respectively. Overall, the responses suggest that a significant
amount of active fund investment is driven by the belief that superior managers can be identified.


3
 Historically, high momentum, low investment expenditure, high profitability, and value stocks have had high average
returns.

                                                             3
       We ask the concentrated portfolio questions of the 15% of respondents who report that they
currently hold more than 10% of their net worth in a single company's stock. Respondents are
most likely to hold a concentrated position because they think it is a superior investment: 46% say
that a belief that the stock would have higher returns on average than other stocks in the market is
very or extremely important, and 33% say that a belief that the stock would provide less risky
returns than other stocks in the market is very or extremely important. A personal or family
association with the company is described as very or extremely important by 26% of these
respondents. Other factors, including a lockup agreement, signaling and bequest motives, difficulty
finding a buyer, and a desire to maintain a voting stake receive less support (17% or fewer respond
very or extremely important).
       The drawbacks of surveys are well-known. Respondents have no external incentive to
provide accurate responses, which may introduce noise into the responses. Moreover, the meaning
of responses on a Likert scale (e.g., "extremely important") may not be consistent across
respondents. To the extent that the measurement error introduced by these forces is mean-zero
white noise, the ordinal rankings of responses will still be informative. A more fundamental
objection is that individuals might not know the true motivations for their decisions. Just as the
billiards player of Friedman (1956) plays as though he knows the laws of physics despite being
unable to articulate them, a survey respondent may invest as though a factor is important,
regardless of whether she perceives it to be so. Under this view, the fact that an assumption about
investors' thought processes is false is unimportant as long as it generates accurate predictions of
behavior.
       Our survey measures how individuals consciously perceive themselves to have made
financial decisions. Although individuals may not have full insight into the true reasons behind
their decisions, there are at least five reasons why it is worthwhile to understand these perceptions.
First, an individual's perceptions of her decision-making process are unlikely to be entirely
unrelated to her true decision-making process. Every reader of this article has almost certainly
asked somebody recently why that person made a particular choice (e.g., "Why did you choose to
major in economics?") and considered the response to the question to be informative. Harris and
Keane (1998) find that survey responses about how important various health insurance plan
attributes are to respondents have substantial predictive power for which health insurance plan
respondents actually choose. Parker and Souleles (2019) report that asking survey respondents


                                                      4
how much economic stimulus payments in 2008 caused their spending to change yields answers
that correspond well to econometric estimates of these spending responses that exploit the quasi-
random timing of the payments.
           Second, perceptions and beliefs can help researchers choose between theories that have
identical predictions for prices and quantities but very different implications for welfare, policy,
optimal investment strategies, and our understanding of the world. For example, an asset may have
a high expected return either because it is undervalued or because it is highly risky. The latter
explanation becomes less likely if most people believe the asset to have low risk or a low expected
return.
           Third, individuals' perceptions of their decision-making process affect how they will
forecast their future actions, which is itself an input into their actions today. Fourth, these
perceptions can affect an individual's demand for debiasing mechanisms, information, and advice.
Finally, we believe that it is inherently interesting to know what individuals believe about
themselves and the reasons for their behavior.
           The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 discusses the process of
designing our questions and our survey sample. Section 2 presents our questions and results
relating to equity allocation decisions. Sections 3 and 4 present the same for investors' perceptions
of the cross-section of stock returns and active equity investment funds, respectively. Section 5
discusses our questions and results regarding concentrated equity holdings. Section 6 concludes.
An online appendix contains the survey text.


1. Survey design and sample
           Our questions build upon the survey that Choi and Robertson (2020) administered to a
representative sample of U.S. adults after multiple pilot-tests of its questions for comprehension
among Mechanical Turk respondents.4 We retained most of that survey's questions and added
questions about relative wealth concerns, illiquid investments, the expected returns and risks of
high-profitability and high-investment-expenditure stocks, and reasons for choosing to hold a
concentrated equity position. We removed some questions that seemed irrelevant to wealthy




4
    For a discussion of the process used in designing the initial survey questions, see Choi and Robertson (2020).

                                                                 5
individuals, such as whether not having enough money to make investing in stocks worthwhile
drove stock market non-participation.5
        Our questions about the respondents' portfolio equity share and concentrated equity
positions were included as sections of a quarterly survey that UBS conducts of high net worth
individuals. Our questions about investment funds and the cross-section of stock returns were
included as sections of a one-off survey UBS conducted of high net worth individuals. The surveys
were run by Research Now SSI, a company that works with a wide range of partners such as
American Airlines, Hilton, Macy's, and Best Buy to recruit participants for surveys. Individuals
are selected from partners' customer databases and invited via email to join Research Now SSI's
survey panel. Those who have opted out of marketing, live outside the U.S., or are under the age
of 15 are excluded from the invitations. Acceptance rates are between 1% and 5%, depending on
the partner.
        Upon entering the survey panel, respondents fill out a lengthy profiling questionnaire,
which includes questions about their demographic characteristics, work, family, and other
information. All of the data provided are self-reported. Each attribute has a lifecycle in the system.
For example, gender and ethnicity are checked once a year, while residential zip code and
employment status are checked every six months. Respondents not providing reliable data are
removed from the panel. Importantly, because Research Now SSI runs surveys on a variety of
populations for its clients, one does not need to be wealthy in order to enter the panel. As a result,
there is no incentive to misreport one's assets in order to earn compensation for taking surveys.
We discuss evidence at the end of this section that supports the hypothesis that our self-identified
wealthy respondents really are wealthy.
        For the quarterly survey (which asked about the respondent's portfolio equity share and
concentrated equity positions), UBS specified that the sample include 300 UBS clients with at
least $1 million in investable assets, 1,000 non-business-owners with at least $1 million in
investable assets who were not UBS clients, 300 individuals with at least $5 million in investable
assets, and 300 owners of businesses with at least one employee other than the respondent and at




5
  For the sake of survey brevity, we also removed follow-up questions that Choi and Robertson (2020) asked of
individuals who gave certain responses to some questions.

                                                         6
least $250,000 in annual revenue who were not UBS clients.6 For the one-off survey (which asked
about investment funds and the cross-section of stock returns), UBS specified that the sample
include 300 owners of businesses with at least one employee other than the respondent and at least
$250,000 in annual revenue, and 700 non-business-owners with at least $1 million in investable
assets. These sample specifications were driven by UBS's interest in responses to survey questions
not analyzed in this paper.
         Panelists are offered e-Rewards points as an incentive to complete surveys. Points can be
accumulated and redeemed for a variety of items, gift cards, or loyalty program points that depend
upon the partner through which the panelist was recruited. For example, participants recruited
through American Airlines can redeem 50 e-Rewards points for 1,000 American Airlines miles.
Participants recruited through Hilton can redeem 50 e-Rewards points for 2,500 Hilton points.
Respondents whom Research Now SSI believed to be business owners prior to the survey's
administration were offered 6 points to complete one of our surveys, and all others were offered
4.5 points.
         Even though Research Now SSI sent survey invitations only to panelists it believed had a
high chance of meeting the sample criteria, respondents' eligibility was assessed through several
screener questions at the beginning of each survey. The first asked, "What is your role in making
financial and investment decisions for your household?" Those who answered that they make all
decisions, most decisions, or share the decision-making equally with their spouse/partner were
retained, while those who said their spouse/partner makes most decisions or that they do not
participate in the decision-making were excluded.
         The second screener question asked, "Please think about the total value of your
household's investable assets. By investable assets, we mean all of your household's savings and
investments, including deposit accounts, mutual funds, stocks, bonds, IRAs, and 401(k)'s or
403(b)'s, EXCLUDING real estate and any private business assets. Which of the following
broad categories includes your household's total investable assets?" Those who chose a category
under $1 million or who said they preferred not to answer were excluded from the quarterly survey.
Business owners were not excluded from the one-off survey based on this question, but to create



6
  Research Now SSI was not able to identify UBS clients in their panel using data linkages from UBS. Instead, UBS
clients were identified by a question asking at which financial services firms the respondent had an account, product,
or service.

                                                              7
consistency between the two survey samples, we drop from our analysis all one-off survey
respondents who reported less than $1 million of investable assets.
        The third screener question asked in what year the respondent was born. Respondents born
after 1991 were excluded from the survey, which means that the minimum allowed age is 26.
Finally, respondents who said they were a business owner were asked how many employees they
had and what their approximate annual revenue was. Those who had no employees other than
themselves or who had less than $250,000 of annual revenue were dropped.
        For the quarterly survey, 3,633 individuals clicked the link, 1,662 completed the survey,
319 only partially completed the survey, and 1,652 were disqualified--1,550 for not meeting the
sample criteria and 102 because the quota for respondents of their type had already been reached.
This survey was completed between March 14, 2018, and March 20, 2018. The average time spent
answering questions (including those not part of this study) was 32 minutes, while the median
completion time was 26 minutes. The questions for our study took about 5 minutes to complete.
For the one-off survey, 2,214 individuals clicked the invitation link, 1,020 completed the survey,
81 only partially completed the survey, and 1,113 were disqualified--631 for not meeting the
sample criteria and 482 because the quota for respondents of their type had already been filled. We
eliminate an additional 198 respondents who reported having less than $1 million in investable
assets, leaving a total of 822 respondents. This survey was completed between January 8, 2018,
and January 12, 2018. The average time spent answering questions (including those not part of this
study) was 12 minutes, while the median completion time was 10 minutes. The questions for our
study took about 3 minutes to complete. Research Now SSI conducts survey quality checks by
monitoring the time it takes to complete a survey and dropping participants who take suspiciously
little time.
        Table 1 shows summary statistics for our two survey samples. Our sample characteristics
skew away from those of the overall U.S. population in ways that are consistent with our
respondents truthfully reporting their high-net-worth status.
        Our respondents tend to be older, with 87% of the quarterly survey and 83% of the one-off
survey respondents being 55 or above. This differs greatly from the age distribution in the 2016
Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF), where only 44% of all respondents are 55 or above, but is
similar to the 76% of SCF respondents with more than $1 million of investable assets who are 55




                                                     8
or above.7 Relative to these wealthy SCF respondents, our respondents tend to be older, although
they are less likely to be 75 or above. Reflecting their older ages, our respondents are more likely
to be retired (58% and 49% in the two surveys) than the wealthy SCF respondents (36%).
         Our respondents are overwhelmingly married or living with a partner (85%), which is
similar to the proportion among wealthy SCF respondents (83%) and much higher than the
proportion in the overall SCF (60%). Between 72% and 73% of our respondents are male. The
"SCF respondent" is the household member who is identified by the SCF to be the most financially
knowledgeable8--closely related to the financial decision-making screening criterion we used for
our surveys. Among wealthy SCF respondents, 70% are male, which is much closer to our
samples' proportion than the 48% of all SCF respondents who are male.
         We also see that the distribution of investable financial assets in our survey samples is
similar to what is found in the SCF conditional on having more than $1 million. About half of all
three samples have between $1 million and $2 million, about a third have between $2 million and
$5 million, about a tenth have between $5 million and $10 million, and about 5% have over $10
million. The most common primary sources of wealth in our sample are labor income (45%) and
investments (39%). Finally, median household income in our surveys is between $150,000 and
$249,999. This is considerably lower than in the wealthy SCF sample, but our survey question did
not specify to respondents a definition of income. The SCF uses an expansive definition of income
that includes realized capital gains and withdrawals from retirement accounts, which many people
may not colloquially consider to be income. The lower income in our samples may also be due to
the larger fraction of retirees in our samples relative to the wealthy SCF population.


2. Equity Share of Portfolio
         In this section, we discuss the factors that determine the fraction of wealth invested in
equities, for which we have relevant responses from the 1,662 individuals in our quarterly survey.
Table 2 shows the mean and standard deviation of respondents' portfolio allocation (in percent) to
each asset class, as well as the fraction of the sample that has positive holdings in each asset class.



7
  We define investable assets in the SCF as total assets minus primary residence minus residential property excluding
primary residence minus net equity in non-residential real estate minus businesses (with either an active or non-active
interest).
8
  This is different from the household head, which the SCF automatically designates as the male in a heterosexual
couple and the older individual in a same-sex couple.

                                                               9
On average, respondents hold 53% of their portfolio in equities. Non-participation in equities is
rare--only 6% of respondents hold no stocks, in contrast to the 48% non-participation rate in the
total 2016 SCF population. There is strong home bias in respondents' equity holdings: 83% of
their stocks are U.S. stocks. Only 10% hold any assets in hedge funds, venture capital, or private
equity, but conditional on doing so, they allocate 13% of their portfolio to these funds.
        We begin by asking respondents, "How important are the following factors in determining
the total percentage of your net worth that is currently invested in stocks--both in private
businesses and publicly traded companies? (Don't count factors that affect which stocks you hold
but don't affect the total amount invested across all stocks.)" The answer options for each question
are "Not important at all," "A little important," "Moderately important," "Very important," and
"Extremely important." The order in which factors are presented is randomized across
respondents.
        Table 3 presents a high-level summary of the results across all categories. The first column
shows the percent of respondents who report that each factor is very or extremely important.9 The
second column shows the percent who report that the relevant factor is moderately, very, or
extremely important. The third column shows the mean rating when each possible response is
given a numerical value between 1 and 5 (where 5 represents "extremely important"). The fourth
column shows the average value of a standardized variable designed to capture whether a
respondent indicates that a factor is particularly important relative to the other factors. This
variable is constructed by subtracting the mean numerical value of the respondent's ratings from
the numerical value of each of his responses and dividing by the standard deviation of that
respondent's numerical rating values. This standardization purges some of the variation in ratings
that arises from different individuals having different interpretations of the response categories.
The correlations between the first measure and each of the other three are 0.82 or higher, so we
will focus on the percent who report a factor to be very or extremely important.
        A few factors stand out as particularly important. No matter which column we sort on, the
top five remain the same: Advice from a professional financial advisor, personal experience
investing in the stock market, experience of living through stock market returns, rare disaster risk,


9
  The question about the importance of professional advice was asked only of respondents who answered yes to the
question, "Do you work with a professional financial advisor who helps you manage your finances and make
investment decisions?" We impute an answer of "not important at all" for this factor for the 542 respondents (33% of
the quarterly survey sample) who said they do not work with a professional financial adviser.

                                                            10
and the risk of illness or injury. At least 20% of respondents rate each of these factors as very or
extremely important in determining their equity share. Among employed respondents, years left
until retirement is also one of the most important factors, with 26% rating it as very or extremely
important.
       At the other end of the spectrum are six factors cited as very or extremely important by no
more than 7% of respondents: loss aversion; external habit; illiquid non-equity investments; advice
from a friend, family member or acquaintance; wealth relative to other rich people; and advice
from media. These are the six lowest-ranked factors when sorting by the percent rating a factor to
be at least very important, or when sorting by the percent rating a factor to be at least moderately
important. They are all in the bottom eight when sorting by the average numerical rating, and in
the bottom nine when sorting by the standardized rating.
       We perform three diagnostics on our respondents' answers. First, we estimate the
likelihood that we would observe this spread of responses if respondents were answering
randomly. Let p be the empirical probability, pooled across all the factors in Table 3, of a
respondent rating a factor as very or extremely important. We run a Monte Carlo analysis where
respondents randomly and independently rate each factor about which they were asked as very or
extremely important with probability p, and as moderately, a little, or not important with
probability 1 ­ p. The actual across-factor standard deviation of the percent rating each factor as
very or extremely important is 6.3%, which is more than five times larger than the maximum
standard deviation we obtain across 1,000 simulation runs. Second, in Section 2.7, we show that
the first five principal components explain 46% of the variance in whether individuals rate factors
as very or extremely important. Hence, it is exceedingly unlikely that respondents were answering
in a random or haphazard fashion.
       Finally, we investigate the possibility that our respondents' answers about the importance
of a factor are affected by how simple or complex our description of that factor is. This could occur
because individuals are more likely to understand, and therefore identify with, factors described in
simpler terms. Alternatively, if respondents are trying to appear more sophisticated, they may
overstate the importance of factors with more complex descriptions. We estimate a linear
regression over the 38 factors asked of all respondents, where the dependent variable is the
proportion of respondents who describe a particular factor as very or extremely important, and the
explanatory variable is a measure of how complex the description of that factor is. We consider


                                                     11
two complexity measures: the number of words in the description, and the description's Flesch-
Kincaid grade level.10 Although we find a positive correlation between both measures of
complexity and the proportion (where 1% is coded as 1, not 0.01) of respondents who describe
each factor as very or extremely important, neither relationship is statistically distinguishable from
zero: the coefficient on number of words is 0.06, with a t-statistic of 0.52, and the coefficient on
grade level is 0.28, with a t-statistic of 1.33.11 Moreover, neither complexity measure is able to
explain much of the variation in the dependent variable: the R-squared of the two regressions are
0.0085 and 0.029, respectively. Together, we interpret these diagnostics as evidence suggesting
that the respondents are answering the questions we posed to them in a reasonably thoughtful way.
        In the exposition that follows, we group the factors into six categories: social and personal
factors, background risks and assets, expected return beliefs, factors from neoclassical asset pricing
models, nonstandard preferences, and miscellaneous factors.12 We also report results in the tables
separately by whether the respondent has assets greater than $5 million (i.e., in the top 1.1% of the
SCF wealth distribution), is employed, or is at least 65 years old. However, for the sake of brevity,
our discussion will focus on the full sample results.


2.1. SOCIAL AND PERSONAL FACTORS
        We measure the importance of nine social and personal factors. In Table 4, we present the
percentage of respondents who report that each of these factors is very or extremely important in
determining the proportion of their portfolio invested in equity, along with the exact text used to
describe each factor in the survey.
        We ask respondents about advice from various sources: a professional financial advisor the
respondent hired ("advice from professional financial advisor"); advice from a friend, family
member, or other acquaintance ("advice from friend, family, or other acquaintance"); and advice
from media sources ("advice from media"). We also ask about the flip side of this: the difficulty
of finding a trustworthy investment advisor ("lack of trustworthy advisor"). Guiso, Sapienza, and
Zingales (2008) present evidence that a general lack of trust in other market participants is an


10
   The Flesch-Kincaid grade level of a text is defined as (0.39 ´ number of words/number of sentences) + (11.8 ´
number of syllables/number of words) ­ 15.59.
11
   These t-statistics are calculated using heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors.
12
   Some of the descriptions of the survey questions and their motivation in the remainder of the paper are taken from
Choi and Robertson (2020).

                                                             12
important driver of reluctance to invest in stocks, so we ask respondents about the importance of
the concern that companies, managers, brokers, or other market participants might cheat them out
of their investments ("low trust in market participants"). We additionally ask about the importance
of a general lack of knowledge about how to invest ("lack of knowledge about how to invest").
       A growing literature documents the role of personal experience in financial decision
making. For example, Vissing-Jørgensen (2003) finds that the idiosyncratic component of an
investor's own portfolio return positively affects her expectation of future aggregate stock market
returns, and Malmendier and Nagel (2011) find evidence that households who have lived through
higher stock market returns invest more in stocks. To investigate whether individuals are conscious
of these effects, we ask our respondents about the importance of feelings, attitudes, and beliefs
about the stock market that came from living through stock market returns, whether or not they
were invested in stocks at the time ("experience of living through returns"), and the importance of
feelings, attitudes, and beliefs about the stock market gotten from personal experiences of investing
in the stock market ("personal experience investing in stock market").
       Religion has been hypothesized to influence economic risk-taking since at least Weber
(1930), and a large body of empirical literature has found that Catholics are less risk averse than
Protestants (Barsky et al., 1997; Hilary and Hui, 2009; Kumar, 2009; Kumar, Page, and Spalt,
2011; Shu, Sulaeman, and Yeung, 2012; Schneider and Spalt, 2016, 2017; Benjamin, Choi, and
Fisher, 2016). We therefore ask respondents whether their religious beliefs, values, and
experiences played an important role in their equity allocation decision ("religion").
       Social and personal factors dominate the top of the summary list in Table 3, representing
three of the top four (and five of the top nine) factors. The most commonly cited factor--both in
this section (as shown in Table 4) and overall--is advice from a professional financial advisor,
which is described as very or extremely important by 33% of respondents. Next are personal
experience investing in the stock market (24%) and experience of living through returns (23%).
Lack of a trustworthy advisor and religion are each described as very or extremely important by
18% of respondents. Relatively few respondents point to a lack of trust in market participants
(12%) or a lack of knowledge about how to invest (11%), and the least important factors are advice
from peers and family members (6%) and advice from the media (5%).




                                                     13
2.2. BACKGROUND RISKS AND ASSETS
          We explore how eight background risks and assets affect allocations to equities. Even
though our sample consists of individuals with substantial financial assets, human capital may still
represent a substantial fraction of their total wealth. This is particularly likely to be true of
individuals who are employed (40% of our sample), under 65 years old (42%), or both (29%).
Because human capital is subject to both wage risk and health risk, it could affect an individual's
optimal allocation to equities, whether or not these risks are correlated with stock returns (Bodie,
Merton, and Samuelson, 1992; Pratt and Zeckhauser, 1987; Kimball, 1993; Gollier and Pratt,
1996).13 To capture portfolio effects of human capital risk, we ask respondents about the
importance of the risk of expenses related to illness or injury to themselves or a family member
("risk of illness/injury expenses"). We also ask respondents who are currently employed about the
importance of unemployment and wage risk in their equity allocation decision ("labor income
risk").
          An individual's human capital wealth depends on the number of future years in which the
individual expects to earn labor income. As a result, as an individual approaches retirement, the
individual's financial portfolio represents an increasing fraction of the individual's total wealth.
This should affect the allocation of the financial portfolio (Bodie, Merton, and Samuelson, 1992).
We therefore ask employed respondents about the importance of the number of years remaining
until retirement ("years left until retirement"). Time until retirement can also affect portfolio
choice in other ways, even if respondents fail to consider the human capital portion of their total
wealth--for example, due to a belief in time diversification or negative serial correlation of stock
returns (Barberis, 2000). We therefore separately ask about the importance of the difference
between current financial wealth and the wages that will be earned over the remainder of one's
lifetime ("human capital") to isolate the human capital channel. We also ask all respondents about
the importance of time remaining until a significant non-retirement expense such as a home
purchase, school tuition, or a major charitable donation ("time until significant non-retirement
expense"), motivated by Wachter (2002), who shows that the timing of intermediate-period


13
  The empirical literature on background labor income risk has generally found negative effects on equity allocations
(Guiso, Jappelli, and Terlizzese, 1996; Hochguertel, 2003; Angerer and Lam, 2009; Palia, Qi, and Wu, 2014; Schmidt,
2016; Fagereng, Guiso, and Pistaferri, 2018). While the estimated magnitudes tend to be small, this may be because
of difficulty isolating exogenous variation in wage variability that is truly risk rather than the result of the individual's
choices. Rosen and Wu (2004) find that households in poor health hold less in risky assets.

                                                                 14
consumption can affect the optimal current portfolio allocation if risky asset returns are mean-
reverting.
       We ask about the importance of two other types of investment. Flavin and Yamashita
(2002), Cocco (2004), and Yao and Zhang (2005) present models where housing affects the
demand for stocks. While housing may be a smaller proportion of wealthy individuals' portfolios
than it is of the typical homeowner, we nevertheless ask respondents about concern that one's
home value might fall ("home value risk"). We also ask about the importance of significant
holdings in illiquid non-equity assets, such as fine art or real estate ("illiquid non-equity
investments"). Ang, Papanikolaou, and Westerfield (2014) find that uncertainty about when
illiquid assets can be traded reduces optimal allocations to both liquid and illiquid risky assets.
       Finally, we investigate the effect of inflation. Stocks hedge against inflation over longer
horizons (Boudoukh and Richardson, 1993; Solnik and Solnik, 1997), although stock returns are
negatively correlated with inflation over shorter horizons (Lintner, 1975; Bodie, 1976; Nelson,
1976; Fama and Schwert, 1977; Gultekin, 1983). We ask our respondents about the importance of
the belief that when their living expenses increase unexpectedly, the stock market will tend to rise
("stocks are an inflation hedge").
       Table 5 summarizes the results for these eight factors. Among factors that apply to all
respondents, risk of illness or injury expenses is the most prominent, with 20% describing it as
very or extremely important. This factor is notable for having the largest difference among all 40
of our equity share factors between respondents with more versus less than $5 million. Only 12%
of those with more than $5 million cite health expense risk as very or extremely important, versus
22% of those with less than $5 million.
       Among employed respondents, the number of years remaining until retirement is somewhat
more important than health risk; 26% of employed respondents say it is very or extremely
important, compared to 24% of employed respondents who say the same about risk of illness or
injury expenses. Twenty-six percent is considerably higher than the 17% of employed respondents
who say that the human capital fraction of their total wealth is very or extremely important,
indicating that belief in time diversification or negative return autocorrelation plays some role in
making time horizon important. In contrast, labor income risk receives less support, with only 12%
of employed respondents describing it as very or extremely important. The importance of stocks
as an inflation hedge receives a similar level of support among all of our respondents (11%). Two


                                                     15
factors associated with concentrated investment positions--home value risk (9%) and significant
illiquid non-equity investments (6%)--are somewhat less salient. The number of years until a
significant non-retirement expenditure receives roughly the same level of support, with 8% of
respondents describing it as very or extremely important.


2.3. EXPECTED RETURN BELIEFS
       We consider the importance of four factors related to beliefs about expected stock market
returns. We ask about the belief that low stock market returns tend to be followed by more low
stock market returns ("stock market returns have momentum"). DeBondt (1993), Fisher and
Statman (2000), Vissing-Jørgensen (2003), and Greenwood and Shleifer (2014) find survey
evidence that individuals hold extrapolative beliefs about aggregate stock market returns on
average. Positive return autocorrelation should decrease an individual's unconditional willingness
to hold equities, since it implies that poor stock returns are associated with worse future investment
opportunities (Choi and Mertens, 2019). We also ask about the converse: whether a belief that low
stock market returns tend to be followed by high stock market returns played an important role in
their portfolio choice ("stock market returns mean-revert"). Because negative return
autocorrelation implies that stocks are a hedge, it should make people unconditionally more willing
to hold stocks (Barberis, 2000).
       If individuals believe that expected returns are time-varying, their view that expected
returns are particularly high or low around the survey date could affect their equity share at that
point in time. We therefore ask respondents whether a belief that the returns they can expect to
earn from investing in stocks right now are lower than usual played an important role in their
portfolio choice ("expected stock returns lower than usual right now"), as well as the reverse
question about expected returns being higher than usual ("expected stock returns higher than usual
right now").
       The results are presented in Table 6. Fifteen percent of respondents describe a belief that
expected returns are currently higher than usual as a very or extremely important factor, which is
significantly higher than the 10% who cite expected returns being lower than usual. This optimism
may have been fed by the fact that the S&P 500 returned 17% in the twelve months prior to March
2018, the quarterly survey date, and had a negative return in only one of those months.
Nevertheless, more respondents cite as very or extremely important a belief in negative stock


                                                     16
return correlation (15%) than a belief in positive stock return correlation (9%). The coexistence of
optimism fueled by the prior year's returns and a belief in mean reversion is not necessarily
contradictory. For example, it could be that respondents believe that returns are positively
autocorrelated over the short run but mean revert over longer horizons. Vissing-Jørgensen (2003)
finds that individuals' forecasts of one-year-ahead stock returns respond strongly positively to the
market index level, but forecasts of stock returns over the next ten years are insensitive to recent
returns.


2.4. NEOCLASSICAL ASSET PRICING FACTORS
       We ask about nine factors drawn from neoclassical representative agent asset pricing
models. Each factor has been hypothesized to affect the equity premium, which implies that it
affects portfolio choice.
       One of the most basic predictions of standard asset pricing theory is that assets that tend to
have high payoffs when the marginal utility of money is high are more attractive than assets that
tend to have low payoffs when the marginal utility of money is high. To investigate whether
wealthy individuals consciously think in these terms, we ask each respondent to rate the
importance of this factor for his investment decision ("return covariance with marginal utility of
money"). Specifically, we ask about the concern that when the respondent especially needs the
money, the stock market will tend to drop. We did not want to tell the respondent that this
relationship between returns and marginal utility actually exists, which is why we describe this
factor as a "concern" about such a property. It would be natural for a respondent who does not
believe that this relationship exists to say that such a concern is not an important factor. As with
the other theories addressed in this section, we do not directly measure our respondents' beliefs
about the existence or nature of the phenomenon emphasized by the theory.
       A special case in the class of models where return covariance with the marginal utility of
money matters is the consumption-based capital asset pricing model (CCAPM) (Rubenstein, 1976;
Breeden and Litzenberger, 1978; Lucas, 1978; Breeden, 1979). In the CCAPM, an asset's risk
premium is determined by its return covariance with consumption growth. We ask respondents
about the importance of the concern that when they need to cut their spending, the stock market
will tend to drop ("return covariance with marginal utility of consumption").




                                                    17
         We also ask about models based on specific conceptions of consumption risk. Following
the rare disaster literature (e.g., Rietz, 1988; Barro, 2006; Gabaix, 2012; Wachter, 2013), we ask
our respondents about the importance of a concern that a dollar invested in stocks will lose more
money than a dollar in a bank savings account or government bond during an economic disaster
like the Great Depression, where the U.S. economy's annual output drops by more than 10% ("rare
disaster risk"). Our definition of a disaster is drawn from the cutoff of Barro and Ursúa (2012). If
a respondent does not believe that such a disaster is possible, believes that safe assets would lose
as much value as the stock market in such a disaster, or if she has not considered such a possibility,
then it would be natural to respond that such a concern is not important for her equity allocation
decision.
         An alternative hypothesis about the nature of consumption risk comes from the long-run
risk model (Bansal and Yaron, 2004), which emphasizes a concern that, when bad news arrives
about the expectation and volatility of consumption growth over the long run, stock returns tend
to be low. We ask separate questions about the importance of a concern that stocks tend to drop
with the arrival of bad news about aggregate consumption growth over the next year ("risk of
aggregate consumption over next year"), or with the arrival of bad news about aggregate
consumption growth over the five-year period starting one year in the future ("risk of long-run
aggregate consumption"). Whereas the first of these could be viewed as a nearly contemporaneous
covariance (consistent with the risk the CCAPM is concerned with), the second is more clearly
about the long term.14 The five-year period in the latter question is based on the half-life of
expected growth shocks in the Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2012) calibration, which is about 2.25
years.
         We ask analogous questions about economic uncertainty--concern about stock return
covariance with the arrival of news about higher aggregate consumption uncertainty over the next
year ("risk of aggregate consumption volatility over next year") or with the arrival of news about
higher aggregate consumption uncertainty over the ten-year period starting one year in the future
("risk of long-run aggregate consumption volatility"). The ten-year period in the second question
is motivated by the high persistence of volatility shocks in Bansal, Kiku, and Yaron (2012).



14
   Cochrane (2017, p. 957) emphasizes the importance of news about non-contemporaneous future consumption
growth in distinguishing the long-run risks model from the Merton ICAPM model. In the latter, the "reduction in
today's consumption reveals all we need to know about how much the bad news hurts."

                                                          18
       Piazzesi, Schneider, and Tuzel (2007) hypothesize that the relevant consumption risk is
consumption composition risk. They posit a representative household with nonseparable
preferences over housing and a numeraire good, leading it to fear changes to the relative share of
housing in its consumption basket. Because of this, assets that have low numeraire payoffs when
housing consumption is low relative to numeraire consumption command a higher risk premium.
We thus ask about the importance of a concern that stock returns will tend to be low when the
quality of one's physical living situation is dropping more quickly than the rest of one's material
quality of life ("consumption composition risk").
       Finally, Chetty and Szeidl (2007) and Chetty, Sándor, and Szeidl (2017) show how
difficulty in adjusting some components of one's consumption bundle in the short run can cause
individuals to invest less in risky assets. In such a situation, a negative shock must be
accommodated entirely by adjusting uncommitted consumption (e.g., food), raising the local
curvature of utility. To capture this factor, we ask respondents about the importance of fixed
expenses like mortgage payments, tuition bills, charitable commitments, etc. that are difficult to
adjust in the short run ("consumption commitments").
       Rare disaster risk receives substantially more support among our respondents than the other
neoclassical asset pricing factors. Table 7 shows that 23% of respondents describe it as a very or
extremely important factor. Indeed, it is the fourth most important factor among all the ones we
ask our entire sample about (see Table 3). Covariance with the marginal utility of money is next,
with 15% of respondents describing it as very or extremely important, but this level of support is
surprisingly middling for such a fundamental building block of modern finance theory. It is also
the factor in Table 7 that shows the greatest divergence between the level of support received from
those with more than $5 million of investable assets (11%) and those with less (16%), further
calling into question its importance in determining asset prices. Consistent with the well-
documented empirical failure of the CCAPM (Mehra and Prescott, 1985), covariance with the
marginal utility of consumption receives even less support (9%). Interestingly, the aggregate
version of the CCAPM ("risk of aggregate consumption over next year") receives more support
(13%) than the version tied to the respondent's own marginal utility of consumption.
       Long-run consumption risk and long-run consumption volatility risk are cited as very or
extremely important slightly more often (14% and 13%, respectively) than the aforementioned risk
of aggregate consumption over the next year or the risk of aggregate consumption volatility over


                                                    19
the next year (12%). Like covariance with the marginal utility of consumption, consumption
composition risk (11%) and consumption commitments (9%) receive relatively little support.


2.5. NONSTANDARD PREFERENCES
       We investigate the importance of five types of nonstandard preferences: loss aversion,
ambiguity aversion (which we do not separately identify from the effects of parameter
uncertainty), internal habit, external habit, and the desire to be wealthier than other wealthy people.
       Barberis, Huang, and Santos (2001), Barberis and Huang (2001), and Barberis, Huang, and
Thaler (2006) present models where loss aversion reduces the demand for stocks. Although loss
aversion is frequently described as a property of a utility function under which the pain from a loss
is greater than the enjoyment from an equivalent-sized gain, an agent with classical risk aversion
feels this way as well. In order to isolate the importance of loss aversion, we focus on a
distinguishing feature of loss aversion: an aversion to small gambles (Segal and Spivak, 1990;
Rabin, 2000), which an expected utility agent regards with near risk neutrality due to the local
linearity of her utility function. We ask respondents how important worry about the possibility of
even small losses on their stock investments is to their equity allocation decisions ("loss aversion").
       A Bayesian investor will reduce her allocation to the risky asset as uncertainty about its
return distribution increases, and an ambiguity averse (Ellsberg, 1961) investor will reduce her
risky allocation even further (Dow and Werlang, 1992; Barberis, 2000; Garlappi, Uppal, and
Wang, 2007; Kan and Zhou, 2007). Dimmock et al. (2016) show that those who exhibit ambiguity
aversion in a laboratory experiment are less likely to hold stocks in their real-life portfolios, and
conditional on holding stocks, allocate less to them. However, they also find that many individuals
are ambiguity-seeking. We elicit the role of ambiguity and parameter uncertainty, which we do
not disentangle from each other, by asking about the importance of not having a good sense of the
average returns and risks of stocks ("ambiguity/parameter uncertainty").
       We ask respondents questions about two kinds of habits. In the Constantinides (1990)
internal habit model, individuals derive utility from consumption today relative to their own past
consumption. In contrast, in the Campbell and Cochrane (1999) external habit model, individuals
derive utility from their own consumption today relative to past aggregate consumption. In both
models, habit decreases the willingness to hold stocks by increasing risk aversion. We investigate
the extent to which individuals consciously consider these factors by asking respondents about the


                                                      20
importance of the difference between their current material standard of living and the level they
are used to ("internal habit"), and the importance of the difference between their current material
standard of living and the level everybody else around them has experienced recently ("external
habit").
       A desire to increase one's wealth relative to wealthy peers may also drive risky asset
allocations. Roussanov (2010) models a "getting ahead of the Joneses" motive and finds that it can
explain why the very wealthy take more financial risks than the remainder of the population. We
therefore ask about the importance of a desire to become wealthier than other wealthy people
("desire to become wealthier than other wealthy people").
       Table 8 shows that we find relatively little support for these non-standard preferences.
Ambiguity/parameter uncertainty is described as very or extremely important by 10% of
respondents, internal habit by 9%, and loss aversion by 7%. Six percent of respondents describe
external habit and a desire to become wealthier than other wealthy people as very or extremely
important.


2.6. MISCELLANEOUS FACTORS
       Finally, we include five factors that do not neatly fall into the above categories. We ask
about the importance of rules of thumb, such as investing 100 minus age percent of assets in stocks,
or investing one-third of one's wealth in each of stocks, bonds, and real estate ("rule of thumb").
We also ask about two transactional factors related to those in the model of Lagos (2010), where
equities command a high expected return because they are less useful for facilitating exchange:
the concern that stock investments will take too long to convert into spendable cash in an
emergency ("stocks take too long to convert to cash in emergency"), and the amount of cash the
respondent needs to have on hand to pay routine expenses ("need cash on hand for routine
expenses"). As a point of comparison to the two personal experience factors discussed in Section
2.1, we ask respondents about the importance of what they know about the stock market's returns
during the decades before they were born ("stock market returns before I was born"). Finally, we
ask about the difficulty associated with selling private equity shares ("hard to sell PE shares"),
which might decrease equity investment ex ante but increase it ex post if the respondent would
like to reduce her equity exposure but cannot find a buyer for her private equity stake.




                                                    21
        Table 9 presents the results. Despite the fact that our sample consists of high net worth
individuals, 19% reported that having cash on hand for routine expenses is a very or extremely
important factor in their decision about what percentage of their net worth to allocate to equity.
While this factor is slightly more important among individuals with less than $5 million (20%), it
receives substantial support even among respondents with more than $5 million (16%). Returns
from the decades before the respondent's birth are described as very or extremely important by
only 9% of respondents--substantially less than the 24% and 23% who say the same for their
personal experiences investing in the stock market and their experience of living through stock
market returns, respectively. Those who are younger than 65 are more likely (13%) to say that
those pre-birth returns are very or extremely important than those older than 65 (6%). The
remaining three factors garner even less support than pre-birth returns: illiquidity of private equity
shares (9%), stocks taking too long to convert to cash (8%), and a rule of thumb (7%).


2.7. PRINCIPAL COMPONENTS ANALYSIS
        In this section, we discuss a principal components analysis that explores whether
respondents who report that a certain equity share factor is very or extremely important tend to
report that certain other equity share factors are also very or extremely important. The factors we
include in this analysis are the 38 factors in Table 3 about which all quarterly survey respondents
were asked.15 The outcome variables are binary indicators for whether the respondent rated each
factor as very or extremely important.
        Using the common criterion of retaining only principal components with an eigenvalue
above 1, we identify five important principal components which together capture 46% of the
variance in whether individuals rate factors as very or extremely important. To aid interpretation,
we perform an orthogonal varimax rotation of these principal components. We employ the
common rule of thumb of considering loadings whose absolute value is at least 0.30 to be
economically significant when interpreting the principal components, but show in Table 10 all
factors whose loading on a principal component has an absolute value of at least 0.20.16


15
   We include advice from a professional financial adviser in this analysis even though respondents who did not use
such an adviser were not asked about this factor, since we impute "not at all important" responses to this factor for
those who were not asked about it (see footnote 9).
16
   There is an arbitrariness to this commonly used cutoff. Tabachnick and Fidell (2007) suggest an alternative cutoff
of 0.32, but this higher cutoff would leave no significant factors in the first principal component.

                                                             22
        The first principal component captures external social factors and non-professional advice.
Those who rate the desire to become wealthier than other rich people more highly also tend to rate
advice from the media as more important. Other factors whose loadings are just below the 0.30
cutoff also fall into the categories of external social factors (external habit) and non-professional
advice (rules of thumb and peer advice).
        The second principal component captures the importance of neoclassical asset pricing
factors: long-run risk, aggregate consumption covariance with stock returns, rare disaster risk, and
stock return covariance with the marginal utility of money. The third principal component shows
that those whose lack of trust in advisors or market participants importantly influenced their
portfolio allocation also tend to rate their religious beliefs, values, and experiences as more
important for this choice. The fourth principal component loads heavily on personal experiences
of returns and investing. The fifth principal component indicates that those who rate advice from
a professional financial advisor as more important also tend to say that their need for cash on hand
for routine expenses is important for their equity share.
        Table 11 shows the results of regressing portfolio equity share on the first five principal
component scores, using either ordinary least squares or tobit regressions where the dependent
variable is considered censored at 0% and 100%. The scores are normalized so that they each have
unit standard deviation. Higher scores on the first three principal components (external social
factors and non-professional advice, neoclassical asset pricing factors, and trust and religion) are
associated with lower equity allocations, although the statistical significance of the coefficient on
the first principal component score fades when respondent demographics are controlled for. Higher
scores on the fourth principal component (personal experiences) are associated with higher equity
allocations, and scores on the fifth principal component have no significant relationship with
equity allocations. These coefficients do not necessarily represent causal relationships, as it is quite
plausible that relevant omitted variables such as risk aversion are correlated with principal
component scores. Nonetheless, the significance of these correlations is further suggestive
evidence that the ratings provided by our respondents contain meaningful information rather than
being pure noise.




                                                      23
2.8. COMPARISON WITH REPRESENTATIVE U.S. SAMPLE
          How does our wealthy sample differ from typical U.S. households in the factors that affect
portfolio equity share? In this subsection, we compare our results to those of Choi and Robertson
(2020), who administered a similar survey to a representative sample of U.S. households. Table
12 lists, for all 37 factors both samples were asked about, the percent in each sample who
responded that the factor is very or extremely important. Generally, wealthy investors are less
likely to describe a factor as very or extremely important, which could either be because academic
theories are a poorer description of the wealthy's decision-making process or because the wealthy
have a higher bar for describing something as very or extremely important. In the discussion below,
we focus on comparing each sample's ordinal rankings of the factors.
          There are a number of similarities between the two groups. Both cite years left until
retirement, the risk of illness or injury, the need for cash on hand for routine expenses, and rare
disasters as among the most important factors for determining their risky share. Among the least
important factors for both groups are external habit, advice from non-professionals, and rules of
thumb.
          However, the typical household's asset allocation is much more driven by discomfort with
the market, financial constraints, and human capital considerations. Lack of trust in market
participants and lack of knowledge about how to invest are the sixth and seventh most important
factors for the representative sample, whereas these factors are ranked 17th and 21st for the wealthy.
In contrast, the wealthy's market decisions are aided by advice from a professional financial
advisor (their number one most important factor, versus the 23rd most important factor for the
representative sample), and they lean more on their personal experiences (third and fourth most
important factors for the wealthy, versus 21st and 26th most important factors for the representative
sample). Time until a significant non-retirement expense and consumption commitments are the
9th and 10th most important factors for the representative sample, but only the 32nd and 28th most
important factors for the wealthy. Labor income risk and the human capital fraction of one's total
wealth are the 5th and 8th most important factors for the representative sample, versus the 18th and
22nd most important factors for the wealthy. The lesser importance of human capital considerations
for the wealthy is sensible given their older ages and the fact that they have significant financial
assets.




                                                     24
3. Cross-Section of Stock Returns
       In this section, we discuss respondent beliefs about four well-established equity return
anomalies: value (Fama and French, 1992), momentum (Jegadeesh and Titman, 1993),
profitability, and investment (Fama and French, 2015; Hou, Xue, and Zhang, 2015).
       Because not everybody is familiar with the terms "value stock" and "growth stock," we
begin by telling the 822 respondents in the one-off survey, "A value stock is a stock that has a low
price relative to its company's current profits (and other fundamentals). A growth stock is a stock
that has a high price relative to its company's current profits (and other fundamentals)." We then
ask them to complete eight sentences. The first is about the relative risk of value and growth stocks:
"Compared to a growth stock, I expect a value stock to normally be..." Respondents choose among
four possible answers: "Riskier over the next year, on average," "Equally risky over the next year,
on average," "Less risky over the next year, on average," and "No opinion."
       We next ask them to complete a sentence about the relative expected returns of value and
growth stocks. This sentence reads, "Compared to a growth stock, I expect a value stock to
normally have..." The answer options are, "Higher returns over the next year, on average," "About
the same returns over the next year, on average," "Lower returns over the next year, on average,"
and "No opinion."
       We ask respondents to complete similar sentences about the risks and expected returns of
momentum (comparing "a stock whose price fell a lot over the past year" to "a stock whose price
rose a lot over the past year"), profitability (comparing "the stock of a company with low current
profits" to "the stock of a company with high current profits"), and investment (comparing "the
stock of a company that currently has low investment expenditures" to "the stock of a company
that currently has high investment expenditures").
       Table 13 summarizes the responses. Respondents are quite convinced that value stocks are
less risky than growth stocks, with 47% ranking value as less risky versus only 13% saying the
reverse. Betermeier, Calvet, and Sodini (2017) argue that households hold growth stocks in order
to hedge human capital risk, which is why they tilt their portfolios towards value stocks as they
age and their human capital risk diminishes. However, in our sample of retired wealthy investors,
who have no human capital risk, the fraction that says that value stocks are less risky than growth
stocks is nearly identical to the fraction in the full sample. Consistent with a belief in a positive
relationship between risk and expected return, respondents collectively believe that value stocks

                                                     25
have lower expected returns than growth stocks, although with considerably less conviction: 24%
say value stocks have lower expected returns, compared to 22% who say the reverse. Choi and
Robertson (2020) find that in a sample representative of the entire U.S. population, respondents
also tend to believe that value stocks have lower expected returns and lower risk. Of course,
historically, value stocks have had higher average returns than growth stocks, which could be due
to investors undervaluing value stocks. Interestingly, respondents with assets above $5 million are
more likely to expect value stocks to have higher average returns than the reverse (29% versus
22%), while continuing to believe that value stocks are less risky than growth stocks. In other
words, in the view of these richer investors, value stocks are good deals.
        In contrast, respondents collectively believe that high-momentum stocks are bad deals.
More people believe that high-momentum stocks are riskier rather than safer (28% versus 8%),
and more also believe that high-momentum stocks have lower expected returns than higher
expected returns (27% versus 10%). This pattern holds for respondents with assets above $5
million as well. Historically, high-momentum stocks have appeared to be anomalously good deals,
enjoying higher, not lower, average returns than low-momentum stocks. Choi and Robertson
(2020) find that their representative sample also tends to believe that high-momentum stocks have
higher risk, but (unlike our wealthy respondents) with higher expected returns.
        Our respondents' beliefs about high-profitability stocks line up more closely with empirical
academic research, which finds that these stocks seem to offer positive alphas. Thirty-four percent
believe that high-profitability stocks have higher expected returns--consistent with the historical
data--versus only 11% who believe the opposite. Thirty-eight say that high-profitability stocks
have less risk, versus only 8% who believe the opposite. Those with more than $5 million of assets
have even more positive beliefs about high-profitability stocks: 41% believe they have higher
expected returns, and 53% believe they have lower risk.
        Finally, respondents think that high-investment-expenditure stocks are bad deals. More
believe that they have lower expected returns (24%) than higher expected returns (18%), consistent
with the historical pattern. But more believe that they are riskier (26%) than less risky (12%). The
pattern of beliefs about this stock characteristic is similar among those with more than $5 million
in assets.
        These responses cast some doubt on rational explanations for why these stock
characteristics are associated with different expected returns. For two of the four characteristics,


                                                    26
wealthy investors believe that their correlation with expected returns has a sign that is the opposite
of what is in the historical data. For three of the characteristics, wealthy investors do not believe
there is a positive association between risk and expected return. That said, there are ways to
rationalize these responses. It is possible that at the time of the survey, the rational forward-looking
expectation of the relationship between a characteristic and expected returns was the reverse of
their historical relationship. It could also be that the relationship between characteristics and risk
specific to wealthy investors has a different sign than it does for the marginal investor.


4. Active Equity Investment Managers
       The merits of active investing are controversial. French (2008) and many others argue that
investing in an actively managed fund instead of an index fund is a mistake. On the other hand,
Moskowitz (2000), Glode (2011), Kosowski (2011), and Savov (2014) argue that investment in
active funds could be rational despite their lower average returns, since active funds outperform in
states of the world where marginal utility is high, such as recessions. In the model of Berk and
Green (2004), the returns on active management, net of fees, should match those of passive
management on average. Two key features of this model are that managers have heterogeneous
skill in generating alpha, and this skill has decreasing returns to scale. In equilibrium, there is
neither persistence in alphas nor outperformance of active management because money rationally
flows out of funds with low past returns and into funds with high past returns until every manager's
alpha going forward is the same in expectation.
       To investigate why the wealthy invest in active equity strategies, we first tell the 822
respondents in the one-off survey, "An active stock investment strategy tries to beat the overall
stock market's return by picking stocks to buy. A passive stock investment strategy holds stocks
in order to match the performance of a market benchmark (such as the S&P 500 stock market
index) as closely as possible." We then ask, "Have you ever pursued an active investment strategy
through a fund or a professional manager?" Three hundred seventy-one (45%) report that they had,
399 (49%) report that they had not, and a further 52 (6%) report being unsure of the answer to the
question. We then ask the 371 who answered yes, "How important were the following factors in
your decision(s) to pursue an active strategy instead investing the money in a passive strategy?"
The factors we ask about are the recommendation of an investment advisor that they hired
("advisor recommendation"), a belief that the active strategy would give them higher returns on


                                                      27
average than a passive strategy ("higher returns"), and a belief that even though the active strategy
would have lower returns than a passive strategy on average, it would have higher returns when
the economy is doing poorly ("hedging"). The answer options are "Not important at all," "A little
important," "Moderately important," Very important," and "Extremely important."
       To investigate whether our respondents have beliefs that are consistent with the
assumptions of the Berk and Green (2004) model, we ask all respondents--whether or not they
had invested in an active strategy--how much they agree with the statement that when a stock
investment fund following an active strategy gets more money to manage, it becomes harder for it
to generate higher returns than the overall stock market ("decreasing returns to scale"). We also
ask how much they agree with the statement that when a stock investment fund following an active
strategy has had significantly higher past returns than the overall stock market, this is strong
evidence that its manager has good stock-picking skills ("managerial skill"). For both questions,
the answer options are "Strongly disagree," "Disagree," "Neither agree nor disagree," "Agree,"
and "Strongly agree."
       Table 14 summarizes the results on motives for pursuing an active strategy. Two of the
three factors behind choosing to invest actively receive substantial support: advisor
recommendation, which is described as very or extremely important by 45% of eligible
respondents, and a belief that the active strategy would deliver higher average returns (44%).
Hedging demand also receives non-trivial support, and is described as very or extremely important
by 23% of eligible respondents.
       Table 15 reports levels of agreement with the Berk and Green (2004) assumptions. Forty-
two percent of respondents agree or strongly agree that past returns are strong evidence of stock-
picking skill, but only 33% agree or strongly agree that there are decreasing returns to scale in
active equity investment management. Relatively few disagree or strongly disagree with these
statements (9% and 14%, respectively), but about half of our sample (49% and 53%, respectively)
have no opinion about the statements, responding that they neither agree nor disagree.
Interestingly, levels of agreement with the assumptions are substantially higher among those who
have actively invested than among those who have not. Despite moderate levels of agreement with
each of the two assumptions in isolation, only 19% of respondents (and 26% of those who have
invested actively) agree with both assumptions.




                                                     28
           Of course, the fact that only a minority of respondents agree with the model assumptions
need not imply that the model does not accurately explain the dynamics of the mutual fund
industry. If the model's assumptions about fund managers are true, only the marginal investors
need to believe them in order to equalize expected alphas across funds. On the other hand, as the
number of investors who believe the assumptions declines, the less likely it becomes that they will
be the marginal investors, especially because fund managers cannot be sold short.
           Overall, the pattern of responses suggests that a significant amount of active investing
through funds by the wealthy is driven by a belief that they can identify managers who will deliver
superior unconditional average returns.


5. Concentrated Stock Ownership
           Wealthy households are particularly likely to hold a large undiversified equity position
(Carroll, 2002; Roussanov, 2010). We therefore ask undiversified wealthy respondents nine
questions about why they chose to forego the benefits of diversification.
           We begin by asking the individuals in our quarterly survey whether they currently hold
more than 10% of their net worth in a single company's stock. Of the 1,662 respondents, 15%
replied that they do. More specifically, 12% report that more than 10% of their net worth is
currently invested in the stock of one and only one company, and an additional 3% report that
more than 10% of their net worth is currently invested in the stock of each of two or more
companies.17
           We ask the 256 respondents with concentrated holdings, "How does the fact that you have
a concentrated ownership stake in one or more companies affect the total amount of stock (summed
across both concentrated and non-concentrated investments) you choose to hold in your portfolio?"
The possible answer choices are, "It makes me hold more in stocks than I otherwise would," "It
has no effect on the total amount I invest in stocks," "It makes me hold less in stocks than I
otherwise would," and "I don't know." A surprisingly high 67% report that their concentrated
position has no effect on their total amount invested in equities; standard portfolio choice theory
predicts that their total equity position should decrease. Slightly more say that the concentrated
position causes them to hold more in stocks than less in stocks (14% and 12%, respectively).18


17
     Four percent of respondents reported being unsure about the answer to the question.
18
     The remaining 6% report that they do not know the effect on their allocation to equities.

                                                                29
These results suggest that, while concentrated holdings affect (by definition) the allocations of
high net worth investors within equities, they have little effect on average on these investors' total
investment in equities.
        We then ask a series of questions about why the individual decided to hold a concentrated
position, with question order randomized across respondents. We tell respondents who have
concentrated positions in multiple companies to answer these questions with respect to their largest
single holding.19 As in the equity share section, the answer options are, "Not important at all," "A
little important," "Moderately important," "Very important," and "Extremely important."
        There is substantial evidence that a controlling stake in a corporation is more valuable than
an equivalent number of shares held by dispersed investors (e.g., Barclay and Holderness, 1989;
Dyck and Zingales, 2004). Therefore, we ask about the desire to maintain a significant voting stake
in the company ("voting stake"). We also ask about a personal reason for choosing to maintain a
concentrated position: a strong association between the individual or her family and the company
("personal/family association"). Iconic examples of what we have in mind here are the association
between Henry Ford and Ford Motor Company, or Sam Walton and Walmart.
        The existence of such a strong association might engender a desire for it to continue to the
next generation. To measure this motive, we ask about the desire to hold a significant amount of
stock in the company in order to pass it on to one's heirs ("bequest motive"). This question may
also capture a tax motivation for holding a concentrated position, although its wording doesn't
match such a motivation precisely. The U.S. federal income tax code subsidizes bequests of
appreciated assets by adjusting the cost basis of bequeathed assets to equal the assets' value at the
time of the bequest, allowing the unrealized capital gains accrued during the decedent's life to
permanently escape taxation (Joulfaian, 2005). Thus, it may be advantageous to hold onto an
ownership position that has appreciated and bequeath it to one's heirs in kind rather than
diversifying the stake and paying the resulting capital gains tax.
        We ask about two reasons driven by selling constraints. The first is the difficulty of finding
a buyer for the shares in question ("difficulty finding a buyer"). This could be due to the illiquidity
of the private equity market, or concerns about adverse price impact when selling shares in a public



19
  We show the following text to illustrate how to answer when the respondent has more than one concentrated holding:
"For example, if 11% of your net worth is invested in Company A and 12% in Company B, please answer with respect
to your investment in Company B."

                                                            30
market. The second is the importance of lockup agreements that prevent the individual from selling
shares in either an investment fund or the company itself ("lockup"). Corporate executives are
often granted restricted stock that cannot be sold for a number of years. In addition, lockups of 90
or 180 days are common after IPOs and SEOs (Karpoff et al., 2013).
        Lockups and restricted stock exist to mitigate adverse selection and moral hazard. Even in
the absence of formal restrictions, an individual who is significant to a company may choose to
hold a large stake in order to certify the company's quality to outsiders and assure other
shareholders that his interests are aligned with theirs. To measure these motives, we ask about the
desire to build others' confidence in the company ("signaling confidence") and the desire to build
others' confidence in the respondent's commitment to the company as an employee or board
member ("signaling commitment").
        Finally, we ask about two factors related to beliefs. First, we ask about the belief that the
stock would have higher returns on average than other stocks in the market ("higher returns").
Second, we ask about the belief that the stock would be less risky than other stocks ("lower risk").
These motives may be diagnostic of overconfidence or familiarity bias. An individual stock's
return is at best only modestly predictable without inside information, and any given individual
stock usually has large amounts of idiosyncratic risk, which would cause a substantial expected
return premium to be required to rationalize holding a concentrated position in it.20
        Table 16 shows that the most popular factor motivating a concentrated holding is the belief
that the stock would provide higher returns on average (46%), followed by the belief that it would
provide lower risk (33%). Respondents who describe one of these two factors as very or extremely
important are disproportionately likely to say the same thing about the other. Of the 117 individuals
who say higher expected returns are very or extremely important, 72 (62%) say the same about
lower risk. These 72 individuals represent 85% of the 85 individuals who describe lower risk as
very or extremely important. Unconditionally, 28% of the respondents with concentrated equity
holdings say both that a belief that the stock in question would provide higher returns and the
belief that it would provide lower risk are very or extremely important.
        The other factors are cited less frequently than the union of the beliefs that the concentrated
position has higher expected returns and lower risk. Twenty-six percent of respondents report that


20
  The exclusion of relative wealth concerns (DeMarzo, Kaniel, and Kremer, 2004; Roussanov, 2010) from this section
of questions was an unintentional oversight.

                                                           31
a personal or family association with the company is a very or extremely important factor in their
decision to hold a concentrated position in a single company's stock. Lockups are very or
extremely important to 17% of respondents, and signaling confidence in the company is a very or
extremely important factor to 14% of respondents, as is signaling commitment to the company.
Bequests are very or extremely important to 13%. The desire to maintain a significant voting stake
and difficulty in finding a buyer are each described as very or extremely important by 12% of
respondents.
       In sum, the belief that the concentrated position is a superior investment seems to be the
predominant motive for foregoing diversification.


6. Conclusion
       Our surveys of wealthy U.S. individuals reveal that professional advice, time until
retirement, personal experience, rare disaster risk, and health risk are the most important factors in
determining their portfolio equity share. Our respondents often exhibit confidence in their ability
to identify superior investment opportunities. At the individual stock level, rich investors
collectively believe that high-profitability stocks offer high risk-adjusted returns. Indeed, it is not
that such stocks have risk that is elevated, but not sufficiently elevated to offset their higher
expected returns: our respondents tend to believe that these stocks have lower risk while offering
higher expected returns. Conversely, they believe that high-momentum and high-investment-
expenditure stocks offer low risk-adjusted returns, featuring lower expected returns and higher
risk. Value stocks are thought to have both low expected returns and lower risk. Nearly half of our
respondents have invested in an active investment strategy through a fund or professional manager,
and the most common reasons for doing so are professional advice and the expectation that they
will earn higher average returns from active investing. Past fund manager performance is seen as
a strong evidence of stock-picking skill, and there is only weak consensus that there are
diminishing returns to scale in active management; less than a fifth of respondents believe both of
these propositions to be true. Concentrated equity holdings are most often motivated by a belief
that the overweighted stock will have higher returns and less risk than other stocks.


References
Ang, Andrew, Dimitris Papanikolaou, and Mark M. Westerfield, 2014. "Portfolio choice with
    illiquid assets." Management Science 60, 2737-2761.

                                                      32
Angerer, Xiaohong, and Pok-Sang Lam, 2009. "Income risk and portfolio choice: An empirical
    study." Journal of Finance 64, 1037-1055.
Angrist, Joshua D., Guido W. Imbens, and Donald B. Rubin, 1996. "Identification of causal effects
    using instrumental variables." Journal of the American Statistical Association 91, 444-455.
Bansal, Ravi, Dana Kiku, and Amir Yaron, 2012. "An empirical evaluation of the long-run risks
    model for asset prices." Critical Finance Review 1, 183-221.
Bansal, Ravi, and Amir Yaron, 2004. "Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset pricing
    puzzles." Journal of Finance 59, 1481-1509.
Barberis, Nicholas, 2000. "Investing for the long run when returns are predictable." Journal of
    Finance 55, 225-264.
Barberis, Nicholas, and Ming Huang, 2001. "Mental accounting, loss aversion, and individual
    stock returns." Journal of Finance 56, 1247-1292.
Barberis, Nicholas, Ming Huang, and Tano Santos, 2001. "Prospect theory and asset prices."
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 1-53.
Barberis, Nicholas, Ming Huang, and Richard H. Thaler, 2006. "Individual preferences, monetary
    gambles, and stock market participation: A case for narrow framing." American Economic
    Review 96, 1069-1090.
Barclay, Michael, and Clifford Holderness, 1989. "Private benefits of control of public
    corporations." Journal of Financial Economics 25, 371-395.
Barro, Robert J., 2006. "Rare disasters and asset markets in the twentieth century." Quarterly
    Journal of Economics 121, 823-866.
Barro, Robert J., and José F. Ursúa, 2012. "Rare macroeconomic disasters." Annual Review of
    Economics 4, 83-109.
Barsky, Robert B., F. Thomas Juster, Miles S. Kimball, and Matthew D. Shapiro, 1997.
    "Preference parameters and behavioral heterogeneity: An experimental approach in the
    Health and Retirement Study." Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 537­579.
Benjamin, Daniel J., James J. Choi, and Geoffrey Fisher, 2016. "Religious identity and economic
    behavior." Review of Economics and Statistics 98, 617-637.
Berk, Jonathan B., and Richard C. Green, 2004. "Mutual fund flows and performance in rational
    markets." Journal of Political Economy 112, 1269-1295.
Betermeier, Sebastien, Laurent E. Calvet, and Paolo Sodini, 2017. "Who are the value and growth
    investors?" Journal of Finance 72, 5-46.
Bewley, Truman, 1999. Why Wages Don't Fall During a Recession. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
    University Press.
Bodie, Zvi, 1976. "Common stocks as a hedge against inflation." Journal of Finance 31, 459-470.
Bodie, Zvi, Robert C. Merton, and William F. Samuelson, 1992. "Labor supply flexibility and
    portfolio choice in a life cycle model." Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 16, 427-
    449.
Boudoukh, Jacob, and Matthew Richardson, 1993. "Stock returns and inflation: A long-horizon
    perspective." American Economic Review 83, 1346-1355.
Breeden, Douglas T., 1979. "An intertemporal asset pricing model with stochastic consumption
    and investment opportunities." Journal of Financial Economics 7, 265-296.
Breeden, Douglas T., and Robert H. Litzenberger, 1978. "Prices of state-contingent claims implicit
    in option prices." Journal of Business 51, 621-651.
Campbell, John Y., and John H. Cochrane, 1999. "By force of habit: A consumption-based
    explanation of aggregate stock market behavior." Journal of Political Economy 107, 205-251.


                                                    33
Carroll, Christopher D., 2002. "Portfolios of the rich." In Luigi Guiso, Michael Haliassos, and
     Tulio Jappelli, eds., Household Portfolios: Theory and Evidence. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
     389-430.
Chetty, Raj, László Sándor, and Adam Szeidl, 2017. "The effect of housing on portfolio choice."
     Journal of Finance 72, 1171-1212.
Chetty, Raj, and Adam Szeidl, 2007. "Consumption commitments and risk preferences." Quarterly
     Journal of Economics 122, 831-877.
Cheung, Yin-Wong, and Menzie D. Chinn, 2001. "Currency traders and exchange rate dynamics:
     A survey of the US market." Journal of International Money and Finance 20, 439-471.
Cheung, Yin-Wong, Menzie D. Chinn, and Ian W. Marsh, 2004. "How do UK-based foreign
     exchange dealers think their market operates?" International Journal of Finance and
     Economics 9, 289-306.
Cheung, Yin-Wong, and Clement Yuk-Pang Wong, 2000. "A survey of market practitioners'
     views on exchange rate dynamics." Journal of International Economics 51, 401-419.
Chinco, Alex, Samuel M. Hartzmark, and Abigail Sussman, 2020. "Necessary evidence for a risk
     factor's relevance." Working paper.
Choi, James J., and Thomas M. Mertens, 2019. "Extrapolative expectations and the equity
     premium." Working paper.
Choi, James J. and Adriana Z. Robertson, 2020. "What Matters to Individual Investors? Evidence
     from the Horse's Mouth." Journal of Finance 75, 1965-2020.
Cochrane, John H., 2017. "Macro-finance." Review of Finance 21, 945-985.
Cocco, Joao F., 2004. "Portfolio choice in the presence of housing." Review of Financial Studies
     18, 535-567.
Constantinides, George M., 1990. "Habit formation: A resolution of the equity premium puzzle."
     Journal of Political Economy 98, 519-543.
Das, Sreyoshi, Camelia M. Kuhnen, and Stefan Nagel, 2020. "Socioeconomic status and
     macroeconomic expectations." Review of Financial Studies 33, 395-432.
Deaton, Angus, and Nancy Cartwright, 2018. "Understanding and misunderstanding randomized
     controlled trials." Social Science & Medicine 210, 2-21.
DeBondt, Werner, 1993. "Betting on trends: Intuitive forecasts of financial risk and return."
     International Journal of Forecasting 9, 355-371.
DeMarzo, Peter M., Ron Kaniel, and Ilan Kremer, 2004. "Diversification as a public good:
     Community effects in portfolio choice." Journal of Finance 59, 1677-1715.
Dimmock, Stephen G., Roy Kouwenberg, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Kim Peijnenburg, 2016.
     "Ambiguity aversion and household portfolio choice puzzles: Empirical evidence." Journal
     of Financial Economics 119, 559-577.
Dow, James, and Sérgio Ribeiro da Costa Werlang, 1992. "Uncertainty aversion, risk aversion,
     and the optimal choice of portfolio." Econometrica 60, 197-204.
Dyck, Alexander and Luigi Zingales, 2004. "Private Benefits of Control: An International
     Comparison." Journal of Finance, 59, 537-600.
Ellsberg, Daniel, 1961. "Risk, ambiguity, and the Savage axioms." Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 75, 643-669.
Fagereng, Andreas, Luigi Guiso, and Luigi Pistaferri, 2018. "Portfolio choices, firm shocks, and
     uninsurable wage risk." Review of Economic Studies 85, 437-474.
Fama, Eugene F., 1970. "Efficient capital markets: A review of theory and empirical work."
     Journal of Finance 25, 383-417.


                                                  34
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1992. "The cross-section of expected stock returns."
     Journal of Finance 47, 427-465.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2015. "A five-factor asset pricing model." Journal of
     Financial Economics 116, 1-22.
Fama, Eugene F., and G. William Schwert, 1977. "Asset returns and inflation." Journal of
     Financial Economics 5, 115-146.
Fisher, Kenneth, and Meier Statman, 2000. "Investor sentiment and stock returns." Financial
     Analysts Journal 56(2), 16-23.
Flavin, Marjorie, and Takashi Yamashita, 2002. "Owner-occupied housing and the composition
     of the household portfolio." American Economic Review 92, 345-362.
French, Kenneth R., 2008. "Presidential address: The cost of active investing." Journal of Finance
     63, 1537-1573.
Friedman, Milton, 1953. Essays in Positive Economics. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Gabaix, Xavier, 2012. "Variable rare disasters: An exactly solved framework for ten puzzles in
     macro-finance." Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, 645-700.
Garlappi, Lorenzo, Raman Uppal, and Tan Wang, 2007. "Portfolio selection with parameter and
     model uncertainty: A multi-prior approach." Review of Financial Studies 20, 41-81.
Giglio, Stefano, Matteo Maggiori, Johannes Stroebel, and Stephen Utkus, 2020. "Five facts about
     beliefs and portfolios." Working paper.
Glode, Vincent, 2011. "Why mutual funds `underperform.'" Journal of Financial Economics 99,
     546-559.
Gollier, Christian, and John W. Pratt, 1996. "Risk vulnerability and the tempering effect of
     background risk." Econometrica 64, 1109-1123.
Graham, John R., and Campbell R. Harvey, 2001. "The theory and practice of corporate finance:
     Evidence from the field." Journal of Financial Economics 60, 187-243.
Greenwood, Robin, and Andrei Shleifer, 2014. "Expectations of returns and expected returns."
     Review of Financial Studies 27, 714-746.
Guiso, Luigi, Tullio Jappelli, and Daniele Terlizzese, 1996. "Income risk, borrowing constraints,
     and portfolio choice." American Economic Review 86, 158-172.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, 2008. "Trusting the stock market." Journal of
     Finance 63, 2557-2600.
Guletkin, N. Bulent, 1983. "Stock market returns and inflation: Evidence from other countries."
     Journal of Finance 38, 49-65.
Harris, Katherine M., and Michael P. Keane, 1998. "A model of health plan choice: Inferring
     preferences and perceptions from a combination of revealed preference and attitudinal data."
     Journal of Econometrics 89, 131-157.
Heckman, James J., and Sergio Urzúa, 2010. "Comparing IV with structural models: What simple
     IV can and cannot identify." Journal of Econometrics 156, 27-37.
Hilary, Gilles, and Kai Wai Hui, 2009. "Does religion matter in corporate decision making in
     America?" Journal of Financial Economics 93, 455­473.
Hochguertel, Stefan, 2003. "Precautionary motives and portfolio decisions." Journal of Applied
     Econometrics 18, 61-77.
Hou, Kewei, Chen Xue, and Lu Zhang, 2015. "Digesting anomalies: An investment approach."
     Review of Financial Studies 28, 650-705.
Joulfaian, David, 2005. "Choosing between gifts and bequests: How taxes affect the timing of
     wealth transfers." Journal of Public Economics 89, 2069-2091.


                                                   35
Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, and Sheridan Titman, 1993. "Returns to buying winners and selling loser:
     Implications for stock market efficiency." Journal of Finance 48, 65-91.
Kan, Raymond, and Guofu Zhou, 2007. "Optimal portfolio choice with parameter uncertainty."
     Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 42, 621-656.
Karpoff, Jonathan M., Gemma Lee, and Ronald W. Masulis, 2013. "Contracting under asymmetric
     information: Evidence from lockup agreements in seasoned equity offerings." Journal of
     Financial Economics 110, 607-626.
Kimball, Miles S., 1993. "Standard risk aversion." Econometrica 61, 589-611.
Kosowski, Robert, 2011. "Do mutual funds perform when it matters most to investors? US mutual
     fund performance and risk in recessions and expansions." Quarterly Journal of Finance 1,
     607-664.
Kozak, Serhiy, Stefan Nagel, and Shrihari Santosh, 2018. "Interpreting factor models." Journal of
     Finance 73, 1183-1223.
Kuchler, Theresa, and Basit Zafar, 2019. "Personal experiences and expectations about aggregate
     outcomes." Journal of Finance 74, 2491-2542.
Kuhnen, Camelia M., and Andrei C. Miu, 2017. "Socioeconomic status and learning from financial
     information." Journal of Financial Economics 124, 349-372.
Kumar, Alok, 2009. "Who gambles in the stock market?" Journal of Finance 64, 1889-1933.
Kumar, Alok, Jeremy Page, and Oliver Spalt, 2011. "Religious beliefs, gambling attitudes, and
     financial market outcomes." Journal of Financial Economics 102, 671-708.
Lagos, Ricardo, 2010. "Asset prices and liquidity in an exchange economy." Journal of Monetary
     Economics 57, 913-930.
Lintner, John, 1956. "Distribution of incomes of corporations among dividends, retained earnings,
     and taxes." American Economic Review 46, 97-113.
Lintner, John, 1975. "Inflation and stock returns." Journal of Finance 30, 259-280.
Liu, Hongqi, Cameron Peng, Wei A. Xiong, and Wei Xiong, 2020. "Resolving the excessive
     trading puzzle: An integrated approach based on surveys and transactions." Working paper.
Lucas, Robert E., 1978. "Asset prices in an exchange economy." Econometrica 46, 1429-1445.
Malmendier, Ulrike, and Stefan Nagel, 2011. "Depression babies: Do macroeconomic experiences
     affect risk taking?" Quarterly Journal of Economics 126, 373-416.
Mehra, Rajnish, and Edward C. Prescott, 1985. "The equity premium: A puzzle." Journal of
     Monetary Economics 15, 145-161.
Moskowitz, Tobias, 2000. "Mutual fund performance: An empirical decomposition into stock-
     picking talent, style, transactions costs, and expenses: Discussion." Journal of Finance 55,
     1695-1703.
Nelson, Charles R., 1976. "Inflation and rates of return on commons stocks." Journal of Finance
     31, 471-483.
Palia, Darius, Yaxuan Qi, and Yangru Wu, 2014. "Heterogeneous background risks and portfolio
     choice: Evidence from micro-level data." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 46, 1687-
     1720.
Parker, Jonathan A., and Nicholas S. Souleles, 2019. "Reported effects versus revealed-preference
     estimates: Evidence from the propensity to spend tax rebates." American Economic Review:
     Insights 1, 273-290.
Piazzesi, Monika, Martin Schneider, and Selale Tuzel, 2007. "Housing, consumption and asset
     pricing." Journal of Financial Economics 83, 531-569.



                                                  36
Pratt, John W., and Richard J. Zeckhauser, 1987. "Proper risk aversion." Econometrica 55, 143-
     154.
Rabin, Matthew, 2000. "Risk aversion and expected-utility theory: A calibration theorem."
     Econometrica 68, 1281-1292.
Rietz, Thomas A., 1988. "The equity risk premium: A solution." Journal of Monetary Economics
     22, 117-131.
Rosen, Harvey S., and Stephen Wu, 2004. "Portfolio choice and health status." Journal of
     Financial Economics 72, 457-484.
Roussanov, Nikolai, 2010, "Diversification and Its Discontents: Idiosyncratic and Entrepreneurial
     Risk in the Quest for Social Status." Journal of Finance 65, 1755-1788.
Rubenstein, Mark, 1976. "The valuation of uncertain income streams and the pricing of options."
     Bell Journal of Economics 7, 407-425.
Savov, Alexi, 2014. "The price of skill: Performance evaluation by households." Journal of
     Financial Economics 112, 213-231.
Schmidt, Lawrence D. W., 2016. "Climbing and falling off the ladder: Asset pricing implications
     of labor market event risk." Working paper.
Schneider, Christoph, and Oliver Spalt, 2016. "Conglomerate investment, skewness, and the CEO
     long shot bias." Journal of Finance 71, 635-672.
Schneider, Christoph, and Oliver Spalt, 2017. "Acquisitions as lotteries: Do managerial gambling
     attitudes influence takeover decisions?" Critical Finance Review 6, 77-132.
Segal, Uzi, and Avia Spivak, 1990. "'First order versus second order risk aversion." Journal of
     Economic Theory 51, 111-125.
Shu, Tao, Johan Sulaeman, and P. Eric Yeung, 2012. "Local religious beliefs and mutual fund
     risk-taking behaviors." Management Science 58, 1779-1796.
Solnik, Bruno, and Vincent Solnik, 1997. "A multi-country test of the Fisher model for stock
     returns." Journal of International Financial Markets 7, 289-301.
Tabachnick, Barbara G., and Linda S. Fidell, 2007. Using Multivariate Statistics, 5th edition.
     Boston, MA: Pearson Education, Inc.
Vissing-Jørgensen, Annette, 2003. "Perspectives on behavioral finance: Does `irrationality'
     disappear with wealth? Evidence from expectations and actions." NBER Macroeconomics
     Annual 18, 139-194.
Wachter, Jessica A., 2002. "Portfolio and consumption decisions under mean-reverting returns:
     An exact solution for complete markets." Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 37,
     63-91.
Wachter, Jessica A., 2013. "Can time-varying risk of rare disasters explain aggregate stock market
     volatility?" Journal of Finance 68, 987-1035.
Weber, Max, 1930. The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. London: Allen and Unwin.
Wolff, Edward N., 2017, "Household Wealth Trends in the United States, 1962 to 2016: Has
     Middle Class Wealth Recovered?." NBER Working Paper 24085.
Yao, Rui, and Harold H. Zhang, 2005. "Optimal consumption and portfolio choices with risky
     housing and borrowing constraints." Review of Financial Studies 18, 197-239.




                                                   37
                                                       Table 1: Sample Summary Statistics
This table shows the percent of our respondents who have various characteristics for each of our samples. The quarterly survey (N = 1,662)
contains the respondents who were given questions about the equity share of their portfolio and concentrated equity holdings. The one-off
survey (N = 822) contains the respondents who were given questions about active equity investment strategies and the cross section of stock
returns. The SCF columns show the characteristics of 2016 Survey of Consumer Finances respondents--either those with more than $1 million
of investable assets or all SCF respondents.
                                 Quarterly   One-off      SCF     SCF                                    Quarterly   One-off    SCF     SCF
                                  survey     survey      (rich)   (all)                                   survey     survey    (rich)   (all)
 Age                                                                      Gender
   < 27                            0.0%       0.0%       0.5%      7.8%     Male                          72.1%      72.7%     69.9%    47.5%
   27-34                          1.1%        1.7%       0.9%     13.7%
   35-44                          3.2%        3.8%       6.3%     16.8%   Investable financial assets
   45-54                          8.5%       11.9%      16.4%     18.0%     $0 - $999,999                  0.0%       0.0%      0.0%    93.1%
   55-64                          29.3%      31.0%      34.3%     19.4%     $1,000,000-$1,999,999         46.9%      57.2%     50.8%     3.5%
   65-74                          45.1%      39.7%      24.4%     14.3%     $2,000,000-$4,999,999         31.4%      33.3%     32.3%     2.2%
   75-84                          11.6%      10.8%      12.2%      7.4%     $5,000,000-$9,999,999         16.6%       7.2%     10.8%     0.7%
    85                            1.1%        1.1%       5.1%      2.6%     $10,000,000+                   5.1%       2.3%      6.2%     0.4%

 Employment status                                                        Primary source of wealth
   Self-employed                  10.7%      12.0%      19.2%      9.4%     Salary/Bonus/Stock options    45.4%        --        --      --
   Employed full-time             25.2%      31.5%      36.3%     46.4%     Inheritance/Marriage           5.2%        --        --      --
   Employed part-time             4.5%        5.6%       4.3%      7.7%     Investments                   39.4%        --        --      --
   Unemployed                     0.4%        0.6%       0.6%      4.0%     Business income                8.8%        --        --      --
   Student                        0.1%        0.0%       0.0%     1.0%
   Retired                        57.9%      49.1%      36.1%     27.0%   Household income
   Homemaker                      1.3%        1.1%       3.6%      4.5%     < $50,000                      0.6%       0.9%      2.4%    45.9%
                                                                            $50,000 - $74,999              5.4%       7.7%      3.6%    16.8%
 Living situation                                                           $75,000 - $99,999             11.2%      11.4%      5.0%    11.3%
   Married/living with partner    84.6%        ---      83.0%     60.1%     $100,000 - $149,999           26.8%      27.6%     13.2%    12.2%
   Divorced                       4.8%         ---       5.6%     14.3%     $150,000 - $249,999           30.6%      32.0%     23.5%     8.0%
   Widowed                        4.5%         ---       7.2%      8.6%     $250,000 - $399,999           16.2%      13.3%     20.8%     3.0%
   Single                         6.1%         ---       4.1%     16.9%     $400,000+                      8.6%       6.8%     31.5%     2.7%




                                                                            38
                                   Table 2: Portfolio Holdings
This table shows the mean and standard deviation of the fraction of portfolio held in each asset
class, as well as the percent of the sample that has positive holdings in the asset class. The sample
is respondents to the quarterly survey (N = 1,662). The question that elicited these percentages
read, "Please provide your approximate overall asset allocation across all your accounts. Please
refer to your latest statement(s) if needed."
                                      Mean           Standard deviation      Has positive holdings
 Cash                                 11.1%               15.2%                     93.1%
 CDs/Money market funds                9.0%               15.5%                     57.5%
 Government bonds                      4.1%                9.1%                     34.8%
 Other U.S. bonds                      9.6%               14.0%                     51.5%
 International bonds                   1.7%                5.0%                     19.2%
 Stocks                               53.3%               26.4%                     94.3%
    U.S. stocks                       44.3%               25.0%                     93.3%
    International stocks               7.7%                9.9%                     58.0%
    Hedge funds/Venture                1.3%                5.9%                     10.2%
    capital/Private equity
 Structured products                  4.4%                 14.1%                    18.5%
 Real estate investments              5.9%                 12.5%                    34.8%
 (excluding own home)
 Commodities/futures/options          0.9%                  4.3%                     9.7%




                                                     39
                  Table 3: Summary of Importance of Equity Allocation Factors
The first column shows the percent of quarterly survey respondents (N = 1,662) who described the
factor as very or extremely important. The second shows the percent of respondents who described
the factor as at least moderately important. The third column shows the mean response, where the
responses are translated into a five-point scale: not important = 1, a little important = 2, moderately
important = 3, very important = 4, and extremely important = 5. The fourth column shows the
average value of a standardized variable designed to capture whether a respondent indicated that
a factor is important relative to the other factors. This variable is constructed by subtracting the
mean numerical value of the respondent's ratings from the numerical value of each response and
dividing by the standard deviation of that respondent's numerical rating values.

                                                              Very or    Moderately                Mean
                                                             extremely   important    Mean     standardized
                                                             important    or more     rating      rating
  Advice from a professional financial advisor                 33.2%       53.3%       2.59        0.44
  Years left until retirement*                                25.8%        58.1%       2.64        0.34
  Personal experience investing in stock market               23.6%        60.3%       2.71        0.64
  Experience of living through stock market returns           22.9%        59.8%       2.70        0.63
  Rare disaster risk                                          22.9%        54.8%       2.66        0.59
  Risk of illness/injury expenses                             20.0%        52.8%       2.58        0.50
  Need cash on hand for routine expenses                      19.3%        44.3%       2.36        0.26
  Lack of trustworthy advisor                                 18.4%        39.0%       2.21        0.06
  Religious beliefs, values, and experiences                  17.5%        35.4%       2.10        -0.06
  Expected stock returns higher than usual right now          14.8%        51.6%       2.47        0.38
  Return covariance with marginal utility of money            14.6%        41.5%       2.33        0.21
  Stock market returns mean-revert                            14.5%        51.0%       2.44        0.33
  Risk of long-run aggregate consumption                      14.3%        44.5%       2.41        0.30
  Risk of long-run aggregate consumption volatility           13.2%        44.8%       2.39        0.26
  Risk of aggregate consumption over next year                12.7%        44.0%       2.36        0.24
  Risk of aggregate consumption volatility over next year     12.4%        45.6%       2.37        0.26
  Lack of trust in market participants                        12.2%        35.7%       2.12        -0.02
  Labor income risk*                                          12.1%        34.5%       2.04        -0.33
  Stocks are an inflation hedge                               11.4%        43.9%       2.30        0.19
  Consumption composition risk                                10.8%        36.0%       2.11        -0.05
  Lack of knowledge about how to invest                       10.7%        31.3%       2.00        -0.16
  Human capital fraction of total wealth                      10.3%        35.9%       2.07        -0.08
  Ambiguity / Parameter uncertainty                            9.9%        33.0%       2.02        -0.14
  Expected stock returns lower than usual right now            9.5%        38.8%       2.20        0.07
  Stock market returns have momentum                           9.4%        35.6%       2.10        -0.04
  Internal habit                                               9.4%        32.6%       1.99        -0.17
  Stock market returns before I was born                       9.1%        35.3%       2.10        -0.05
  Home value risk                                              9.0%        30.4%       1.99        -0.18
  Consumption commitments                                      9.0%        30.3%       1.92        -0.24
  Return covariance with marginal utility of consumption       8.8%        35.1%       2.11        -0.03
  Hard to sell private equity shares                           8.5%        26.7%       1.82        -0.37
  Stocks take too long to convert to cash in emergency         7.9%        30.9%       1.99        -0.17
  Time until significant non-retirement expense                7.6%        27.8%       1.85        -0.33
  Rule of thumb                                                7.3%        34.2%       2.04        -0.09
  Loss aversion                                                7.2%        25.3%       1.86        -0.32
  External habit                                               6.3%        26.4%       1.80        -0.37
  Illiquid non-equity investments                              6.3%        25.7%       1.76        -0.42
  Advice from a friend, family member, or acquaintance         6.0%        23.8%       1.79        -0.38
  Desire to become wealthier than other rich people            5.7%        19.8%       1.60        -0.61
  Advice from media                                            5.0%        21.4%       1.72        -0.46
* Among employed respondents only (N = 670).

                                                            40
                                                             Table 4: Social and Personal Factors
This table presents the percent of quarterly survey respondents (N = 1,662) who described the factor in the first column as very or extremely
important, either for the entire sample or split by investable assets, employment status, or age. The second column gives the text used to
describe the factor in the survey. Standard errors are in parentheses below the point estimates.

                                                           Question Text                              All      Assets > $5M        Employed         65 and Older
                                                                                                                Yes      No       Yes     No        Yes      No
 Advice from a professional       Advice from a professional financial advisor I hired               33.2%    28.3% 34.6%       31.0% 34.7%       35.7% 29.8%
 financial advisor                                                                                    (1.2)    (2.4)    (1.3)    (1.8)   (1.5)     (1.5)    (1.7)
 Personal experience investing    The feelings, attitudes, and beliefs about the stock market I've   23.6%    26.9% 22.7%       24.3% 23.1%       24.1% 22.8%
 in stock market                  gotten from my personal experiences of investing in the stock       (1.0)    (2.3)    (1.2)    (1.7)   (1.3)     (1.4)    (1.6)
                                  market
 Experience of living through     The feelings, attitudes, and beliefs about the stock market I've   22.9%    24.7%    22.4%    24.2%    22.1%    23.3%    22.4%
 stock market returns             gotten from living through stock market ups and downs               (1.0)    (2.3)    (1.2)    (1.7)    (1.3)    (1.4)    (1.6)
                                  (whether or not I was invested in stocks at the time)
 Lack of trustworthy advisor      Difficulty in finding a trustworthy advisor                        18.4%    15.0%    19.3%    20.3%    17.0%    17.3%    19.8%
                                                                                                      (0.9)    (1.9)    (1.1)    (1.6)    (1.2)    (1.2)    (1.5)
 Religious beliefs, values, and   My religious beliefs, values, and experiences                      17.5%    16.3%    17.8%    20.3%    15.6%    16.1%    19.4%
 experiences                                                                                          (0.9)    (1.9)    (1.1)    (1.6)    (1.2)    (1.2)    (1.5)
 Lack of trust in market          Concern that companies, managers, brokers, or other market         12.2%    11.4%    12.4%    16.7%    9.1%     8.9%     16.5%
 participants                     participants might cheat me out of my investments                   (0.8)    (1.7)    (0.9)    (1.4)    (0.9)    (0.9)    (1.4)
 Lack of knowledge about          My lack of knowledge about how to invest                           10.7%    8.9%     11.2%    14.6%    8.1%     8.7%     13.4%
 how to invest                                                                                        (0.8)    (1.5)    (0.9)    (1.4)    (0.9)    (0.9)    (1.3)
 Advice from a friend, family     Advice from a friend, family member, or other acquaintance         6.0%     7.2%     5.7%     10.1%    3.2%     3.7%     9.1%
 member, or acquaintance                                                                              (0.6)    (1.4)    (0.6)    (1.2)    (0.6)    (0.6)    (1.1)
 Advice from media                Advice from a book or an article I read, or from somebody on       5.0%     5.5%     4.8%     9.1%     2.2%     2.5%     8.4%
                                  TV, radio, or the internet                                          (0.5)    (1.2)    (0.6)    (1.1)    (0.5)    (0.5)    (1.0)




                                                                                         41
                                                          Table 5: Background Risks and Assets
This table presents the percent of quarterly survey respondents (N = 1,662) who described the factor in the first column as very or extremely
important, either for the entire sample or split by investable assets, employment status, or age. The second column gives the text used to
describe the factor in the survey. Standard errors are in parentheses below the point estimates.

                                                          Question Text                                 All      Assets > $5M        Employed        65 and Older
                                                                                                                  Yes      No       Yes     No       Yes      No
 Years left until retirement*   The number of years I (and my spouse/partner, if applicable) have      25.8%    20.3% 27.1%       25.8%     ---    19.3% 28.2%
                                left until retirement                                                   (1.7)    (3.6)    (1.9)    (1.7)            (2.9)    (2.0)
 Risk of illness/injury         The risk of expenses due to illness or injury to me or someone else    20.0%    11.9% 22.2%       23.7% 17.4%      18.0% 22.7%
 expenses                       in my family                                                            (1.0)    (1.7)    (1.2)    (1.6)   (1.2)    (1.2)    (1.6)
 Labor income risk*             Concern that I (or my spouse/partner, if applicable) might become      12.1%    16.4% 11.1%       12.1%     ---    6.6% 14.1%
                                unemployed, receive a pay cut, or not receive an expected bonus or      (1.3)    (3.3)    (1.3)    (1.3)            (1.8)    (1.6)
                                pay increase
 Stocks are an inflation        A belief that stocks are attractive because when my living expenses    11.4%    10.0%    11.8%    15.4%    8.7%    9.1%    14.6%
 hedge                          increase unexpectedly, the stock market will tend to rise               (0.8)    (1.6)    (0.9)    (1.4)   (0.9)   (0.9)    (1.3)
 Human capital fraction of      The difference between how much money I have available to invest       10.3%    8.6%     10.8%    16.6%    6.1%    7.4%    14.4%
 total wealth                   right now and all the money I (and my spouse/partner, if applicable)    (0.7)    (1.5)    (0.9)    (1.4)   (0.8)   (0.8)    (1.3)
                                expect to earn in wages or other compensation over the rest of my
                                life
 Home value risk                Concern that the value of my home(s) might fall                        9.0%     8.3%     9.2%     13.0%    6.4%    6.1%    13.0%
                                                                                                       (0.7)    (1.5)    (0.8)     (1.3)   (0.8)   (0.8)    (1.3)
 Time until significant non- How soon I will have significant expenses (like a home purchase,          7.6%     6.9%     7.8%     12.4%    4.3%    5.3%    10.7%
 retirement expense          school tuition, major charitable donation, etc.)                          (0.6)    (1.3)    (0.7)     (1.3)   (0.6)   (0.7)    (1.2)
 Illiquid non-equity         The fact that a significant fraction of my non-stock assets are in        6.3%     5.8%     6.5%     9.3%     4.3%    4.9%    8.3%
 investments                 illiquid investments (such as fine art, real estate, etc.)                (0.6)    (1.2)    (0.7)     (1.1)   (0.6)   (0.7)    (1.0)
* Among employed respondents only (N = 670).




                                                                                      42
                                                               Table 6: Expected Return Beliefs
This table presents the percent of quarterly survey respondents (N = 1,662) who described the factor in the first column as very or extremely
important, either for the entire sample or split by investable assets, employment status, or age. The second column gives the text used to
describe the factor in the survey. Standard errors are in parentheses below the point estimates.

                                                      Question Text                             All      Assets > $5M        Employed        65 and Older
                                                                                                          Yes      No       Yes     No       Yes      No
 Expected stock returns        A belief that the returns I can expect to earn from investing   14.8%    15.2% 14.7%       19.7% 11.5%      11.9% 18.8%
 higher than usual right now   in stocks right now are higher than usual                        (0.9)    (1.9)    (1.0)    (1.5)   (1.0)    (1.0)    (1.5)
 Stock market returns          A belief that low stock market returns tend to be followed      14.5%    11.9% 15.2%       17.8% 12.3%      12.3% 17.5%
 mean-revert                   by high stock market returns                                     (0.9)    (1.7)    (1.0)    (1.5)   (1.0)    (1.1)    (1.4)
 Expected stock returns        A belief that the returns I can expect to earn from investing   9.5%     8.0%      9.9%    13.9% 6.6%       6.6% 13.6%
 lower than usual right now    in stocks right now are lower than usual                         (0.7)    (1.4)    (0.8)    (1.3)   (0.8)    (0.8)    (1.3)
 Stock market returns have     A belief that low stock market returns tend to be followed      9.4%     9.7%      9.4%    12.8% 7.2%       7.3% 12.4%
 momentum                      by more low stock market returns                                 (0.7)    (1.6)    (0.8)    (1.3)   (0.8)    (0.8)    (1.2)




                                                                                        43
                                                       Table 7: Neoclassical Asset Pricing Factors
This table presents the percent of quarterly survey respondents (N = 1,662) who described the factor in the first column as very or extremely
important, either for the entire sample or split by investable assets, employment status, or age. The second column gives the text used to
describe the factor in the survey. Standard errors are in parentheses below the point estimates.

                                                      Question Text                               All       Assets > $5M         Employed         65 and Older
                                                                                                            Yes        No       Yes     No        Yes      No
 Rare disaster risk          Concern that in an economic disaster where the amount that the      22.9%    23.5%      22.7%    23.4% 22.5%       22.4% 23.5%
                             U.S. economy produces in a year shrinks by more than 10%--           (1.0)    (2.2)      (1.2)    (1.6)   (1.3)     (1.3)    (1.6)
                             like the Great Depression--a dollar I invested in stocks would
                             lose more value than a dollar I put in a bank savings account or
                             government bond
 Return covariance with      Concern that when I especially need the money, the stock            14.6%    10.8%     15.6%     18.1%    12.2%    12.0%    18.1%
 marginal utility of money   market will tend to drop                                             (0.9)    (1.6)     (1.0)     (1.5)    (1.0)    (1.0)    (1.5)
 Risk of long-run            Concern that when bad news arrives about how the U.S.'s             14.3%    13.3%     14.5%     16.4%    12.8%    13.0%    16.0%
 aggregate consumption       material standard of living will change over the 5 year period       (0.9)    (1.8)     (1.0)     (1.4)    (1.1)    (1.1)    (1.4)
                             starting 1 year in the future, the stock market will tend to drop
 Risk of long-run            Concern that when uncertainty increases about how the U.S.'s        13.2%    11.9%     13.6%     16.0%    11.4%    12.4%    14.4%
 aggregate consumption       material standard of living will change over the 10 year period      (0.8)    (1.7)     (1.0)     (1.4)    (1.0)    (1.1)    (1.3)
 volatility                  starting 1 year in the future, the stock market will tend to drop
 Risk of aggregate           Concern that when bad news arrives about how the U.S.'s             12.7%    12.7%     12.7%     16.9%    9.9%     11.4%    14.4%
 consumption over next       material standard of living will change over the next year, the      (0.8)    (1.8)     (0.9)     (1.4)   (0.9)     (1.0)    (1.3)
 year                        stock market will tend to drop
 Risk of aggregate           Concern that when uncertainty increases about how the U.S.'s        12.4%    11.4%     12.7%     15.5%    10.3%    11.2%    14.0%
 consumption volatility      material standard of living will change over the next year, the      (0.8)    (1.7)     (0.9)     (1.4)    (1.0)    (1.0)    (1.3)
 over next year              stock market will tend to drop
 Consumption composition     Concern that when the quality of my physical living situation       10.8%    11.4%     10.7%     15.5%    7.7%     8.7%     13.7%
 risk                        (how nice my housing is, the safety of my neighborhood, etc.) is     (0.8)    (1.7)     (0.9)     (1.4)   (0.8)    (0.9)     (1.3)
                             dropping faster than the rest of my material quality of life, the
                             stock market will tend to drop
 Consumption                 My fixed expenses (like mortgage payments, tuition bills,           9.0%     8.9%       9.1%     13.7%    5.8%     6.6%     12.4%
 commitments                 charitable commitments, etc.) that are difficult to adjust in the   (0.7)    (1.5)      (0.8)     (1.3)   (0.7)    (0.8)     (1.2)
                             short run
 Return covariance with      Concern that when I have to cut my spending, the stock market       8.8%     7.5%       9.2%     13.4%    5.7%     6.5%     12.1%
 marginal utility of         will tend to drop                                                   (0.7)    (1.4)      (0.8)     (1.3)   (0.7)    (0.8)     (1.2)
 consumption


                                                                                      44
                                                           Table 8: Nonstandard Preferences
This table presents the percent of quarterly survey respondents (N = 1,662) who described the factor in the first column as very or extremely
important, either for the entire sample or split by investable assets, employment status, or age. The second column gives the text used to
describe the factor in the survey. Standard errors are in parentheses below the point estimates.

                                                  Question Text                         All    Assets > $5M      Employed        65 and Older
                                                                                                Yes     No       Yes   No        Yes     No
 Ambiguity / Parameter        I don't have a good sense of the average returns and     9.9%    9.4% 10.1%      12.7% 8.1%       8.5% 11.8%
 uncertainty                  risks of investing in stocks                             (0.7)   (1.5) (0.8)      (1.3) (0.9)     (0.9) (1.2)
 Internal habit               The difference between my current material standard of   9.4%    7.2% 10.0%      13.6% 6.6%       7.3% 12.3%
                              living and the level I am used to                        (0.7)   (1.4) (0.8)      (1.3) (0.8)     (0.8) (1.2)
 Loss aversion                The possibility of even small losses on my stock         7.2%    8.0% 7.0%       10.4% 5.0%       5.4% 9.7%
                              investments makes me worry                               (0.6)   (1.4) (0.7)      (1.2) (0.7)     (0.7) (1.1)
 External habit               The difference between my current material standard of   6.3%    6.1% 6.4%       11.2% 3.0%       3.4% 10.3%
                              living and the level everybody else around me has        (0.6)   (1.3) (0.7)      (1.2) (0.5)     (0.6) (1.1)
                              experienced recently
 Desire to become wealthier   The desire to become wealthier than other wealthy        5.7%    5.8%    5.7%    10.0%    2.8%    3.0%    9.4%
 than other wealthy people    people                                                   (0.6)   (1.2)   (0.6)    (1.2)   (0.5)   (0.6)   (1.1)




                                                                                   45
                                                                Table 9: Miscellaneous Factors
This table presents the percent of quarterly survey respondents (N = 1,662) who described the factor in the first column as very or extremely
important, either for the entire sample or split by investable assets, employment status, or age. The second column gives the text used to
describe the factor in the survey. Standard errors are in parentheses below the point estimates.

                                                   Question Text                            All      Assets > $5M        Employed        65 and Older
                                                                                                      Yes      No       Yes     No       Yes      No
 Need cash on hand for     The amount of cash I need to have on hand to pay routine        19.3%    15.8% 20.2%       22.2% 17.2%      17.4% 21.8%
 routine expenses          expenses                                                         (1.0)    (1.9)    (1.1)    (1.6)   (1.2)    (1.2)    (1.6)
 Stock market returns      What I know about the stock market's returns during the         9.1%     10.2% 8.8%        14.6% 5.4%       6.3% 13.0%
 before I was born         decades before I was born                                        (0.7)    (1.6)    (0.8)    (1.4)   (0.7)    (0.8)    (1.3)
 Hard to sell PE shares    The difficulty in selling private equity shares                 8.5%     10.0% 8.1%        11.9% 6.3%       7.1% 10.6%
                                                                                            (0.7)    (1.6)    (0.8)    (1.3)   (0.8)    (0.8)    (1.2)
 Stocks take too long to   Concern that stock investments will take too long to convert    7.9%     7.2%     8.1%     12.2% 5.0%       5.1% 11.8%
 convert to cash in        into spendable cash in an emergency                              (0.7)    (1.4)    (0.8)    (1.3)   (0.7)    (0.7)    (1.2)
 emergency
 Rule of thumb             A rule of thumb (for example, "The percent you invest in        7.3%     6.6%     7.5%     11.8%    4.3%    4.7%    11.0%
                           stocks should be 100 minus your age" or "Invest one-third in    (0.6)    (1.3)    (0.7)     (1.2)   (0.6)   (0.7)    (1.2)
                           stocks, one-third in bonds, and one-third in real estate")




                                                                                      46
                                                        Table 10: Principal Components Analysis
This table shows loadings on the first five principal components computed over the equity share factors asked of every respondent in Table
3. Factors with a loading magnitude above 0.30 are bolded.
    Principal component 1           Principal component 2                                                                               Principal component 5
  (External social factors and        (Neoclassical asset            Principal component 3              Principal component 4          (Professional advice and
   non-professional advice)              pricing factors)              (Trust and religion)             (Personal experiences)              cash on hand)
 Desire to become        0.313   Risk of long-run         0.386   Lack of trustworthy 0.502          Personal              0.633    Advice from a           0.630
 wealthier than                  aggregate                        advisor                            experience                     professional
 other rich people               consumption                                                         investing in stock             financial advisor
                                 volatility                                                          market
 Advice from media      0.309    Risk of long-run        0.381    Religious beliefs,        0.373    Experience of          0.623   Need cash on hand        0.350
                                 aggregate                        values, and                        living through                 for routine
                                 consumption                      experiences                        stock market                   expenses
                                                                                                     returns
 Rule of thumb          0.294    Risk of aggregate       0.367    Lack of trust in          0.328    Stock market           0.254   Lack of knowledge        0.241
                                 consumption over                 market participants                returns mean-revert            about how to invest
                                 next year
 Peer advice            0.286    Rare disaster risk      0.336    Hard to sell private      0.267    Stock market           0.208   Expected stock           0.226
                                                                  equity shares                      returns before I was           returns higher than
                                                                                                     born                           usual right now
 External habit         0.281    Return covariance       0.314    Lack of knowledge         0.229                                   Risk of illness/injury   0.210
                                 with marginal                    about how to invest                                               expenses
                                 utility of money
 Time until             0.250    Risk of aggregate       0.285    Ambiguity/                0.220                                   Ambiguity/               0.208
 significant non-                consumption                      Parameter                                                         Parameter
 retirement expense              volatility over next             uncertainty                                                       uncertainty
                                 year
 Loss aversion          0.246    Risk of illness/        0.249    Rare disaster risk        0.212                                   Hard to sell private     -0.208
                                 injury expenses                                                                                    equity shares
 Internal habit         0.216                                     Stock market returns      -0.226
                                                                  mean-revert
 Illiquid non-equity    0.206
 investments


                                                                                       47
     Table 11: Regression of Equity Share on Normalized Principal Component Scores
This table shows coefficients from regressions of the fraction of each respondent's investible
financial assets held in equities on the respondent's first five principal component scores
normalized by each of their standard deviations. The regressions in columns (2) and (4)
additionally control for respondent demographics: age, age squared, and dummies for gender,
living situation, employment status, household income category, primary source of wealth, and
investable financial asset amount category (the categories are those in Table 1). Columns (1) and
(2) are estimated using OLS, and columns (3) and (4) are estimated using tobit regressions
censored at 0% and 100%. Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity are in parentheses below
each point estimate. * Significant at the 5% level. ** Significant at the 1% level.
                                            OLS                              Tobit
                                     (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)
 PC 1 (External social             -2.57*           -1.78           -2.93*            -1.98
 factors and non-pro advice)       (1.04)          (1.11)           (1.15)           (1.20)
 PC 2 (Neoclassical asset          -1.95*          -2.03*           -1.95*           -2.06*
 pricing factors)                  (0.92)          (0.94)           (0.96)           (0.97)
 PC 3 (Trust and religion)        -2.25**          -2.06**         -2.48**           -2.27**
                                   (0.82)           (0.79)          (0.87)            (0.83)
 PC4 (Personal experiences)        2.96**          2.61**           3.07**           2.68**
                                   (0.70)          (0.70)           (0.73)           (0.73)
 PC 5 (Professional advice          0.52            0.76             0.70             0.93
 and cash on hand)                 (0.75)          (0.76)           (0.80)           (0.80)
 Constant                          53.3**           -6.15           52.7**            -17.7
                                   (0.64)          (17.8)           (0.68)           (20.6)
 Demographic controls               No               Yes             No               Yes
 Observations                      1,662            1,662           1,662            1,662
 R2                                0.036            0.087
 Adjusted R2                       0.033            0.071
 McFadden's pseudo R2                                               0.004            0.010




                                                  48
                       Table 12: Importance of Equity Allocation Factors,
                        Representative U.S. Adults vs. Wealthy Investors
The left column of this table shows the percent of the representative U.S. adult sample in Choi and
Robertson (2020) who described each factor as very or extremely important in determining the
fraction of their portfolio invested in equities. The right column of this table shows the same
percentages for the wealthy population in our quarterly survey.
                 Representative population                               Wealthy investors
 1. Years left until retirement *               47.5% 1. Advice from pro financial advisor        33.2%
 2. Risk of illness/injury expenses             47.3% 2. Years left until retirement*             25.8%
 3. Need cash on hand for routine expenses      47.2% 3. Personal experience investing in stocks  23.6%
 4. Rare disaster risk                          45.5% 4. Experience living through stock returns  22.9%
 5. Labor income risk *                         41.6% 5. Rare disaster risk                       22.9%
 6. Lack of trust in market participants        37.5% 6. Risk of illness/injury expenses          20.0%
 7. Lack of knowledge about how to invest       36.2% 7. Need cash on hand for routine expenses   19.3%
 8. Human capital fraction of total wealth      35.9% 8. Lack of trustworthy advisor              18.4%
 9. Time until sig. non-retirement expense      35.7% 9. Religion                                 17.5%
 10. Consumption commitments                    35.5% 10. Expect. stock returns higher than usual 14.8%
 11. Return covariance with MU of money         35.2% 11. Return covariance with MU of money      14.6%
 12. Lack of trustworthy advisor                31.1% 12. Stock market returns mean-revert        14.5%
 13. Risk of agg. consumption over next year    30.3% 13. Risk of LR aggregate consumption        14.3%
 14. Risk of long-run aggregate consumption     29.8% 14. Risk of LR agg. consumption volatility 13.2%
 15. Return covar. with MU of consump.          29.1% 15. Risk of agg. consump. over next year    12.7%
 16. Stocks take too long to convert to cash    29.1% 16. Risk of agg. cons. vol. over next year  12.4%
 17. Risk of agg. consump. vol. over next year  28.7% 17. Lack of trust in market participants    12.2%
 18. Consumption composition risk               28.6% 18. Labor income risk*                      12.1%
 19. Home value risk ***                        28.5% 19. Stocks are an inflation hedge           11.4%
 20. Loss aversion                              28.2% 20. Consumption composition risk            10.8%
 21. Experience living through stock returns    26.9% 21. Lack of knowledge about how to invest 10.7%
 22. Internal habit                             26.9% 22. Human capital fraction of total wealth  10.4%
 23. Advice from pro financial advisor          26.7% 23. Ambiguity / Parameter uncertainty       9.9%
 24. Ambiguity / Parameter uncertainty          26.7% 24. Expect. stock returns lower than usual  9.5%
 25. Risk of LR aggregate consump. volatility   26.3% 25. Stock market returns have momentum      9.4%
 26. Personal experience investing in stocks    25.8% 26. Internal habit                          9.4%
 27. Religion                                   25.6% 27. Stock market returns before I was born 9.1%
 28. Expect. stock returns lower than usual     25.2% 28 (tied). Home value risk                  9.0%
 29. Expect. stock returns higher than usual ** 24.3% 28 (tied). Consumption commitments          9.0%
 30. Stocks are an inflation hedge **           20.4% 30. Return covar. with MU of consump.       8.8%
 31. Stock market returns have momentum         18.7% 31. Stocks take too long to convert to cash 7.9%
 32. Stock market returns mean-revert           17.2% 32. Time until sig. non-retirement expense 7.6%
 33. External habit                             16.3% 33. Rule of thumb                           7.3%
 34. Stock market returns before I was born     15.9% 34. Loss aversion                           7.2%
 35. Advice from friend, family, coworker       15.3% 35. External habit                          6.3%
 36. Rule of thumb                              12.7% 36. Advice from friend, family, acquaint.   6.0%
 37. Advice from media                          11.9% 37. Advice from media                       5.0%
* Among employed respondents only. ** Among stock market participants only. *** Among homeowners only.




                                                       49
                                 Table 13: Cross-Section of Stock Returns
This table presents the distribution of responses (N = 822) to questions about the expected returns and risks of value
stocks versus growth stocks, high-momentum stocks versus low-momentum stocks, high profitability versus low
profitability stocks, and high investment expenditure versus low investment expenditure stocks. Standard errors are in
parentheses below the point estimates.

                                          Panel A: Value stocks versus growth stocks
 Compared to a growth stock, I expect a value stock to         Compared to a growth stock, I expect a value stock to
 normally be ... over the next year, on average.               normally have ... over the next year, on average.
                      All       Assets > $5M       Retired                           All     Assets > $5M      Retired
 Riskier            12.7%          16.7%            12.9%      Higher returns      21.7%         29.5%         23.3%
                     (1.2)          (4.2)            (1.7)                          (1.4)         (5.2)         (2.1)
 Equally risky      28.3%          26.9%            25.7%      About the           39.4%         38.5%         38.6%
                     (1.6)          (5.0)            (2.2)     same                 (1.7)         (5.5)         (2.4)
 Less risky         47.1%          47.4%            47.3%      Lower returns       24.3%         21.8%         22.3%
                     (1.7)          (5.7)            (2.5)                          (1.5)         (4.7)         (2.1)
 No opinion         11.9%           9.0%            14.1%      No opinion          14.6%         10.3%         15.8%
                     (1.1)          (3.2)            (1.7)                          (1.2)         (3.4)         (1.8)
                               Panel B: High-momentum stocks versus low-momentum stocks
 Compared to a stock whose price fell a lot over the past      Compared to a stock whose price fell a lot over the
 year, I expect a stock whose price rose a lot over the        past year, I expect a stock whose price rose a lot over
 past year to normally be ... over the next year, on           the past year to normally have ... over the next year,
 average.                                                      on average.
                      All       Assets > $5M       Retired                           All     Assets > $5M      Retired
 Riskier            28.0%          30.8%            27.5%      Higher returns      10.5%         12.8%          9.4%
                     (1.6)          (5.2)            (2.2)                          (1.1)         (3.8)         (1.5)
 Equally risky      47.9%          41.0%            44.8%      About the           43.7%         41.0%         42.8%
                     (1.7)          (5.6)            (2.5)     same                 (1.7)         (5.6)         (2.5)
 Less risky          7.9%           7.7%             8.4%      Lower returns       27.1%         23.1%         24.5%
                     (0.9)          (3.0)            (1.4)                          (1.6)         (4.8)         (2.1)
 No opinion         16.2%          20.5%            19.3%      No opinion          18.7%         23.1%         23.3%
                     (1.3)          (4.6)            (2.0)                          (1.4)         (4.8)         (2.1)
                                  Panel C: High profitability versus low profitability stocks
 Compared to the stock of a company with low current           Compared to the stock of a company with low current
 profits, I expect the stock of a company with high            profits, I expect the stock of a company with high
 current profits to normally be ... over the next year, on     current profits to normally have ... over the next year,
 average.                                                      on average.
                      All       Assets > $5M       Retired                           All     Assets > $5M      Retired
 Riskier             7.7%           5.1%             5.7%      Higher returns      33.8%         41.0%         34.9%
                     (0.9)          (2.5)            (1.2)                          (1.7)         (5.6)         (2.4)
 Equally risky      40.5%          25.6%            34.7%      About the           40.0%         35.9%         37.1%
                     (1.7)          (4.9)            (2.4)     same                 (1.7)         (5.4)         (2.4)
 Less risky         38.0%          52.6%            42.6%      Lower returns       10.6%          7.7%          8.2%
                     (1.7)          (5.7)            (2.5)                          (1.1)         (3.0)         (1.4)
 No opinion         13.9%          16.7%            17.1%      No opinion          15.6%         15.4%         19.8%
                     (1.2)          (4.2)            (1.9)                          (1.3)         (4.1)         (2.0)




                                                               50
                    Panel D: High investment expenditure versus low investment expenditure stocks
Compared to the stock of a company that currently has     Compared to the stock of a company that currently has
low investment expenditures, I expect the stock of a      low investment expenditures, I expect the stock of a
company that currently has high investment                company that currently has high investment
expenditures to normally be ... over the next year, on    expenditures to normally have ... over the next year,
average.                                                  on average.
                   All      Assets > $5M         Retired                      All    Assets > $5M       Retired
Riskier          26.4%           23.1%           27.5%    Higher returns    17.8%        15.4%           14.1%
                  (1.5)           (4.8)           (2.2)                      (1.3)         (4.1)          (1.7)
Equally          38.4%           39.7%           31.4%    About the         36.6%        29.5%           34.2%
risky             (1.7)           (5.5)           (2.3)   same               (1.7)         (5.2)          (2.4)
Less risky       12.2%           12.8%           13.4%    Lower returns     24.1%        32.1%           25.2%
                  (1.1)           (3.8)           (1.7)                      (1.5)         (5.3)          (2.2)
No opinion       23.0%           24.4%           27.7%    No opinion        21.5%        23.1%           26.5%
                  (1.5)           (4.9)           (2.2)                      (1.4)         (4.8)          (2.2)




                                                          51
                                   Table 14: Determinants of Choosing an Active Investment Strategy
This table presents, among respondents who said that they had ever pursued an active investment strategy through a fund or a professional
manager (N = 371), the percent who described the factor described in the second column as very or extremely important in their decision to
pursue an active strategy instead investing the money in a passive strategy. The second column gives the text used to describe the factor in
the survey. Standard errors are in parentheses below the point estimates. The percentages are calculated over either the entire subsample or
split by investable assets, employment status, and age.

                                             Question text                                 All       Assets > $5M          Employed         65 and Older
                                                                                                     Yes        No       Yes       No       Yes       No
 Advisor          The recommendation of an investment advisor I hired                     45.0%    45.2%      45.0%    40.3%     50.6%    48.0%     42.2%
 recommendation                                                                            (2.6)    (7.7)      (2.7)    (3.5)     (3.8)    (3.7)     (3.6)
 Higher returns   A belief that the active strategy would give me higher returns on       43.7%    50.0%      42.9%    45.3%     41.8%    41.9%     45.3%
                  average than a passive strategy                                          (2.6)    (7.7)      (2.7)    (3.5)     (3.8)    (3.7)     (3.6)
 Hedging demand   A belief that even though the actively strategy would have lower        23.2%    28.6%      22.5%    26.9%     18.8%    19.0%     27.1%
                  returns on average than a passive strategy, the active strategy would    (2.2)    (7.0)      (2.3)    (3.1)     (3.0)    (2.9)     (3.2)
                  have higher returns than the passive strategy when the economy does
                  poorly (for example, during recessions or stock market crashes)




                                                                                   52
                                     Table 15: Agreement with Berk and Green (2004) Assumptions
The first two rows present the percent of one-off survey respondents (N = 822) who agree or strongly agree with the statement in the second
column. The third row presents the percent of survey respondents who agree or strongly agree with both of the first two rows' statements.
Standard errors are in parentheses below the point estimates. The percentages are calculated over either the entire sample or split by whether
the respondent had ever pursued an active investment strategy through a fund or professional manager, investable assets, employment status,
or age.
                                         Question text                            All      Invested Actively     Assets > $5M          Employed        65 and Older
                                                                                              Yes      No        Yes        No       Yes      No       Yes      No
 Managerial skill   When a stock investment fund following an active             42.0%      49.3%    35.9%     42.3%      41.9%    42.3%    41.6%    43.4% 40.5%
                    strategy has had significantly higher past returns than       (1.7)      (2.6)    (2.3)     (5.6)      (1.8)    (2.5)    (2.4)    (2.4)    (2.5)
                    the overall stock market, this is strong evidence that its
                    manager has good stock-picking skills
 Decreasing         When a stock investment fund following an active             33.5%     42.3%     26.2%     38.5%     32.9%     34.7%    32.3%    34.7%    32.2%
 returns            strategy gets more money to manage, it becomes harder         (1.6)     (2.6)     (2.1)     (5.5)     (1.7)     (2.4)    (2.3)    (2.3)    (2.3)
                    for it to generate higher returns than the overall stock
                    market
 Both of the        N/A                                                          19.5%     25.6%     14.4%     20.5%     19.4%     21.3%    17.7%    18.6%    20.4%
 above statements                                                                 (1.4)     (2.3)     (1.7)     (4.6)     (1.4)     (2.0)    (1.9)    (1.9)    (2.0)




                                                                                          53
                                                          Table 16: Concentrated Stock Ownership
This table presents, among respondents who said that they currently held more than 10% of their net worth in a single company's stock (N =
256), the percent who described the factor in the first column as very or extremely important in causing them to hold more than 10% of their
net worth in a single company's stock. Respondents who had more than 10% of their net worth currently invested in the stock of each of two
or more companies were asked to answer with respect to their largest single holding. The percentages are calculated over either the entire
subsample or split by investable assets, employment status, or age. The second column gives the text used to describe the factor in the survey.
Standard errors are in parentheses below the point estimates.

                                                    Question Text                                  All       Assets > $5M        Employed         65 and Older
                                                                                                             Yes       No       Yes      No       Yes      No
 Higher returns       I believe this stock will give me higher returns on average than other      45.7%    38.8%     49.1%    48.8%    42.6%    40.5% 50.8%
                      stocks in the market                                                         (3.1)    (5.3)     (3.8)    (4.4)    (4.4)    (4.4)    (4.4)
 Lower risk           I believe this stock will give me less risky returns than other stocks in   33.2%    31.8%     33.9%    35.4%    31.0%    29.4% 36.9%
                      the market                                                                   (2.9)    (5.0)     (3.6)    (4.2)    (4.1)    (4.1)    (4.2)
 Personal / family    A strong association between me or my family and the company                25.8%    29.4%     24.0%    31.5%    20.2%    21.4% 30.0%
 association                                                                                       (2.7)    (4.9)     (3.3)    (4.1)    (3.5)    (3.7)    (4.0)
 Lockup               A lockup agreement that prevents me from selling shares in the              16.8%    15.3%     17.5%    28.3%    5.4%     7.1% 26.2%
                      company or an investment fund                                                (2.3)    (3.9)     (2.9)    (4.0)    (2.0)    (2.3)    (3.9)
 Signaling            The desire to build others' confidence in the company by holding a          14.1%    14.1%     14.0%    24.4%    3.9%     3.2% 24.6%
 confidence           significant ownership stake in it                                            (2.2)    (3.8)     (2.7)    (3.8)    (1.7)    (1.6)    (3.8)
 Signaling            The desire to build others' confidence in my commitment to the              13.7%    12.9%     14.0%    22.0%    5.4%     5.6% 21.5%
 commitment           company as an employee or board member by holding a significant              (2.1)    (3.6)     (2.7)    (3.7)    (2.0)    (2.0)    (3.6)
                      ownership stake in it
 Bequest motive       The desire to maintain a significant amount of stock in the company in      13.3%    12.9%    13.5%     21.3%    5.4%     5.6%    20.8%
                      order to pass it on to my heirs                                              (2.1)    (3.6)    (2.6)     (3.6)   (2.0)    (2.0)    (3.6)
 Difficulty finding   The difficulty of finding a buyer for my shares                             12.1%    10.6%    12.9%     19.7%    4.7%     4.0%    20.0%
 a buyer                                                                                           (2.0)    (3.3)    (2.6)     (3.5)   (1.9)    (1.7)    (3.5)
 Voting stake         The desire to maintain a significant voting stake in the company            12.1%    12.9%    11.7%     20.5%    3.9%     4.0%    20.0%
                                                                                                   (2.0)    (3.6)    (2.5)     (3.6)   (1.7)    (1.7)    (3.5)




                                                                                         54
