                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      EFFICIENCY WAGES, UNEMPLOYMENT, AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY

                                         Garth Heutel
                                          Xin Zhang

                                      Working Paper 27960
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27960


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2020




We thank Spencer Banzhaf, Stefano Carattini, Kenneth Castellanos, Yuci Chen, Dan Karney,
Stephie Fried, Don Fullerton, Chi Ta, and seminar participants at GSU, the AERE conference,
and the ASSA conference for valuable comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Garth Heutel and Xin Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Efficiency Wages, Unemployment, and Environmental Policy
Garth Heutel and Xin Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 27960
October 2020
JEL No. H22,J64,Q52

                                           ABSTRACT

We study the incidence of pollution taxes and their impact on unemployment in an analytical
general equilibrium efficiency wage model. We find closed-form solutions for the effect of a
pollution tax on unemployment, factor prices, and output prices, and we identify and isolate
different channels through which these general equilibrium effects arise. An effect arising from
the efficiency wage specification depends on the form of the workers' effort function. Numerical
simulations further illustrate our results and show that this efficiency wage effect can fully offset
the sources-side incidence results found in models that omit it.


Garth Heutel
436 Andrew Young School
Department of Economics
Georgia State University
PO Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
and NBER
gheutel@gsu.edu

Xin Zhang
Department of Economics
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Georgia State University
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
xzhang63@student.gsu.edu
I. Introduction

          The effects that environmental policies may have on labor markets, and whether and to

what extent they kill jobs or create jobs, is of utmost importance to policymakers. Much popular

aversion to environmental regulation comes from its perceived negative impact on jobs. Other

distributional impacts of policy, like the sources-side and uses-side incidence, can depend on

frictions in the labor market that yield unemployment. It is important for policymakers to

understand the effect of environmental policies on unemployment and on both factor and output

prices.

          There are several ways to go about addressing the general question of how environmental

policies affect labor markets and unemployment. Many papers empirically estimate the impact

of specific environmental policies on employment, including Martin et al. (2014), Curtis (2018)

and Colmer et al. (2018). Other papers use computable general equilibrium (CGE) models to

quantify the large-scale effects that policies like an economy-wide carbon tax might have,

including Böhringer et al. (2003), Hafstead et al. (2018), and Castellanos and Heutel (2019). A

third approach uses analytical general equilibrium modeling, which can shed light on the

mechanisms behind the effects that can be quantified through empirical or CGE models. Both

Hafstead and Williams (2018) and Aubert and Chiroleu-Assouline (2019) introduce pollution

policy and unemployment resulting from labor search frictions into an analytical general

equilibrium model. Our paper follows this third approach.

          The purpose of this paper is to study the effect of pollution taxes on unemployment and

incidence using an analytical general equilibrium model where unemployment is endogenously

generated via efficiency wages. Workers' effort is a function of the real wage and the economy's

unemployment level. Pollution is modeled as a production input along with capital and labor.



                                                  2
We find closed-form analytic solutions for the general equilibrium responses to a change in the

pollution tax rate, including expressions for changes in the unemployment rate, factor prices (the

sources-side incidence), output prices (the uses-side incidence), and worker effort. The model

allows us to decompose the net effects into substitution effects, output effects, and effects from

the efficiency wage specification. Lastly, we conduct numerical simulations using calibrated

parameter values.

        Our modeling approach dates back to the canonical tax incidence modeling of Harberger

(1962). Like Agell and Lundborg (1992) and Rapanos (2006), our paper adds an efficiency

wage theory of unemployment to the model, though those papers do not model pollution. Like

Fullerton and Heutel (2007), our paper adds pollution and pollution taxes to the model, though

that paper does not model unemployment.1 We incorporate both efficiency wages and

environmental policy into a Harberger-style analytical general equilibrium tax incidence model.

Our paper is most similar to Hafstead and Williams (2018) and Aubert and Chiroleu-Assouline

(2019), which both also model environmental policy and unemployment in an analytical general

equilibrium setting. However, in both of those papers, unemployment arises from Diamond-

Mortensen-Pissarides-style search frictions (Pissarides 2000). In our paper, unemployment

arises from efficiency wage theory (Akerlof 1982, Shapiro and Stiglitz 1984).2

        Our theoretical results add new insights to the tax incidence literature. We identify

effects that have been found in previous studies of environmental taxes, like the output and

substitution effects. For example, an output effect exists such that the pollution tax



1
  Other papers that use a similar methodology to incorporate pollution policy into analytical general equilibrium
modeling include Gonzalez (2012), Fullerton and Monti (2013), Dissou and Siddiqui (2014), and Baylis et al.
(2014).
2
  Furthermore, Hafstead and Williams (2018) do not provide analytical, closed-form solutions, just numerical
simulations, and neither Hafstead and Williams (2018) nor Aubert and Chiroleu-Assouline (2019) include capital in
their model.

                                                        3
disproportionately burdens the factor that is used more intensively in the polluting sector. These

effects differ, though, when there is endogenous unemployment generated through efficiency

wages. Along with these standard effects, we identify an effect that is new to the environmental

tax literature, which we call the efficiency wage effect. The magnitude and direction of this

effect depend on the form of the workers' effort function. Generally, the less elastic the workers'

marginal effort response to the real wage is, the less burden labor bears, and the smaller increase

in unemployment. With more structure on the effort function, we show that the crucial

parameters of the effort function are the elasticities of effort with respect to the real wage and to

unemployment. When effort responds more strongly to the real wage, then the magnitude of the

efficiency wage effect is larger, which alleviates the tax burden on labor. When effort responds

more strongly to unemployment, then the magnitude of the efficiency wage effect is smaller.

       This key result depends on the efficiency wage specification causing unemployment, and

so it is missing from previous studies that model unemployment through other causes. Our

efficiency wage specification is general enough to accommodate different causes of efficiency

wages and different effort functions. A gift exchange or fair wage efficiency wage model like

Akerlof (1982) will lead to effort being very responsive to the real wage, and we find that this

implies that the efficiency wage effect will be large. A shirking and firing model like Shapiro

and Stiglitz (1984) will lead to effort being very responsive to unemployment, and we find that

this implies that the efficiency wage effect will be small. Thus, the structural origin of

unemployment fundamentally affects how large of an effect the unemployment friction will have

on standard tax incidence outcomes.

       The calibrated numerical simulation results, based on a $40 per ton carbon tax, provide

further insights into these effects. The disproportionate burden of the tax on labor from



                                                  4
substitution effects is offset by the disproportionate burden on capital from the efficiency wage

effect. Ignoring the efficiency wage effect, as in previous environmental tax incidence models,

thus gets the sign of the sources-side incidence wrong. Because of the efficiency wage effect,

the carbon tax burdens capital disproportionately higher than labor. The tax increases the

unemployment rate by just under 1%; this effect is mainly driven by a substitution effect from

the larger, untaxed clean sector, rather than substitution within the smaller, taxed dirty sector.

Sensitivity analyses show that the effects on unemployment and on sources-side incidence

depend on the effort function elasticities, the effect on sources-side incidence also depends on

production elasticities, and the effect on uses-side incidence is relatively unaffected by these

parameters. Both the analytical and the numerical results highlight the important role of the

efficiency wage effect and the form of the effort function in the analysis of pollution tax

incidence and unemployment effects.

       The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the model and derives a system of

linearized equations. Section 3 presents and interprets the general solution, decomposing the net

effect into separate effects. Section 4 calibrates and numerically simulates the model. The last

section concludes.



II. Model

       Our model is a two-sector, two-factor incidence model, in the spirit of Harberger (1962),

with the addition of involuntary unemployment through an efficiency wage as in Agell and

Lundborg (1992) and Rapanos (2006), and with the addition of pollution as in Fullerton and

Heutel (2007, 2010). We consider a competitive two-sector economy using two factors of

production: capital and labor. Both factors are perfectly mobile between sectors. A third variable



                                                  5
input is pollution, , which is only used in production of one of the goods (the "dirty" good).

The constant returns to scale production functions are:

                                                   = ( ,  )

                                                  = ( ,  , )

where X is the "clean" good, Y is the "dirty" good,  and  are the capital used in each sector,

and  and  are the effective labor, in efficiency units, used in each sector.

         The effective labor in each sector is defined as the actual amount of labor  times the

effort level :

                                                    
                                                =  ( , )  
                                                    
                                                     
                                                 =  ( , )  
                                                     
                                                                                                             
where (  , ), the effort level of a representative worker, depends on the real wage rate  , and

on the level of unemployment .

         This effort function is how we incorporate the efficiency wage theory of unemployment

into our model. In structural models of efficiency wages, effort is an endogenously-determined

optimal response of workers given the possibility of termination if caught shirking (Shapiro and

Stiglitz 1984) or norms of fairness (Akerlof 1982). But here, the effort function is a reduced-

form relationship between the wage, unemployment, and the level of effort. Our reduced-form

effort function is identical to that of Rapanos (2006).3

         Structural efficiency wage models predict that effort is positively related to the real wage
    
(  ) and to the economy-wide level of unemployment, so we impose that the first derivatives 1




3
  The reduced-form effort function in Agell and Lundborg (1992) is slightly different; effort is a function of the
relative wages across industries and the ratio of the wage to capital rental rate.

                                                           6
and 2 are positive.4 The effort level is identical across the two sectors (since neither the real

wage nor unemployment are sector-specific).  and  are the labor used in each sector in terms

of the number of workers. Linearizing the two equations defining effective labor gives us:

                                                   =  + 
                                                                                                             (1)

                                                   =  + 
                                                                                                             (2)

We adopt the "hat" notation where a variable with a hat represents a proportional change in the

variable. That is,    / , and likewise for the other variables.


        Both representative firms face the same effort function , and they set their wages  to

minimize the effective wage cost per worker   /. Formally, the optimization problem for

the representative firm is:

                                                           
                                             min  =       
                                               
                                                         (  , )

The first-order condition is
                                                        
                                                 - 1     =0
                                                        

where 1 is the first derivative of the effort function with respect to the real wage. This condition
                          1 
can be written as 1            = 1, meaning that the wage is set so that the elasticity of effort with
                           


respect to the real wage is one. Totally differentiating this first-order condition, and employing

                                2 
the assumption that 12 =               = 0, we obtain:
                               ( )
                                 


                                             11  2  
                                        2  =      (  - )
                                              2       

which can be rewritten as


4
 Empirical support for this reduced-form relationship is found in Raff and Summers (1987) and Cappelli and
Chauvin (1991).

                                                       7
                                           11 
                          
                             11  2
                                           1        )
                           =       ( - ) =      ( - 
                             2 2            2
                                               
                                           
                                                        11
                                                  =
                                                           ( - )                                                   (3)
                                                        2

            11                              
where 11  (    ) (  ), and 2  ( 2) . Since 2 > 0, we also have 2 > 0, which is the
                      1


elasticity of effort with respect to unemployment. We assume concavity of the effort function

with respect to the real wage / to ensure an interior solution to the minimization problem, so

11 < 0, which implies that 11 < 0. This parameter, 11 , is important throughout the analysis

and arises in the closed-form solutions presented below. It is a measure of the concavity of the

effort function with respect to the real wage. If it is close to zero, the effort function is close to

linear in the real wage. If it is large in absolute value, then the marginal effort with respect to the

real wage (1 ) declines quickly as the wage increases.5
                                                                     
           Totally differentiating the effort function  = (  , ) obtains

                                                   =  -  + 2                                                       (4)

From the definition of effective wage v, we have

                                                       =  -                                                        (5)

The first five equations of our model describe the labor market and are identical to those in the

efficiency wage model of Rapanos (2006).

           The resource constraints are:

                                                     +  = 

                                                   +  =  - 




5
    Rapanos (2006) describes the parameter 11 as "the rate at which workers get satisfied with real wages." (p. 481).

                                                            8
where  and  are the fixed total amounts of capital and labor in the economy.6 All capital is

fully employed, while labor faces a level of unemployment . Totally differentiating the

resource constraints (noting that  and  remain fixed) yields

                                                 
                                               +    = 0                                                           (6)

                                                   
                                           +    = -                                                               (7)

                                                                
where  denotes sector 's share of factor  ( =                   
                                                                    ).  denotes the unemployment rate
                                                                

         
( =      
            ). Pollution  has no equivalent resource constraint. As in Fullerton and Heutel
         

(2007), we start with a preexisting positive tax  on pollution.

         When modeling producer behavior, we consider the producers responding to the price

and quantity of effective labor rather than actual labor. The price of a unit of effective labor is ,

and the quantities are  and  . Producers of  can substitute between factors in response to

changes in the factor prices   (1 +  ) and   (1 +  ), where  and  are the ad

valorem taxes on capital and effective labor. We will only consider a change in the pollution tax,

not in any of the other taxes, so,  =  and  = .7 The elasticity of substitution in

production  is defined to capture this response to factor price changes:

                                                
                                              -  =  (
                                                      -  )                                                        (8)

where  is defined to be positive.




6
  As is standard in Harberger-type incidence models, total resources are fixed, though they can be re-allocated across
sectors in response to policy. These models are thus sometimes described as "medium-run" adjustment models.
7
  Since we do not model changes in other pre-existing tax rates, like the labor tax, we do not consider revenue
recycling (i.e. using the pollution tax revenues to reduce the labor tax rate). Pollution tax revenues are returned
lump-sum and assumed to not affect equilibrium prices. CGE models, like Hafstead et al. (2018) and Castellanos
and Heutel (2019), consider revenue recycling.

                                                          9
         Producers of  use three inputs: capital, effective labor, and pollution. Firms face no
                                                                                  8
market price for pollution, just a tax on per unit of pollution, so  =  and  =   . We


model firm 's behavior by assuming a constant elasticity of substitution (CES) production

function, yielding:

                                                
                                              -  =  (
                                                       -  )                                                       (9)

                                              -  =  (
                                                       - )                                                      (10)

where  > 0 is the elasticity of substitution in production. Equations (9) and (10) show how a

change in any of the input prices affects the relative demand for the three inputs. The change in

relative demand is a function of the change in relative prices and the substitution elasticity. A

more complicated and general way of modeling production when the dirty sector has three inputs

is to use Allen elasticities of demand, as in Fullerton and Heutel (2007). While that assumption

is more general than CES, the resulting general solution is very long and complicated and does

not add additional insight into the effect of the efficiency wage specification on outcomes. In the

appendix, we present and analyze the full solution from the more general model, while here in

the text we use the CES simplification.

         Using the assumptions of perfect competition and constant returns to scale, we get

                                              
                                    +  =  ( +  ) +  ( +  )                                                      (11)

                                    
                          +  =  ( +  ) +  ( +         )
                                               ) +  ( +                                                         (12)

               (1+ )                (1+ )                      
Here                      ,                     and     are the share of sales revenue from  that
                                                               


is paid to capital, to effective labor, and to pollution (through the tax), respectively. Define 

and  similarly to  . (Note that  +  = 1 and  +  +  = 1.) Totally


8
  Modeling pollution as an input allows for a very general form of substitutability between pollution, capital, and
labor. One can alternatively interpret the pollution input as an energy input. In the numerical calibration below, we
calibrate pollution factor shares and other parameters based on data on energy factor shares.

                                                         10
differentiate each sector's production function and substitute in the conditions from the perfect

competition assumption to get

                                               =  
                                                   +  
                                                                                                                (13)

                                          =  
                                                 
                                              +   +  
                                                                                                                (14)

The details of the derivation of equations 11 through 14 can be found in Fullerton and Heutel

(2007, Appendix A).

         Consumer preferences are modeled using  , the elasticity of substitution between goods

 and . The definition of this elasticity yields

                                              -  =  ( - )                                                       (15)

Lastly, the price index , which appears in the effort function, is defined to equal a weighted

average of the output prices of the two goods, i.e.  =     1- , ( < 1). Then the change in

the price index can be written as

                                              = 
                                                 + (1 - )
                                                                                                                (16)

         The full model is equations (1) through (16). It contains just one exogenous policy

variable ( ) and 17 endogenous variables. To solve it, we impose a normalization assumption

by assuming that the price index  is the numeraire and unchanged, so that  = 0.9 Dropping 

from the model thus yields 16 equations with 16 unknowns

(          , 
  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  , 
                             , ,
                                 ,    
                                   ,  , ). The model is solved with successive

substitution, as described in Appendix A.I.




9
 This normalization implies that all price changes analyzed in the model are price changes relative to the price index
                                                                         
 . An increase in the pollution tax  is actually an increase in the ratio  . By contrast, Fullerton and Heutel
                                                                          
(2007) normalize by setting the clean good price change    = 0, and Rapanos normalizes by setting       = 0.
Garnache and Mérel (2020) demonstrate that choosing the overall price index  as numeraire is a more natural
assumption that eliminates some counterintuitive cases.

                                                         11
         The graphs in Figure 1 illustrate the intuition of the efficiency wage theory used in our

model. On the left-hand side is the labor market, where supply is perfectly inelastic (since  is

fixed). When labor demand is given by the curve , the equilibrium wage would be where

demand and supply intersect. However, the right graph presents the effort function  as a

function of the wage  on the x-axis. For a given effort function, the firm chooses the wage to

maximize productivity per dollar paid. This is given by the tangent point of the effort function to

a straight line starting at the origin, which yields the wage   for the effort function  =

(, ). This wage is higher than the market-clearing wage, and thus causes unemployment 

(since quantity supplied at this wage,   , exceeds quantity demanded at this wage,  ).

Equilibrium is where the wage   chosen at the tangent line to the effort function in the right

graph for unemployment level  also yields unemployment  in the labor market on the left

graph.

         Suppose now that a pollution tax burdens the firms and therefore decreases labor demand

to . Without a change in the wage from   , unemployment would drastically increase. But

the effort function also responds to unemployment, which changes the firm's optimal wage

shown on the right graph. A new unemployment level yields a new optimal wage (from equation

3). The new, post-pollution-tax equilibrium involves an unemployment level  such that the

optimal wage   given  from the effort function (right graph) yields unemployment  in the

labor market (left graph). As drawn in Figure 1, the pollution tax reduces labor demand, lowers

the wage, and increases unemployment. However, both the magnitude and the direction of these

changes depend on model parameters. For example, the effort function might be such that the




                                                  12
new wage   is higher than the original wage   . We explore these effects in both the

analytical solutions and numerical simulations below.10

          The simplified analysis in Figure 1 omits several features of the model, including the two

production sectors and the interaction between labor demand and capital demand. But it

demonstrates that how workers' effort responds to changes in the wage and unemployment is

crucial in determining the effects of the pollution tax. In an efficiency wage model, the wage is

determined not only by the interaction of labor supply and demand. Rather, the wage affects

both the workers' effort (internal margin) and the quantity of labor demanded (external margin).

The inclusion of this margin has the potential to affect the incidence results from pollution

policy.



III. Solution

          Our focus is on incidence and unemployment effects, so we are most interested in

solutions for changes in factor prices ( and  ), output prices ( and                      
                                                                      ), and unemployment .


          We present three closed-form solutions. The first is  , which is the change in

unemployment or the unemployment rate.11 The second is  -  , which represents the sources-

side incidence, i.e., the relative burden on labor versus capital. If  -  is positive, then the

wage increases more than the rental rate does (or decreases less), so the burden of the tax falls

relatively more on capital than on labor. The third is  -  , which represents the uses-side


incidence, i.e. the relative burden on consumers of the dirty good versus consumers of the clean



10
  For more intuition on the microfoundations of the efficiency wage model, see Yellen (1984) or Weiss (2014).
11
   is the level of unemployment, so       is defined as the percentage change in the level of unemployment. But since
the total labor force is fixed,  is also the percent change in the unemployment rate. It is not a percentage point
change. For example, if the baseline unemployment rate is 4%, then       = 0.1 is a ten-percent increase in that
baseline rate, to 4.4%.

                                                         13
good. If  -  is positive, then the difference in these prices increases, so the burden of the

tax falls relatively more on consumers of the dirty good versus consumers of the clean good.

These solutions are:

              
        =
                { [(1 - ) +  ( -  )] +   ( -  ) +  (1 - )}                                                    (17)
              2                                             


                      [(1 - )( + 11 ) + ( -  )(11  -  )]
      -  =      {                                             }  (18)
             11  + ( -  )( - 11  ) +  (1 - )(1 + 11 ) - (1 - ) 

                                                      
                    -  =         { [  +   +   ] +  -    }                                                     (19)
                                                      11 

                                                                                                 
These solutions use the following definitions and simplifications:    ,    , A 
                                                                                                  


  +   +  (1 -  ), B    +   +  (1 -  ),     +   + 1,

                                                                         1
    +  (1 - ),     +  (1 - ),                                                 [(1 -  ) +
                                                                        


                  
11 (1 -  -             )], and    ( -  )(  -   ) +  ( +  ) +
                   2


 ( +  ) -  /11 .

        All three expressions are linear functions of the change of the pollution tax   , since the


model is linearized and   is the only exogenous policy variable. These expressions can be

decomposed into several effects that can be separately analyzed.12 In the following subsections,

we decompose each expression into terms representing several intuitive effects, in the spirit of

Mieszkowski (1967): an output effect, two substitution effects (one from the clean sector and one

from the dirty sector), and an effect that we call the efficiency wage effect. The output effect is

represented by the terms that include the elasticity of substitution in utility,  . The clean sector

substitution effect is represented by the terms that include the elasticity of substitution in


12
  Throughout the analysis below, we assume that the denominator  is positive, which it is in all of the numerical
simulations. A sufficient but not necessary condition ensuring that  is positive is 11 > -1.

                                                        14
production in the clean sector,  . The dirty sector substitution effect is represented by the terms

that include the elasticity of substitution in production in the dirty sector,  . Finally, the

efficiency wage effect is represented by the terms that include .13 While assigning these names

to each separable term, the efficiency wage effect that we identify does not capture all the

channels of the pollution tax's impact related to workers' effort. The effort elasticity parameters

11 and 2 are also in the coefficients in front of equations (17) and (18), as well as in the

denominator . We should interpret the terms including  as the identifiable part of the

complex effect of the efficiency wage, while bearing in mind that the assumption of efficiency

wage changes the sizes of all three other effects compared to the previous literature.



III.A. Efficiency wage effect

         Our main result is the interpretation of an effect that we call the efficiency wage effect.

This effect of course is absent in previous models without an efficiency wage or endogenous

unemployment. It is present in previous models with efficiency wage-driven unemployment, for

instance Rapanos (2006) derives a similar effect that he calls the "unemployment effect." But in

those papers, the effect arises not from a pollution tax (since there is no pollution in those

models) but rather from factor income taxes.

         This efficiency wage effect is absent from the equation for unemployment, equation (17)

(there is no term with  in that equation). That may seem counterintuitive since of course the

                                                                                                                   1
efficiency wage component of the model must affect unemployment. However, the coefficient 
                                                                                                                    2


in front of equation (17) captures this relationship. The substitution and output effects are scaled


13
   Since these results are so complicated, we also consider a simpler model that does not include capital. This model
is presented in Appendix A.II. While the results are simpler than those from the main model, it cannot be used to
analyze sources-side incidence or to see how substitution between labor and capital affects unemployment.

                                                         15
by this coefficient, which shows how the form of the effort function translates these effects into

unemployment. When workers' effort is more responsive to unemployment, 2 is large, so the

equilibrium effect on unemployment is smaller in magnitude, all else equal. The intuition for

this effect is clearer in the simplified model in Appendix A.II, where the effect on unemployment
                    1
is also scaled by  .
                     2


         The efficiency wage effect is its own term in the expressions for the sources-side and

uses-side incidence; it is represented by the terms with  in it. As defined earlier,  

     1                                      
         [(1 -  ) + 11 (1 -  -                   )] , which is strictly positive if 11 > -1. The efficiency
                                             2

                                                                                          
wage effect in the expression for sources-side incidence (equation 18) is -   (1 - ) and so
                                                                                           11


is the same sign of . If workers' marginal effort with respect to the real wage does not decline

too fast as the wage increases (i.e. 11 > -1), then the efficiency wage effect on  -  is strictly

positive, meaning that a pollution tax disproportionately burdens capital. The uses-side

                                                         
efficiency wage effect from equation (19) is -                  . Under the same assumption that 11 >
                                                          11 


-1, this effect is strictly positive, which means the dirty good price increases more than the

clean good price, and the uses-side incidence falls more on consumers of the dirty good.

         To further interpret this effect, we can impose a functional form on the worker's effort

function:

                                                     
                                          ( , ) =  ( ) + 
                                                    

where  > 0, 0 <  < 1,  < 0, and  < 0.14 These parameter restrictions ensure that 1 > 0,

2 > 0, 12 = 0, 11 < 0, and 22 < 0. The elasticity of effort with respect to the wage is 1 =


14
  A more natural functional form assumption is Cobb-Douglas, but a Cobb-Douglas effort function does not satisfy
the assumption that 12 = 0, and the first-order condition that 1 = 1 demands that effort is linear in the real wage.

                                                         16
          
     ( )
                                                                                                        
  
             . The first-order condition that this elasticity is one amounts to ( - 1) (  ) =
( ) + 
 


                                                                                                     (-1)
 . The elasticity of effort with respect to unemployment is 2 =                      
                                                                                                 =          > 0.
                                                                                   ( ) +              
                                                                                    


The concavity of the effort function with respect to wage is 11 =  - 1 < 0. Under this

                                                               1
functional form assumption,  =                   (1 - (1 + )  ). This expression is strictly positive,
                                           


and its magnitude depends on both the unemployment rate  and the elasticities of the effort

function. These elasticities ultimately depend on the values of  and  , which represent the

responsiveness of effort with respect to the real wage and to unemployment, respectively.

         We explore how the magnitude of , and thus of the efficiency wage effect on both the

                                                                                          
sources-side and uses-side incidence, depends on these parameters. First,                    =
                                                                                          

     1               1
         (1 - (1 + )  ). This derivative is strictly positive (since  < 0). The efficiency
 


wage effect becomes larger in magnitude ( increases) as workers' effort becomes more

                                                                            
responsive to the real wage ( increases). Second,                  =             . This derivative is strictly
                                                                             2


positive. The efficiency wage effect becomes smaller in magnitude ( decreases) as workers'

effort becomes more responsive to unemployment ( decreases).15 These two derivatives

demonstrate how the source of the efficiency wage matters greatly to incidence effects. A high 

means effort is very responsive to the real wage, which is likely to be true in a gift exchange or

fair wage efficiency wage model like Akerlof (1982). A high  means effort is very responsive

to unemployment, which is likely to be true in a shirking and firing model like Shapiro and

Stiglitz (1984). If a fair wage model is more accurate, then the efficiency wage incidence effect


15
   Because  < 0 and the elasticity of effort with respect to unemployment is proportional to the absolute value of  ,
a lower value of  (more negative) represents more elastic effort.

                                                         17
is large, whereas if a shirking and firing model is more accurate, then the efficiency wage

incidence effect is smaller.

       We provide intuition for this key result that the efficiency wage effect on both sources-

side and uses-side incidence is larger when effort is more responsive to the real wage and is

smaller when effort is more responsive to unemployment. When effort is very responsive to the

real wage, then the efficiency wage effect on sources-side incidence, which increases the relative

burden on capital, is large, because in equilibrium the wage must rise high enough to provide the

incentive for worker effort. Thus, workers' effort being highly responsive to the wage benefits

workers by forcing the wage to increase. When effort is very responsive to the unemployment

rate, then the efficiency wage effect on sources-side incidence is small, because in equilibrium

the effort can be incentivized through unemployment rather than through the wage. Thus,

workers' effort being highly responsive to the unemployment rate hurts workers by decreasing

the wage.

       The intuition is similar for the efficiency wage effect on uses-side incidence. When

effort is very responsive to the real wage, then the efficiency wage effect on uses-side incidence,

which increases the relative burden on consumers of the dirty good, is large, because the increase

in the wage necessary to induce equilibrium effort is partially passed through to output prices

and disproportionately to the dirty good price. When effort is very responsive to the

unemployment rate, then the efficiency wage effect on uses-side incidence is small, because

effort need not be induced through a change in the wage but instead can be induced through

equilibrium unemployment, and less of a price change passes through to output prices.

                                                                                          
       We also explore how the unemployment rate affects the efficiency wage effect:             =
                                                                                              


  -          1
       (1 + ). This is positive if and only if -1 <  < 0, and negative if and only if  < -1.
 


                                                18
All else equal, one might predict that a larger baseline unemployment rate will increase the

magnitude of the efficiency wage effect. But if effort is very responsive to unemployment (  is

large in absolute value) then this might not be the case.

       While the efficiency wage effect is represented by the term with  in the expression for

sources-side incidence, the entire expression for sources-side incidence (equation 18) is scaled
              1
by the factor  . This scale factor also appears in the corresponding expression in the simpler
              11


model in Appendix A.II. As in that model, this factor shows that all of the effects on the

sources-side incidence depend on the magnitude of 11 . If it is large in absolute value, then

workers' marginal effort is highly responsive to the wage, so that all of the effects on the wage

(and thus on the sources-side incidence) are dampened.



III.B. Output Effect

       The remaining effects in equations (17), (18), and (19) are the output effect and two

substitution effects. These are standard effects found in the tax incidence literature dating back

to Harberger (1962) and Mieszkowski (1967). Here, we focus on how the inclusion of pollution

and unemployment modifies these effects.

       In both equations (17) and (18), the terms that include  , the substitution elasticity of

demand between the two goods  and , represent an output effect. Through the output effect,

the pollution tax disproportionately affects the dirty sector -- because the dirty sector is the only

sector that uses pollution as an input -- and reduces its output in a way that depends on

consumer preferences via  . Less output means less demand for all inputs, but particularly the

input used intensively in that sector.




                                                 19
            The output effect caused by a one-unit change in the pollution tax (  ) on unemployment


 is  {  ( -  )}. This term is negative whenever  >  , which holds whenever the
        2


dirty sector  is relatively capital-intensive.16 The dirty sector being capital-intensive means that

the pollution tax will impose a larger burden on capital than on labor, which translates to a

decrease in unemployment, captured in this term.

            In the expression for sources-side incidence  -  , equation (18), the output effect


       {- ( -  )(- + 11  )} is positive whenever  >  . If the dirty sector is
11 


relatively capital-intensive ( >  ), then this output effect will decrease the price of capital

relative to the wage ( -  > 0). The magnitude of this effect is proportional to the substitution

elasticity of demand between the two goods,  .

            There is no output effect on the uses-side incidence  -  ; the relative factor intensities

do not affect uses-side incidence, only sources-side incidence.



III.C. Clean Sector Substitution Effect

            Next, we identify two kinds of substitution effects. In equations (17), (18), and (19), the

terms that include  , the substitution elasticity of input demand between capital and labor for

the clean () sector, are what we call the clean sector substitution effect. This captures the

response of the clean sector to the change of relative input prices. Because the model is general

equilibrium and total factor quantities (capital and labor) across sectors are fixed, the effect of

substitutability within the clean industry impacts the incidence of a tax levied only on the dirty

industry.



16                                                      
      >  implies        >      , which implies      >      .
                                                        

                                                               20
          In the expression for the change in unemployment  (equation 17), the clean sector

                         
substitution effect is   { (1 - )}. This term is unambiguously positive. An increase in the
                          2


pollution tax unambiguously increases unemployment through the clear sector substitution

effect. Similarly, for the sources-side incidence (equation 18), the clean sector substitution effect

     
is   { (1 - )(1 + 11 )}. This term is unambiguously negative, so when the pollution tax
     11


increases, this effect decreases  -  and places more burden of the tax on labor.

          The clean sector substitution effect's impact on both unemployment  and sources-side

incidence  -  arises from the same intuition. The tax increase is an overall distortion to the

economy. While the total amount of capital employed is fixed, the total amount of labor

employed varies because of endogenous unemployment. The overall distortion from the

pollution tax thus exacerbates the tax wedge affecting unemployment, increasing overall

unemployment and disproportionately burdening labor income (due to the link between

unemployment and labor income from the effort function).

                                                                                                 
          The clean sector substitution effect on the uses-side incidence  -  is                      { }
                                                                                                   

which is always positive. An increase in the pollution tax burdens consumers of the dirty good

more than it burdens consumers of the clean good through this effect.

          The clean sector substitution effect's magnitude on all three outcomes is scaled by the

magnitude of  . The easier it is for the clean sector to substitute between capital and labor

(larger  ), the larger is the size of each of the effects described above.17




17
  A similar effect is found in Rapanos (2006). For example, the first term in equation 34 in Rapanos (2006) is the
clean sector substitution effect on sources-side incidence, and it also is scaled by the substitution elasticity in
consumption between the two goods (denoted by  in his model).

                                                         21
III.D. Dirty Sector Substitution Effect

       The other substitution effect comes from substitutability among inputs in the dirty sector.

It is represented by the terms that contain the dirty sector's substitution elasticity,  . The dirty

                                                                               
sector substitution effect on the change in unemployment in equation 17 is    [(1 - ) +
                                                                                2


 ( -  )]. This effect contains two parts. The first, (1 - ), is strictly positive, so this part

of the effect increases the unemployment rate. The second part,  ( -  ), is of the same sign

as  -  , and so it is positive whenever the dirty sector is capital-intensive, and it is negative

whenever the dirty sector is labor-intensive. When the dirty sector is capital-intensive, then the

pollution tax unambiguously increases the unemployment rate via the dirty sector substitution

effect, but when the dirty sector is labor-intensive, then the dirty sector substitution effect

contains offsetting terms on unemployment.

       The dirty sector substitution effect on sources-side incidence in equation 18 is

                                                 
     [(1 - ) ( + ) + ( -  ) ( -   )]. The second half of this effect,
                  11                             11


                  
( -  ) ( -             ), is of the same sign as  -  , and so is positive when the dirty sector is
                  11

                                                                                                  
labor-intensive. The first half of the effect is of ambiguous sign, depending on the sign of  +
                                                                                                  11


. Like the dirty sector substitution effect on unemployment, the dirty sector substitution effect

on sources-side incidence can have ambiguous sign.

       However, the dirty sector substitution effect on uses-side incidence in equation 19,


     [  +   +   ], is unambiguously positive. This effect increases the burden of
 

the pollution tax disproportionately for consumers of the dirty good.

       Appendix A.III presents results from a more general model that does not impose the CES

assumption about production in the dirty sector; as a result the dirty sector substitution effect is

                                                    22
much more complicated. It depends on the relative substitutability among inputs (for example,

whether labor or capital is a better substitute for pollution), which is missing under the CES

assumption.



III.E. Other Outcomes

          The focus of our model is the effect of the pollution tax on unemployment, sources-side

incidence, and uses-side incidence, which are given in equations 17-19. Two other outcomes

may also be of interest: the effect on worker effort and on pollution. In a standard tax incidence

model, the sources-side burden on workers is fully captured by the change in the wage. Here,

workers' burden is more complicated, since the tax affects the wage, unemployment, and worker

effort, all of which contribute to worker welfare.18 The effect on effort is:

          (11 + 1)
      =            { [(1 - ) +  ( -  )] +   ( -  ) +  (1 - )}                                                  (20)
             11 

          Equations 3 and 4 show that the equilibrium change in effort is just a multiple of the

                                                        1+11                     1+11
equilibrium change in unemployment:  = 2 (                     )  . Since 2 (           ) < 0, if 11 > -1
                                                          11                      11

                                                                       
(always true under the effort function form  (  , ) =  (  ) +  ), the sign of the change in

effort  is always opposite of the sign of the change of unemployment  . These two effects on

worker welfare move in opposite directions; an increase in unemployment always coincides with

a decrease in effort (among those with jobs). Equations 3 and 4 also show that the change in the

wage is a multiple of the change in effort:  = (1 + 11 ) . When 11 > -1, the wage and the




18
  Our model does not have an explicit utility function that can be used to measure worker welfare. Fullerton and Ta
(2020) is an analytical general equilibrium that does have a utility function, and their section 10 considers welfare
implications. Bartik (2015) and Kuminoff et al. (2015) discuss the welfare implications of unemployment caused by
environmental regulations.

                                                         23
effort move in the same direction so have opposite effects on worker welfare; an increase in the

wage coincides with an increase in effort.19

                           1+11
         Since  = 2 (             )  , the effect of the pollution tax on effort can be decomposed into
                            11


the substitution effects and output effect that appear in equation 17 for unemployment. For

                                                         (11 +1)
example, the clean sector substitution effect is                      { (1 - )}, which is unambiguously
                                                             11 


negative. An increase in the pollution tax unambiguously decreases workers' effort through this

                                                           (11 +1)
effect. The output effect on the effort level  is                      {  ( -  )}, which is positive
                                                               11 


whenever  >  and 11 > -1. If the dirty sector is capital-intensive and workers' marginal

effort with respect to the real wage does not decline too fast as the wage increases, workers'

effort will increase when the pollution tax increases.

         Another outcome of interest is the effect of the pollution tax on pollution itself, .

Unfortunately, a closed-form solution for  is too complicated to be able to interpret. In

Appendix A.I, we present intermediate steps in the solution method, including an equation

(equation A.2) in which the change in pollution  can be expressed in terms of other endogenous

variables. Instead of an analytical solution, the effect of the pollution tax on pollution will be

considered below using numerical simulations.



IV. Numerical Simulations

         Here we numerically simulate the model by assigning parameter values calibrated from

data and taken from the previous literature. Ours is a simple two-sector, two-input model, not a




19
  This relationship holds for the change in the wage  , relative to the numeraire, but not necessarily for the relative
change in the wage compared to the rental rate,   -  , presented in equation 18.

                                                          24
CGE model, so the purpose of these simulations is not to pin down plausible quantitative values

for the magnitudes of these effects. Rather, the purpose is to explore how the net effects are

decomposed into the effects identified in the previous section and how sensitive the magnitudes

are to various parameter values. We begin by presenting base-case simulations decomposed into

the effects from the analytical model. Then we vary parameter values, including the effort

function elasticities.



IV.A. Calibration

        We use the 2017 Integrated Industry-Level Production Account (KLEMS) data provided

by the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis for the calibration of the factor share and factor

intensity parameters.20

        First, we use the energy inputs (in millions of dollars) as a measurement of the pollution

input  in our dirty sector. There are very few places with prices on pollution, so we do not

calibrate pollution based on market-based pollution policies; instead we interpret the pollution

input as an energy input. The KLEMS data contains 64 major industries. We rank them based

on their ratios of energy inputs to gross outputs, and we assign the top 16 energy-intensive

industries as the dirty sector and the remaining industries as the clean sector. The dirty sector

includes utilities (with energy inputs at 17.63% of output), rail transportation (10.08%), and

truck transportation (9.39%). The 47 clean industries range from accommodation (energy inputs

at 2.63% of output) to insurance carriers and related activities (0.06%). This assignment implies

that the dirty sector makes up about 30 percent of gross outputs. We let the weight of the price

of  on the price index ,  = 0.7, mirroring the fact that the clean sector is 70% of income.


20
  U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, "Production Account Tables, 1998-2017," https://www.bea.gov/data/special-
topics/integrated-industry-level-production-account-klems (accessed December 12, 2019).

                                                     25
         Second, the shares of each sector's revenue paid to labor, capital, and energy are

measured using the ratios of compensation to labor, capital, and energy to the outputs of each

sector. The clean sector is more labor-intensive, with about 61% of its revenue paid to labor, so

 = 0.39 and  = 0.61. The dirty sector is more capital-intensive and pays about 7% of its

revenue to energy inputs, so we have  = 0.07,  = 0.56 and  = 0.37.

         Third, we use the different factor intensities of the two sectors and their share of gross

output to calculate each sector's share of capital and labor. Sector X's share of capital is  =

0.62 and sector Y's is  = 0.38, showing that even though the dirty sector Y is capital-

intensive, it still uses a smaller share of the economy's capital because it only accounts for 30%

of the economy. We set the unemployment rate  to be 0.04 to roughly coincide with the

average U.S. monthly unemployment rate (4.35%) in 2017. Thus, we get  = 0.76,  =

0.20. These imply that  = 0.26 and  = 0.61.

         Fourth, we use unity for the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor in the

clean sector ( = 1) and the elasticity of substitution in consumption between the clean and

dirty goods ( = 1), following Fullerton and Heutel (2007). For the elasticity of substitution in

production in the dirty sector  , we use 0.5 based on Fullerton and Heutel (2010).21

         Finally, we found no source for the parameter values related to the effort function, 11

                                                                                                              
and 2 . When we impose the functional form described earlier in the text,  (  , ) =  (  ) +

                                                            (-1)
 , these parameters are 11 =  - 1 and 2 =                           . So, for the base case, we arbitrarily
                                                               




21
  Fullerton and Heutel (2010) model production in the dirty sector using Allen elasticities instead of CES (see our
Appendix A.III.), and they use  = 0.5,  = 0.5, and  = 0.3 for the three cross-price Allen elasticities. This
indicates that capital is a slightly better substitute for pollution than is labor ( >  ). With CES, though, these
Allen elasticities must all be equal to each other, so we choose 0.5 for their value ( ). In Table 4 below we will
consider alternate values that do not assume CES. In Fullerton and Heutel (2010), there is no effective labor  , just
labor , so we assume that their  is equal to our  , etc.

                                                         26
assume  to be 0.5 and  to be -0.5, implying that 11 = -0.5 and 2 = 0.5. Table 1

summarizes the base-case parameter values.



Table 1 ­ Base Case Parameter Values

       Parameter                  Value                 Parameter                  Value
                                  0.39                                              0.62
                                  0.61                                              0.38
                                  0.56                                              0.76
                                  0.37                                              0.20
                                  0.07                                              0.04
                                  0.61                                              0.26
                                   0.7                                                1
          11                      ­0.5                                                1
           2                       0.5                                               0.5
Note: These values are calibrated based on data and on the previous literature as described in the
text.


The exogenous policy choice variable is the change in the pollution tax   . We model the

change in the price of energy under a carbon tax set at the social cost of carbon (SCC). The

federal Interagency Working Group on Social Cost of Greenhouse Gases provides an updated

estimate of the SCC based on new versions of three IAM models (DICE, PAGE, and FUND) in

2016. We adopt an estimate of $40 per metric ton of CO2 based on the report (Interagency

Working Group on Social Cost of Greenhouse Gases, 2016). Then we calculate the weighted

average energy price with and without a carbon tax at $40 per metric ton CO2. The calculation is

based on the fuel price calculator provided by Hafstead and Picciano (2017), and we use the

2015 energy price and industrial sector energy usage data provided by the U.S. Energy

Information Administration.22 In 2015, the energy generated from coal, petroleum, and natural




22
  U.S. Energy Information Administration, "U.S. industrial sector energy use by source, 1950-2018,"
https://www.eia.gov/energyexplained/use-of-energy/industry.php (accessed December 12, 2019).

                                                       27
gas is 1.38, 8.25, and 9.43 quadrillion British thermal units (BTU), respectively. The average

percentage increase of prices for coal (all types), petroleum products, and natural gas is 264%,

25%, and 50%, respectively. Weighted by the energy usage amount, we get that the $40 carbon

tax increases the energy price by 35% on average. Therefore, we present simulation results with

  = 0.35. This choice of   allows us to compare our model's results to other models that

consider a carbon tax set at the SCC.23



IV.B. Results

            We first present results under the base-case parameterization. In Table 2, and all of the

numerical simulation tables, we present the effects of a 35% increase in the pollution tax on

unemployment ( ), the sources-side incidence ( -  ), and the uses-side incidence ( -  ),


which are the three main results from our model. Table 2 also presents the effect of the pollution

tax on effort ( ), and the subsequent tables also present the effect on effort and on pollution ( ).

The last row of Table 2 (row 5) presents the net effect of the tax, and rows 1 through 4

decompose this net effect into the four effects discussed earlier.



Table 2 ­ Base Case Simulation Results

 Row                                                          - 
                                                                           -                
   1              Output Effect               ­0.25%         0.44%           ­           0.12%
   2     Clean Sector Substitution Effect      0.76%        ­0.38%        1.27%         ­0.38%
   3     Dirty Sector Substitution Effect      0.30%        ­0.31%        0.29%         ­0.15%
   4         Efficiency Wage Effect               ­          0.60%        0.78%             ­
   5                Net Effect                 0.81%         0.35%        2.35%         ­0.41%
Note: This table presents the simulated effects on unemployment, sources-side incidence, and
uses-side incidence of a $40 per metric ton carbon tax (a 35% increase in the pollution tax) under
the base case parameter values (listed in Table 1).


23
     Our model is linear, so the effects of a smaller pollution price change are scaled linearly.

                                                             28
        From the theoretical results, there is no efficiency wage effect in the expression for

unemployment and workers' effort, and there is no output effect in the expression for uses-side

incidence (so these entries in Table 2 are blank).

        The net effect of the 35% increase in the pollution tax on unemployment is to increase

unemployment by 0.81% (a percent change in the unemployment rate, not a percentage-point

change). This is small, because the dirty (taxed) sector is just 30% of the overall economy, and

pollution is just 7% of the value of its inputs, and the tax rate increase is just 35%. The increase

in unemployment is mainly driven by the clean sector substitution effect (0.76% increase) versus

the dirty sector substitution effect (0.30% increase). Even though the dirty sector is the taxed

sector, substitution among inputs in the clean sector has a larger effect on unemployment. This

is because the clean sector is the larger sector (70%), and in general equilibrium, its substitution

possibility is more important for employment than is the dirty sector's substitution. The output

effect is negative since the dirty (taxed) sector is capital-intensive.

        For the sources-side incidence, the efficiency wage effect plays a significant role. Both

dirty and clean sector substitution effects serve to increase the relative burden on labor ( -  <

0). From these two effects alone, the wage relative to the capital rental rate decreases by 0.7%.

The output effect offsets these effects somewhat, again since the dirty sector is capital-intensive.

But the efficiency wage effect reverses the sign and completely offsets the substitution effects

and decreases the relative burden on labor. The sources-side incidence goes from favoring

capital to favoring labor.

        For the uses-side incidence (the relative burden on output prices), we see a positive sign

from all three effects; each puts more of the burden on consumers of the dirty good than on




                                                  29
consumers of the clean good. Ignoring the efficiency wage effect would miss about 30% of this

net effect.

        The net effect of a pollution tax on workers' effort level is that they work 0.41% less

hard, which implies a small utility gain if effort is costly. Just like the effect on unemployment,

this net effect is dominated by the clean sector substitution effect. Finally, Table 2 does not

present the base-case effect of the pollution tax increase on pollution, because that change cannot

be decomposed into the different effects. The net effect of the 35% pollution tax increase is to

decrease pollution by 19%.

        We compare our base-case results to those from CGE papers that simulate the effects of

carbon taxes on unemployment. In Hafstead et al. (2018), unemployment is generated through

search frictions, not efficiency wages. According to their Figures 2 and 3, a $40 per metric ton

carbon price with lump-sum rebate results in a 30% emission reduction and a 0.3 percentage-

point change in the unemployment rate. Given their 5% base steady-state unemployment rate,

the new unemployment rate is 5.3%, so the percent change is 6%.24 Castellanos and Heutel's

(2019) CGE model generates unemployment through a wage curve. They find that a $35 per ton

carbon tax increases unemployment by 4.4% and decreases emissions by 30%. Our $40 per

metric ton carbon tax results in a roughly 19% pollution reduction and 0.81% increase in the

unemployment rate, which is from our base 4% to 4.0324% (= 4 times 1.0081%). Thus, for

roughly the same pollution tax increase, those CGE models find a decrease in pollution about

twice as large as ours, and an increase in unemployment about five to six times as large as ours.




24
  Hafstead et al. (2018) also find that a roughly $15 per metric ton carbon price with lump-sum rebate induces a
15% emission reduction and a roughly 3% increase in the unemployment rate (percent not percentage-point).
Hafstead and Williams (2018) also model unemployment through search frictions, though their model is a two-
sector general equilibrium model rather than a CGE model. They find that a $20 per ton carbon tax increases
unemployment by 3% (5% to 5.16%) and decreases emissions by 13.6%.

                                                        30
       Several explanations could account for this difference in the magnitudes of the results.

First, in those other models, unemployment is generated differently than in our model. In

Hafstead et al. (2018), unemployment is generated via search frictions, and in Castellanos and

Heutel (2019), unemployment is generated via a wage curve. In our model, it is generated via

efficiency wages. Second, those models are multisector calibrated CGE models, while ours is a

two-sector analytical model. Third, our model is linearized, so the 35% tax rate change that we

model may create non-linearities. Fourth, our results could be sensitive to the choice of the

effort function parameters 11 and 2 , for which we were unable to find a calibration source. We

investigate this in the sensitivity analysis below.

       The base-case results depend on the base-case parameters, so we next conduct sensitivity

analysis over parameter values. First, we vary the effort function elasticity parameters 11 and

2 . These results are presented in Table 3, which presents the outcomes when all of the

parameters are at the base case, except for these two parameters. In Table 3 and the remaining

tables, we also present the resulting change in pollution, .



Table 3 ­ Sensitivity Analysis ­ Varying Effort Function Elasticities

 Row                                                    -            -                          
   1          -0.1            0.1        1.08%         0.46%       2.21%       -19.22%      -0.97%
   2          -0.1            0.5        0.22%         0.42%       2.22%       -19.22%      -1.00%
   3          -0.1            0.9        0.12%         0.42%       2.22%       -19.22%      -1.00%
   4          -0.5            0.1        3.67%         0.49%       2.33%       -18.99%      -0.37%
   5          -0.5            0.5        0.81%         0.35%       2.35%       -18.96%      -0.41%
   6          -0.5            0.9        0.46%         0.34%       2.35%       -18.95%      -0.41%
   7          -0.9            0.1        5.00%         0.50%       2.39%       -18.87%      -0.06%
   8          -0.9            0.5        1.16%         0.32%       2.43%       -18.80%      -0.06%
   9          -0.9            0.9        0.66%         0.29%       2.43%       -18.79%      -0.07%
Note: This table presents the simulated effects on unemployment, sources-side incidence, uses-
side incidence, and pollution of a $40 per metric ton carbon tax (a 35% increase in the pollution
tax) for different values of the effort function elasticities. Their base-case values are used in row
5. All the other parameters are kept at their base case values (listed in Table 1).

                                                  31
          In Table 3, unemployment increases the least when the elasticity of marginal effort with

respect to wage (11 in absolute value) is small and the elasticity of effort with respect to

unemployment (2 ) is large. The explanation is that if 11 is large in absolute value, workers'

marginal reduced effort increases quickly as the wage drops. This restrains the magnitude of the

wage dropping relative to capital price because the reduced wage will cause extra loss of

productivity due to a quickly decreased effort level. If 2 is large, workers are more sensitive to

unemployment and work much harder, then their extra productivity will offset the rising cost of

energy and there will be less increase in unemployment. In row seven, where the magnitude of

11 is highest and 2 is smallest, we see the largest increase in unemployment of 5%. This is

about the same magnitude change found for the same carbon tax increase in Hafstead et al.

(2018).

          The uses-side incidence always falls disproportionately on consumers of the dirty good

and is not much affected by the effort function elasticities. Likewise, the fall in pollution is

largely unaffected by these elasticities: a 35% increase in the tax rate yields a pollution reduction

of about 19%. The effort level always decreases when varying effort function elasticities, and its

change correlates more strongly with 11 . The effort decreases the least when the elasticity of

marginal effort with respect to wage (11 in absolute value) is large.

          Next, in Table 4, we investigate the effect of substitution elasticities in the dirty sector.

Rather than simply varying the CES elasticity  , we employ the more complicated model of

dirty sector production from Appendix A.III, where production is modeled using Allen

elasticities of substitution. We vary the Allen cross-price elasticities in Table 4. We keep the

elasticity between labor and capital,  , equal to its base-case value of 0.5, and we vary the

other two cross-price elasticities  and  to vary among 0, 0.5, and 1. All of the other


                                                    32
parameters are kept at their base case values, except that the own-price elasticities  ,  , and

 must also vary with the cross-price elasticities. To demonstrate, we also include in the third

column of Table 4 the resulting value of the own-price elasticity  .



Table 4 ­ Sensitivity Analysis ­ Varying Dirty Sector Substitution Elasticities

  Row                                                   -        -                           
    1        0        0        0         0.66%        0.60%     2.32%        -1.85%       -0.33%
    2        0      0.5      -2.64       0.49%        0.88%     2.28%        -8.43%       -0.25%
    3        0        1      -5.29       0.32%        1.15%     2.24%       -14.99%       -0.16%
    4       0.5       0        -4        0.99%        0.08%     2.39%       -12.31%       -0.49%
    5       0.5     0.5      -6.64       0.81%        0.35%     2.35%       -18.96%       -0.41%
    6       0.5       1      -9.29       0.64%        0.63%     2.31%       -25.57%       -0.32%
    7        1        0        -8        1.31%       -0.44%     2.46%       -22.66%       -0.65%
    8        1      0.5     -10.64       1.13%       -0.16%     2.42%       -29.37%       -0.57%
    9        1        1     -13.29       0.96%        0.12%     2.38%       -36.04%       -0.48%
Note: This table presents the simulated effects on unemployment, sources-side incidence, uses-
side incidence, and pollution of a $40 per metric ton carbon tax (a 35% increase in the pollution
tax) for different values of the substitution elasticities  and  . Their base-case values are
used in row 5. All the other parameters are kept at their base case values (listed in Table 1).


In Table 4, unemployment always increases with the 35% increase in the carbon tax, and it

increases the most when capital is a better substitute for pollution relative to labor ( >  ).

The value of  -  varies across different parameter values, and it is small or even negative

when  >  . The change in pollution  is always negative, but its magnitude varies

considerably. The pollution tax is much more effective in reducing pollution when inputs are

strong substitutes. When  is large in absolute value (as in the last row), then the change in

pollution is large in absolute value. The percent change in pollution in these rows from the 35%

pollution tax increase is similar to that found in Hafstead et al. (2018). The effort level decreases

the most in row 7 when capital is a much better substitute for pollution than is labor. The effort

decreases the least in row 3 when labor is a much better substitute for pollution than is capital.


                                                 33
       Lastly, in Table 5, we hold the factor substitution elasticities and the effort function

elasticities fixed at their base-case values and consider the impact of changes in factor intensities.

We vary the value of  -  from --0.35 to 0.55; this measures the capital intensity of the dirty

sector ( -  is positive if the dirty sector is more capital intensive than the clean sector). We

maintain the assumption that the clean sector is 70% of income, and we set the ratio of total

capital to labor in the economy to be 0.45/0.55 to be roughly consistent with the base case.



Table 5 ­ Sensitivity Analysis ­ Varying Factor Intensities

    Row          -                               - 
                                                                 -                              
      1          -0.35          1.10%          -0.11%          2.59%        -19.11%        -0.55%
      2          -0.25          1.06%          -0.04%          2.57%        -19.09%        -0.53%
      3             0           0.95%           0.13%          2.50%        -19.04%        -0.48%
      4           0.25          0.86%           0.29%          2.41%        -18.97%        -0.43%
      5           0.35          0.82%           0.35%          2.36%        -18.95%        -0.41%
      6           0.55          0.75%           0.46%          2.27%        -18.90%        -0.38%
Note: This table presents the simulated effects on unemployment, sources-side incidence, uses-
side incidence, and pollution of a $40 per metric ton carbon tax (a 35% increase in the pollution
tax) for different values of relative factor intensities. All the other parameters are kept at their
base case values (listed in Table 1). Their base-case values (rounded to the nearest hundredth)
are used in row 5.

       As the dirty sector becomes more capital-intensive (as  -  increases), the increase in

unemployment declines, capital bears an increasing share of the burden ( -  increases), and

workers' effort level decreases less. Varying capital intensities yields only minor variation in the

relative change in output prices and the change in pollution.

       The calibration is based on US data, but one could also apply this model to other

countries with different parameters. For example, China has a proportionately larger

manufacturing sector than the US. China's manufacturing industry contributes about 40.5% of




                                                 34
its GDP in 2017 and employs 28.1% of its workers.25 In the US, the manufacturing sector takes

up only 19.1% of the GDP, which is only half of China's, with the service sector being the largest

contributor to GDP (80%). The employed US population in manufacturing sector is only 19.7%.

Without carefully recalibrating our simulation using industry-specific data, we can roughly take

the manufacturing sector as the dirty sector to find that  -  for China is around -0.2, which

is more labor-intensive than the US. This means Row 2 of Table 5 will more closely reflect the

impact on China's economy.

        In summary, the purpose of these simulations is not to pin down point estimates of the

pollution tax's effects (this is not a CGE model), but rather to explore how the net effects are

decomposed into different channels and to explore how sensitive the effects are to parameter

values. From the decomposition (Table 2), we learn that the efficiency wage effect has a

substantial influence on the sources-side incidence of the tax. From the sensitivity analyses

(Tables 3 through 5), we learn that the net effect on unemployment is highly sensitive to the

elasticities of the effort function but relatively insensitive to substitution elasticities in production

or factor shares. The sources-side incidence is highly sensitive to both substitution elasticities in

production and factor shares, while the uses-side incidence is generally insensitive to any of

these parameters. The effect of the pollution tax on pollution only depends on the substitution

elasticities in production.




25
  National Bureau of Statistics of China, "China Statistical Yearbook 2019,"
http://www.stats.gov.cn/tjsj/ndsj/2019/indexch.htm


                                                        35
V. Conclusion

       We use an analytical general equilibrium model with unemployment generated through

efficiency wages to analyze the effect of a pollution tax on unemployment and on sources-side

and uses-side incidence. Worker effort depends on unemployment and the real wage. Pollution

is modeled as an input to production. We decompose the general equilibrium impact of the tax

on unemployment and incidence into several effects, including an output effect, substitution

effects, and an effect that we call the efficiency wage effect. The efficiency wage effect reduces

the tax's burden on labor. The magnitude of this efficiency wage effect depends crucially on how

workers' effort responds to both the real wage and unemployment. When workers are more

responsive to the real wage, the efficiency wage effect is larger, and when workers are more

responsive to unemployment, the efficiency wage effect is smaller.

       We further illustrate our results through calibrated numerical simulations. At the base-

case parameterization, the new efficiency wage effect offsets the substitution and output effects

on the sources-side incidence. Ignoring the efficiency wage effect, the burden of a pollution tax

increase falls mostly on labor, while including it, the burden falls mostly on capital. On

unemployment, the output effect reduces unemployment since the dirty sector is capital-

intensive, but it is dominated by substitution effects that increase unemployment. The

magnitudes of the effects on unemployment and on sources-side incidence depend greatly on the

structure of the effort function, though the magnitude of the uses-side incidence is largely

independent of that. The uses-side incidence always falls disproportionately on consumers of the

dirty good. The effect on pollution reduction only varies drastically when we change the

substitutability between the three inputs of dirty sector. A pollution tax increase is most effective

when both labor and capital are strong substitutes for pollution.



                                                 36
        We employ a parsimonious model to interpret the intuition behind our results, so there

are many ways in which the model could be extended by relaxing various assumptions. For

example, further work could consider other effort functions, including one that depends on the

wage to rental rate ratio (Agell and Lundborg 1992), or could include heterogeneity among

workers (Fullerton and Monti 2013). We do not consider the benefit of pollution reduction and

its incidence or effect on unemployment. We do not consider the effects of different choices of

revenue recycling, for example using pollution tax revenue to reduce the pre-existing labor tax

rate. Future work could consider including various labor market policies, such as the minimum

wage or pre-existing labor taxes.

        Nevertheless, our results provide theoretical insights into the impact of environmental

policy on labor markets that could inform policymakers. A key takeaway is that the effect of

policy on unemployment depends on how unemployment is generated in the economy. Our

model is an efficiency wage model, rather than a search-and-matching model (Hafstead and

Williams 2018, Aubert and Chiroleu-Assouline 2019) or another model of unemployment. But

our model nests several different structural causes of efficiency wages. Under a fair wage

model, worker effort may respond greatly to the real wage, while under a shirking and firing

model, worker effort may respond greatly to unemployment. We show that how effort responds

is a crucial determinant of how overall unemployment will be affected by a pollution tax, as well

as its incidence.




                                                37
References

Agell, Jonas, and Per Lundborg. "Fair wages, involuntary unemployment and tax policies in the
        simple general equilibrium model." Journal of Public Economics 47, no. 3 (1992): 299-
        320.

Akerlof, George A. "Labor contracts as partial gift exchange." The Quarterly Journal of
       Economics 97.4 (1982): 543-569.

Aubert, Diane, and Mireille Chiroleu-Assouline. "Environmental tax reform and income
       distribution with imperfect heterogeneous labour markets." European Economic
       Review 116 (2019): 60-82.

Bartik, Timothy J. "The social value of job loss and its effect on the costs of US environmental
        regulations." Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 9, no. 2 (2015): 179-197.

Baylis, Kathy, Don Fullerton, and Daniel H. Karney. "Negative leakage." Journal of the
        Association of Environmental and Resource Economists 1, no. 1/2 (2014): 51-73.

Böhringer, Christoph, Klaus Conrad, and Andreas Löschel. "Carbon taxes and joint
      implementation. an applied general equilibrium analysis for Germany and India."
      Environmental and Resource Economics 24, no. 1 (2003): 49-76.

Cappelli, Peter, and Keith Chauvin. "An interplant test of the efficiency wage hypothesis." The
       Quarterly Journal of Economics 106.3 (1991): 769-787.

Castellanos, Kenneth A., and Garth Heutel. "Unemployment, labor mobility, and climate policy."
        Working paper No. w25797, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2019.

Colmer, Jonathan, Ralf Martin, Mirbelle Muûls, and Ulrich Wagner. "Emissions trading, firm
      behavior, and the environment: evidence from French manufacturing firms." Paper
      presented at NBER Summer Institute 2018 environmental & energy economics,
      Cambridge, MA, USA, 2018.

Curtis, E. Mark. "Who loses under cap-and-trade programs? the labor market effects of the NOx
        budget trading program." Review of Economics and Statistics 100, no. 1 (2018): 151-166.

Dissou, Yazid, and Muhammad Shahid Siddiqui. "Can carbon taxes be progressive?" Energy
       Economics 42 (2014): 88-100.

Fullerton, Don, and Garth Heutel. "The general equilibrium incidence of environmental
        taxes." Journal of Public Economics 91, no. 3-4 (2007): 571-591.

Fullerton, Don, and Garth Heutel. "The general equilibrium incidence of environmental
        mandates." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2, no. 3 (2010): 64-89.



                                                38
Fullerton, Don, and Holly Monti. "Can pollution tax rebates protect low-wage earners?" Journal
        of Environmental Economics and Management 66, no. 3 (2013): 539-553.

Fullerton, Don, and Chi L. Ta. "Costs of energy efficiency mandates can reverse the sign of
        rebound." Journal of Public Economics 188 (2020): 104225.

Garnache, Cloé, and Pierre Mérel. "Environmental Policy in General Equilibrium: When the
      Choice of Numeraire Matters." CESifo Working Paper No. 8354, 2020.

Gonzalez, Fidel. "Distributional effects of carbon taxes: The case of Mexico." Energy
      Economics 34, no. 6 (2012): 2102-2115.

Hafstead, Marc, and Paul Picciano. "Calculating various fuel prices under a carbon tax."
       Common Resources (blog), Resources for the Future, November 28, 2017,
       https://www.resourcesmag.org/common-resources/calculating-various-fuel-prices-under-
       a-carbon-tax/.

Hafstead, Marc AC, and Roberton C. Williams. "Unemployment and environmental regulation in
       general equilibrium." Journal of Public Economics 160 (2018): 50-65.

Hafstead, Marc AC, Roberton C. Williams III, and Yunguang Chen. Environmental Policy, Full-
       Employment Models, and Employment: A Critical Analysis. No. w24505. National
       Bureau of Economic Research, 2018.

Harberger, Arnold C. "The incidence of the corporation income tax." Journal of Political
      Economy 70, no. 3 (1962): 215-240.

Interagency Working Group on Social Cost of Greenhouse Gases. "Current Technical Support
       Document (2016): Technical Update of the Social Cost of Carbon for Regulatory Impact
       Analysis Under Executive Order 12866." Environmental Protection Agency (2016).
       https://archive.epa.gov/epa/climatechange/social-cost-carbon-technical-
       documentation.html EPA's Web Archive, Dec 12, 2019.

Karney, Daniel H. "General equilibrium models with Morishima elasticities of substitution in
      production." Economic Modelling 53 (2016): 266-277.

Kuminoff, Nicolai V., Todd Schoellman, and Christopher Timmins. "Environmental regulations
     and the welfare effects of job layoffs in the United States: A spatial approach." Review of
     Environmental Economics and Policy 9, no. 2 (2015): 198-218.

Martin, Ralf, Laure B. De Preux, and Ulrich J. Wagner. "The impact of a carbon tax on
       manufacturing: Evidence from microdata." Journal of Public Economics 117 (2014): 1-
       14.

Mieszkowski, Peter M. "On the theory of tax incidence." Journal of Political Economy 75, no. 3
      (1967): 250-262.

                                               39
Pissarides, Christopher A. Equilibrium unemployment theory. MIT press, 2000.

Raff, Daniel MG, and Lawrence H. Summers. "Did Henry Ford pay efficiency wages?" Journal
       of Labor Economics 5.4, Part 2 (1987): S57-S86.

Rapanos, Vassilis T. "Tax Incidence in a Model with Efficiency Wages and
      Unemployment." International Economic Journal 20, no. 4 (2006): 477-494.

Shapiro, Carl, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. "Equilibrium unemployment as a worker discipline
       device." The American Economic Review 74.3 (1984): 433-444.

Weiss, Andrew. Efficiency wages: Models of Unemployment, Layoffs, and Wage Dispersion.
       Princeton University Press, 2014.

Yellen, Janet. "Efficiency Wage Models of Unemployment." American Economic Review 74, no.
       2 (1984): 200-205.




                                              40
Figure 1: Graphical Intuition of Efficiency Wage Model




Notes: These graphs demonstrate the intuition behind how a change in the pollution tax affects wages and employment in an
efficiency wage model. The left graph is the labor market, where labor supply is perfectly inelastic. The right graph presents workers'
effort function  as a function of the wage  on the x-axis. The firms set the wage where the effort function is tangent to a ray from
the origin, maximizing productivity per dollar paid, and thus creating unemployment. A pollution tax can reduce labor demand from
 to . Unemployment and thus the effort function change, and the equilibrium wage decreases from   to   .




                                                                  41
Appendix

A.I. Solution Method

       We begin by eliminating through successive substitution several of the endogenous

variables from the system of equations. Output quantities  and  can be eliminated with

equations (13) and (14); effort and the effective wage  and  can be eliminated with equations

(4) and (5); and the effective labor levels      
                                             and  can be eliminated with equations (1) and (2).


Then, capital and labor used in each sector (     
                                              ,  ,  ,  ) can be eliminated with equations (6),


(7), (9), and (10), after substitution in for the variables that had already been eliminated. That

leaves six remaining endogenous variables ­  ,  ,  ,  ,  , and  ­ and the following six
                                                               

equations:

                                                  11
                                             =
                                                                                                (1)
                                                  2

                 ( -  )( +  ) - (1 +  (1 -  11 ))  + (  +  )
                                             
                           = [2 (1 +  -  ) -    ]                                               (2)
                                             

                                       =   -  11                                                (3)

                                   =   -  11  +                                                 (4)

                                       0 =  + (1 - )
                                                                                                (5)

                                         ( - )
                                              =
                                            
        -(  +   + 1) + (  +  )  +  [(1 +  )2 -]                                                 (6)
                                            
     +[ ( + 1) - (  +  ) 11 ] - (  +  +   +  )  

We then successively solve for the remaining variables.




                                                 42
A.II. Model without Capital

       We consider a competitive two-sector economy using only one factor of production:

labor, which is perfectly mobile between sectors. The second variable input, pollution, is only

used in the production of the dirty good (sector ). This simpler model allows us to more easily

some of the effects found in the more complicated general solutions presented in the main text.

       The constant-returns-to-scale production functions become:

                                            = ( )

                                           = ( , )

       The labor market equations are the same as equations (1) ­ (5) in the original model.

There is now only one resource constraint, which is on labor and is the same as equation (7).

Producers of  choose between labor and pollution. The elasticity of substitution in production

 is defined to capture this response to factor price changes:

                                       -  =  ( -   )                                           (7)

where  is defined to be positive.

       Using the assumptions of perfect competition and constant returns to scale, we get

                                             + 
                                         +  = 
                                                                                               (8)

                                
                              +  =  ( +         )
                                         ) +  ( +                                              (9)

       Totally differentiate each sector's production function and substitute in the conditions

from the perfect competition assumption to get

                                              = 
                                                                                             (10)

                                        =  
                                            +  
                                                                                             (11)




                                                 43
       The consumer side is the same as in our original model, represented by equations (15)

and (16). We also normalize the overall price level so that  = 0, and we drop that variable out

of the system.

       The full model is equations (1) ­ (5), (7), (15), (16) from the main text model, and (A7)

through (A11). It contains one exogenous policy variable ( ), 13 equations and 13 endogenous

variables (        , 
            ,  ,  ,  , , ,  , 
                               , ,
                                   ,  
                                     , ). The model is solved with successive

substitution similar to the method described in Appendix A.I.

       The results are as follows.

                                              (1 - )  
                                     =
                                                                                               (12)
                                           2 ((1 - ) + )

                                              (1 - )  
                                     =                                                         (13)
                                           11 ((1 - ) + )

                                                      
                                      -  =                                                     (14)
                                                (1 - ) + 

                                          (11 + 1)(1 - )  
                                      =                                                        (15)
                                          11 ((1 - ) + )

       Note that there is no  ,  , or  in the expressions, which means there is no clean

sector substitution effect, dirty sector substitution effect, or output effect in an economy with no

capital. Therefore, equations A12 through A15 fully capture the efficiency wage effect of the

pollution tax on the change of unemployment, wage, relative output prices, and workers' effort.

                                                                     (1-)
To interpret the results, we need to take a closer look at the term (1-)        . The term 
                                                                            +


represents the weight of the clean good's price in the overall price level, or the share of the clean

sector in the economy. Therefore, if the overall revenue of the economy is 1 unit, then the

compensation to effective labor is (1 - ) +  = (1 - ) + , since all the clean



                                                 44
sector's revenue is paid to labor ( = 1). The compensation to pollution or energy is (1 -

) . Then equation A12 becomes

                                        
                              =
                                         >0
                                       2

which is very straightforward. The effect of an increase in the pollution tax on unemployment is

determined by the share of revenue paid to energy compared to labor in the economy, but its

effect will be restrained by the elasticity of workers' effort with respect to unemployment (2 ).

An increase in the pollution tax will increase unemployment more for a more energy-intensive

economy. If workers' effort is more sensitive to unemployment (2 is large), then their extra

productivity will offset the rising cost of energy and there will be less increase in unemployment.
                                                                                                1
In the solution to the full model in the text (equation 17), the overall effect is also scaled by  for
                                                                                                 2


the same reason, though the terms inside the bracket are much more complicated.

       Similarly,

                                        
                              =           <0
                                       11

       The effect on the wage is determined by the share of revenue paid to energy compared to

labor, restrained by the rate at which workers get satisfied with the wage (11 ). The more

energy-intensive the economy is, the carbon tax increase will lead to lower wages to compensate

for the rising costs on energy. If 11 is large in absolute value, workers' marginal effort declines

quickly as the wage increases, or equivalently, as the wage decreases the marginal reduced effort

increases quickly. This restrains the magnitude of the wage dropping, because the reduced wage

will cause an increasing loss of productivity. This effect is also seen in the analogous solution to
                                                  1
the full model (equation 18), which is scaled by  .
                                                   2


       Likewise,

                                                 45
                                             
                  -  =               =          >0
                           (1 - ) +        1 - 

       The increase of the dirty good price relative to the clean good price is proportional to the

ratio of revenue paid to energy compared to labor, whose effect will be restrained by the share of

the dirty sector in the economy (1 -  ).

       Lastly,

                  (11 + 1)(1 - )                11 + 1    
              =                            =(         )     
                   11 ((1 - ) + )                11         

       Since 11 < 0,  is negative as long as 11 > -1, consistent with Cobb-Douglas effort.

The effect of a pollution tax increase on workers' effort is determined by the share of revenue
                                                  11 +1
paid to energy compared to labor, factored by (         ). If 11 is large in absolute value, workers'
                                                   11


marginal effort declines quickly as the wage increases, then workers' equilibrium effort will

become only slightly lower. If 11 is closer to zero, which means the effort is closer to a linear

function of wage, then workers' equilibrium effort will become much smaller. In other words,

since the policy reduces the wage ( < 0) workers will work less hard, but "how much less"

depends on their effort elasticity to wage. Curiously, the effect on effort is independent of

effort's responsiveness to unemployment, 2 , even though unemployment is also changed by the

pollution tax. In the main model in the paper, the elasticity 2 affects effort through its effect on

the equilibrium change in the wage, but that effect is missing in this simpler model.

       These results help us tease out the meaning of the efficiency wage effect: the weight of

energy or pollution expenditures in the economy adjusted by the workers' response to the

changing real wage and unemployment rate due to the tax. However, this model cannot be used

to analyze sources-side incidence or to see how substitution between labor and capital affects

unemployment, which is why the more complicated model with capital is the focus of this paper.

                                                  46
A.III. Model with Allen elasticities in Dirty Sector

        Instead of assuming a CES production function in the dirty sector, we can be more

general by modeling production using Allen elasticities of substitution  . This elasticity is

positive for two substitutes and negative for two complements, and the own price Allen elasticity

must always be negative. We assume that cross-price Allen elasticities are always positive, so

that any two inputs are substitutes for each other. The magnitudes of the Allen elasticities

determine which inputs are better substitutes. For example, if  >  , then capital is a better

substitute for pollution than is labor.

        Following Fullerton and Heutel (2007) (see their Appendix A for the derivation), we

arrive at two equations describing the dirty sector's production decisions:

                   
                 -  =  ( -  ) +  ( -  )
                                        +  ( -  )                                                             (9)

                   
                 -  =  ( -  ) +  ( -  )
                                        +  ( -  )                                                            (10)

All the other equations remain the same as in the general model. This is a more general case of

our original model that can greatly complicate the solutions. The equations (9') and (10')

simplify to equations (9) and (10) from the main model when all of the cross-price elasticities 

are equal to each other and equal  .26

        Solving the model, we get the closed form solutions:



                         [- (1 - )( -  ) +  ( -  )]
                     
                   =
                        { +[ (1 - )( -  ) -  ( -  )] }                                                       (17)
                     2 
                            +  ( -  ) +  (1 - )


26
  Karney (2016) shows that production can also be characterized by Morishima elasticities rather than Allen
elasticities, and his equations 19 and 20 demonstrate how Morishima elasticities can also be transformed into CES
production.

                                                        47
                              -  =
     -[ - )( -  -  - 11  )( -  ) -  (1 - )11 ( -  )]
        (1         )   (

    {-[- (1 - )( -  ) + ( - 11  )( -  ) +  (1 - )11 ( -  )]} (18)
                                                              
11 
         - ( -  )(- + 11  ) +  (1 - )(1 + 11 ) - (1 - )

 - 

    -  [( -  +  -  ) + ( -  +  -  )]
   -  [( -  +  -  ) + ( -  +  -  )]
=                                                                                                     (19)
                     
               + - 
   {                 11             }

These solutions use the same constants defined in the main solution, except that here the

denominator is   [- ( -  ) +  ( -  ) ] + [ ( -  ) -
                                                                   
 ( -  ) ] +  ( -  )(  -   ) -    +  ( +  ).
                                                                   11


        The efficiency wage effect, the output effect, and the clean sector substitution effect are

all identical in these equations to what they were in the original model's equations. The dirty

sector substitution effect here is different; it is all of the terms that contain the Allen elasticities

of substitution  . This effect in each outcome is long and complicated and difficult to interpret,

which is why in the main model we chose to employ the CES assumption. The relative

magnitudes of the various Allen elasticities affects the sign and magnitude of this effect.

The dirty sector substitution effect can be simplified under an additional assumption. The

simplifying assumption is that the two sectors have equal factor intensities; that is,  =   .

Then we have  =  = (1 + ) and  =  + 1. This eliminates the output effect. It also

greatly simplifies the complicated dirty sector substitution effect. The solutions under this

assumption are:

          
     =
             (1 + ){-[ (1 - )( -  ) +  ( -  )] +  (1 - )}  
          2 




                                                   48
 - 

     -(1 + )[(1 - )(-2 (1 -  )) -  ( +  ) + ( - 11  )( -  )]
=       {                                                    }  
    11               +(1 + ) (1 - )(1 + 11 ) - (1 - )

                          -(1 + )[  ( -  +  +  )]
               
          -  =  {                                 }  
                                  +(1 + ) - 
                                             11

        The dirty sector substitution effect on unemployment  is -  (1 + )[ (1 -
                                                                       2


                                                                           
)( -  ) +  ( -  )]. We can sign the following parts: -   (1 + ) < 0 and
                                                                           2


 (1 - )( -  ) < 0. Therefore, as long as  -  < 0, this effect is positive. If

capital is a better substitute for pollution than is labor ( -  < 0), then an increase in the

pollution tax increases unemployment through this effect. However, if labor is a better substitute

for pollution than is capital ( -  > 0), we cannot say with certainty whether it increases or

decreases the unemployment through this effect.

                                                           
        The dirty sector substitution effect on  -  is -   (1 + )[(1 - )(-2 (1 -
                                                            11


 )) -  ( +  ) + ( - 11  )( -  )]. If capital is a better substitute for

pollution than is labor ( -  < 0), then this effect is strictly negative, so the pollution tax

imposes more burden on labor.

        When it comes to the uses-side incidence, the dirty sector substitution effect is

    
-      (1 + )[  ( -  +  +  )]. The sign of this term is determined by  -
    

 +  +  . Since  and  are negative, one simple case is that if capital and labor are

better substitutes than are capital and pollution ( >  ), then the dirty sector substitution

effect on  -  is positive, which means the price of the dirty good increases more than the

clean good through this effect.


                                                 49
