                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                HISTORICAL DATA:
                       WHERE TO FIND THEM, HOW TO USE THEM

                                        Paola Giuliano
                                       Andrea Matranga

                                      Working Paper 27967
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27967


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2020




Prepared for the Handbook of Historical Economics, edited by Alberto Bisin and Giovanni
Federico. We thank seminar participants at the Handbook of Historical Economics Conference at
New York University. All remaining errors are ours. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Paola Giuliano and Andrea Matranga. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Historical Data: Where to Find Them, How to Use Them
Paola Giuliano and Andrea Matranga
NBER Working Paper No. 27967
October 2020
JEL No. N0

                                         ABSTRACT

The use of historical data has become a standard tool in economics, serving three main purposes:
to examine the influence of the past on current economic outcomes; to use unique natural
experiments to test modern economic theories; and to use modern economic theories to refine our
understanding of important historical events. In this chapter, we provide a comprehensive
analysis of the types of historical data most commonly used in economic research and discuss a
variety of issues that they raise, such as the constant change in national and administrative
borders; the reshuffling of ethnic groups due to migration, colonialism, natural disasters, and
many other forces. We also point out which methodological advances allow economists to
overcome or minimize these problems.


Paola Giuliano
Anderson School of Management
UCLA
110 Westwood Plaza
C517 Entrepreneurs Hall
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and IZA
and also NBER
paola.giuliano@anderson.ucla.edu

Andrea Matranga
Chapman University
andreamatranga@gmail.com
    1. Introduction
        The use of historical data has become a standard tool in economics. The use of these data
poses several challenges. Historical data are collected by different people, at different times, using
different units of analysis. Especially when looking at long periods of time, not only the quality can
vary but also the geographical unit needs to be adjusted, for example because borders across
geographical units are not constant. The composition of populations can also change due to migration,
natural disasters and many other forces.
        This chapter describes the main data sources that have been profitably used in economics
research, and their most prominent applications. We broadly classify them in geographical data,
ethnographic data and Censuses. We also describe other commonly used historical data. For each
group, we outline the issues they raise and also point out which methodological advances allow
economists to overcome or minimize these problems.
        The chapter starts with the description of geographical data. Exploiting the geographical
element of the data to match different variables over time, is the most common task economic
historians have to perform before even starting to analyze their data. We start by describing how
original sources should be evaluated: before going through the time and effort of digitizing a map, for
example it is important to do a preliminary step and considers capabilities and motives of the individual
or entity who compiled the map. We proceed by showing how to use a geographical information
systems software (GIS) to convert historical maps in modern format and how to analyze and integrate
the data obtained using spatial locations. After digitizing different maps, one of the difficulties is that
both the number and the geographical boundaries can change over time. Take the case of the United
States: there were only 250 counties in 1790, whereas the number in 2000 is well above 3000. The
chapter describes in details different potential ways of linking counties across the different census
years. We finally describe other geographical data commonly used in economics, which, unlike old
maps that need to be digitized, are already available and ready to use, simply outlining potential issues
in using them.
        The chapter proceeds by describing the use of ethnographic data. A prolific strand of the
economic literature has documented a strong persistence of economic outcomes over time, including
economic growth, political development and a variety of cultural traits (Putternam and Weil, 2010,
Spolaore and Wacziarg, 2013, Michalopoulos and Papaioannou, 2013, Alesina, Giuliano and Nunn,
2013, Voigtlaender and Voth, 2012). The most comprehensive information about societal
characteristics going back to pre-industrial times is the Ethnographic Atlas, assembled by Murdock

                                                    2
(1967a), containing information on political, economic and cultural traits of societies. Economists
vastly used this dataset to document persistence in political, economic or cultural outcomes (Gennaioli
and Rainer, 2007; Michalopoulos and Papaioannou, 2013, Giuliano and Nunn, 2013; Alesina et al.,
2013; Becker, 2019 to quote just few studies). The challenge faced by researchers when using this
important source is how to connect historical characteristics of pre-industrial societies to current
outcomes: the further back into the past one goes, the more the population composition of a given
place tends to diverge from people who currently live there, because ethnicities moved over time or
even disappeared. For example, the ethnicities reported in the Ethnographic Atlas for the case of the
United States were Native-American populations, mostly involved in hunting, fishing and horticultural
communities and organized in small, pre-state political units. By contract, if one looks at the actual
composition of the population in the United States today, a large fraction comes from ethnicities that
lived in settled agricultural societies organized in large states. The chapter describes different ways
used in literature to link the past to the present, using historical geographical locations (Alsan, 2015;
Mayshar et al, 2015), current distribution of languages or ethnicities across the world (Alesina et al.,
2013, Giuliano and Nunn, 2018), a migration matrix (Putternam and Weil, 2010) or individual data at
the ethnicity level (Alesina, Giuliano and Nunn, 2013; Becker, 2019).
        Recent advances in economic history came from the use of historical complete census data
(mostly for the United States), whose biggest advantage has been to link individuals' names over time,
therefore allowing researchers to provide new and more precise answers to topics such as social
mobility (Abramitzky et al., 2014). Contrary to modern administrative data, which contains social
security numbers, historical censuses can only be linked using name, presenting a huge challenges
especially for individuals with common names. The chapters present the different methods used to
match individuals over time (and their limitations): from direct match (Ferrie (1996) and Abramitzky
et al., (2012, 2014, 2019a)) to a more sophisticated machine-learning (Feigenbaum, 2016) or fully
automated probabilistic algorithm (Abramitzky et al., 2019b, 2019c)
        The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the use of geographical data. Section 3
is dedicated to ethnographic data. Sections 4 and 5 describe Census data and other historical data,
whereas Section 6 concludes.


    2. Geographical Data
        Researchers using historical datasets often need to exploit the geographical element of their
data to match the different variables to each other. Economic historians are much more likely to use

                                                   3
data that were collected by different people at different times, using different units of analysis. For
example, an economic historian who wants to study the effect of wars on contemporary outcomes
might be using the amount of wars engaged in by German principalities in the 15th century, but might
need to cross-reference them with the population levels of German provinces a few centuries later,
which have completely different borders. The only way to do so is exploiting the geographic overlap
in the two sets of jurisdictions.
        The common way of dealing with geographical data is a geographic information system (GIS)
which allows to analyze and integrate different types of data, using spatial locations. Any GIS data one
can find will be of one of two kinds, shapefiles and rasters. Most kinds of data can be represented in
either format, and it is possible to convert between the two, but different types of data and collection
processes generally call for one or the other.
        i)      Shapefiles are vector formats, that give precise coordinates for specific points, which
                might represent distinct features such as villages or wells, or be strung together in lines
                or polygons to describe borders, roads, canals, etc. For example if we were interested
                in using the border between Colorado and Wyoming (a straight line along the 41st
                parallel North) for an RDD along the lines of Card and Krueger (1994), we could
                summarize it in the following very short shapefile giving only the two endpoints (41, -
                109.5; 41 -102.05). Even relatively complicated borders (or other linear features) can
                be summarized by files that are quite small. Shapefiles can be similarly used to describe
                point features, such as villages, wells, or homicides.
        ii)     The second way of representing geographical data is through rasters. Rasters are image
                files that have been georeferenced, i.e. have been tagged with information on the
                geographic location of the corners of the image, and the precise way the flat image
                should be stretched to conform to the curved surface of the earth. For the case of the
                border between Wyoming and Colorado, one would have to create a raster covering
                the entire states of Wyoming and Colorado with cells small enough to record the data
                with the precision required. The difficulty with creating a border using a raster file is
                the creation of a large number of records coded as "Not a Border" for all the points
                in the interior of the two states, which could easily result in a file be several gigabytes
                in size.
        Generally different types of data are better suited for storage using one of the two methods.
Data originally created as a rectangular grid of points, for example scanned maps, aerial photographs,

                                                    4
or satellite imagery and its many derived products (e.g. cloud cover, rainfall, landcover) are normally
saved as raster files, whereas data indicating just specific locations, such as borders, wells, or villages,
are more conducive to the use of shapefiles. All GIS packages provide many tools for converting data
from raster to shapefile and vice versa.
        Below we provide a concrete example on how to convert historical data using the GIS tools.
Often economic historians need to work with scanned maps, whose quality can vary. Suppose that
the researcher needs to convert a paper map of medieval borders in Europe, which might show each
country with a different color. Once scanned each country will in fact be composed of pixels that
slightly differ in shade, because of imperfections in the paper and printing technique, as well as random
fluctuations in the acquisition process.
        Esri ArcGIS provides the "Classify" tool that allows researchers to collapse all these similar
colors to a raster of unique values, which can then be used as is, or converted to polygons. Generally,
such a dataset will still need to be cleaned to remove objects within each country that are of a different
color, such as rivers, cities, and printed text. 2
        2.1. Assessing the Suitability of Geographic Data
        Before going through the time and effort of digitizing a paper map, it is necessary to do a
preliminary step and consider the capabilities and motives of the individual or entity who compiled
the map. To warrant use, the map should have been compiled by people that had the technical and
resource capability to collect the data, and the incentives to do so accurately (unless of course reporting
biases are themselves being studied!).
        How was the map created?
        It is often useful to have at least a rough understanding of how the map was compiled. For
example, if a 19th cartographer was asked to produce a map of UK counties by population density,
the best procedure will involve two steps. In the first step one could use the map to simply trace out
the borders of the British counties. In the second step, the researcher could use data from the UK
census to convert the population densities into shades, and color in the counties appropriately. Since
this tracing process inevitably introduces errors, digitizing this map directly would import those errors
into the dataset. It would therefore be better to instead digitize the county borders from a large scale

2  This process can often be partially automated by running the "Zonal Statistics" tool with the Median option,
and a radius larger than the thickness of the largest feature that should be ignored. For example if the problem
is a network of rivers that are 5 pixels wide, a radius of 10 pixels will usually work well. These routines are
sufficiently powerful to generally pick out roads, forests, or other similar uniformly colored features from
satellite imagery.
                                                       5
map directly into a shapefile, and then assign to each county the correct values from the population
density map.
        Other issues can arise when maps are compiled by cartographers based on accounts from
explorers. The report might have said simply that after crossing to the left bank of River X, she
encountered population Y. In absence of further details, the cartographer might have generalized this
observation by assigning the entire left bank of the river to population Y, which may or may not have
been true. If the area under study is an entire continent, it is perhaps acceptable to use a map with
such generalizations, since over a large sample size many sources of error will even out. But if we are
interested in estimating the long run persistence of the effect of the institutions of the single
population Y, such a map could not be reasonably be taken at face value. Tracking down the exact
history of how a map was made could be too laborious (particularly if it is not the variable of interest,
but one of dozens of controls), but a diligent researcher will seek contact with experts on the history
of population Y, that could point out what controversies might exist over the precise borders of their
territory.
        How to deal with interpolated data
        Another common issue in digitizing a map is the use of interpolated data, especially common
when one has to deal with weather data. Suppose one is interested in converting point data for rainfall
to a raster file. The first step before using such a point dataset, would be to go to the original point
dataset and interpolate the data yourself with a known method rather than using the historical
interpolation. If the variable in question can be expected to change very discontinuously, it might be
advisable to eliminate observations that are too far away from an actual sampling point. For example,
if a researcher was using data from pollution that was interpolated based on data from a collection of
measurement stations, it would be wise to check whether (as it is likely) these stations are more
commonly placed in populated centers, which are likely to also be major sources of pollution. If that
is the case, the researcher would be wise to eliminate interpolated observations that were more than a
fixed distance from each actual measurement.
        As a best practice to make the assessment of the original quality of the data transparent, one
could add some explanation on the quality of the original data. For example "The map was compiled
by the Engineer Corps of India to facilitate movement of troops, based on an extensive survey
conducted over the course of 10 years. Since they had the technical capability, and the incentives to
record the land accurately, we can assume that the location of the villages was accurately recorded".
        2.2. Projections, inaccurate or sketched maps, distance measures

                                                   6
        Map projections describe mathematically how an Earth's curved surface is conceptually
flattened for representation in maps or their digital equivalent. To be an ideal representation of
geographic reality, a map would have to be conformal, equal area, and equidistant. Conformal means
that the map is not stretched locally. Equal area implies that areas on the map are proportional to areas
on the planet. And equidistant means that distances are preserved, though unfortunately this is possible
only between two points.
        Unfortunately, while projections can have any of these properties, no projection can have all
of them at the same time. So economic historians have to pick the best compromise depending on
the area depicted by the map, and its intended use. For example, if we are interested in using a shapefile
of country borders and a raster of total annual rainfall to calculate average rainfall within different
countries, it's important to ensure that the calculation is performed using an equal area projection. This
will ensure that each pixel in the precipitation raster represents the same geographic extent, and will
avoid certain areas of each country being incorrectly weighted more.
        Universal Transverse Mercator Projection (UTM)
        For areas up to a few hundred kilometers in extent, the easiest solution is to use the appropriate
Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) projection. The UTM projection is a family of projections each
covering a slice of the Earth that is 6 degrees wide in longitude. The area within each slice can be
treated as essentially flat, and coordinates are given in meters East or North of an arbitrary point.
Specifically the size of the slices was chosen so that any errors in distance would be at most 0.1%
which is essentially negligible for most economic history projects.
        Below we describe a workflow to digitize historical maps.
        Approaches to digitization
        Let's assume a researcher is interested in creating a shapefile with the borders of the Holy
Roman Empire in 1786, and the territories of imperial cities, based on the following map, which uses
an unknown projection (Figure 1).




                                                    7
                                Figure 1. The Holy Roman Empire in 1786




         One would first load some already georeferenced data for the same area, to which points from
the scanned map can then be matched. For example in this case our base-map consisted of data on
country borders (and coastlines) and major rivers. We first need to click on a point to geo-reference
on the scanned map, and then on the corresponding spot on our base-map. Two is the minimum
number of point pairs, but this will only be precise if one knew or correctly guessed the projection.
More points help average out some inaccuracies and will allow for progressively more flexible
transformations such as polynomials up to order three.
         In our example, given the European setting and the fact that the meridians converge towards
North, we first guessed that the map had been projected using some sort of conic projection. 3 We



3In this case we chose the Europe Albers Equal Area Conic as the base projection. This projection is a conic, equal area
map projection that uses two standard parallels. With this projection, although scale and shape are not preserved, the
distortion between the two chosen parallels is minimal. If an incorrect projection had been chosen, the geo-referencing

                                                           8
then matched the locations of a number of prominent points on each map. Note that in this case,
since a graticule was available in the scanned map (Figure 2), it would have been more accurate to
match the intersections of the latitude and longitude lines, but since these are not always available we
wanted to show how points could be selected. Instead in this case the two graticules can be compared
to show the inaccuracies introduced by this process (most prominent in the North Sea).


   Figure 2. The Holy Roman Empire in 1786, Georeferenced Using Coastlines and Rivers




         Using more points is generally better for older, hand traced maps, since they average out the
inevitable inaccuracies. After selecting each point, one should check if the general fit of the two maps
improves, and remove the point if it does not (this usually means the compiler of the map made a
tracing error). If older maps that appear to be locally distorted are used, it is better to use the spline
function. This forces each pair of points to fit exactly, and then stretches the parts in between to make

would still have worked, but it would have been necessary to specify more points, and use a third order polynomial or
spline stretching to ensure a good fit.

                                                         9
them fit. One should continue by adding points until all visible features match. Again, if adding a
particular point makes the fit visibly worse, that point should be deleted, and other reference points
used. This can happen if for example the cartographer was inaccurate in placing a particular village
which is being used as a reference point.
        Once the researcher is satisfied with the fit between the map being georeferenced and the
reference map, they can either create polygons to represent the features manually, or use the "Classify"
tools described above to partially automate the process. To do so, the researcher will have to select
some areas of the map that are of the colors that she wants to extract. The algorithm will then select
all pixels that have colors similar to those chosen. This will generally create rasters that have holes in
them due to the presence of text, which is not the same color as the area of interest. These holes can
be filled using for example the Zonal Statistics tool with the Median option, and a radius large enough to
span the holes to be filled (Figure 3).


               Figure 3. Classification Tool Results and After Median Smoothing




        The following map shows the end result. The black and white line delineates the areas owned
by the Hapsburg Monarchy, plus the territories of the Imperial Cities (Figure 4).




                                                   10
Figure 4. The Automatically Generated Borders of the Hapsburg Lands and Imperial Cities




       2.3. Reconciling changing unit boundaries
       After digitizing different maps, one of the difficulties of using historical data at the
geographical level is that both the number and the geographic boundaries can change over time. For
the case of the United States, one of the most systematically studied countries, the number and
location of the counties changed frequently and significantly since 1790. The difficulty is creating a
consistent panel of spatial units, which are consistent over time. The most used source for historical
geographical data of the United States is the National Historical Geographic Information System
(NHGIS). This website is rich in terms of information, but provides data with geographical identifiers
at the time of data collection. The number of counties changed a lot over time. For example, there
were only 250 counties in 1790, and the number is higher than 3000 in 2000.
       There are different ways of linking counties across all the different census years. Horan and
Hargis (1995) published a County Longitudinal template in order to allow for an inter-temporal
comparison of fixed county groups between 1840 and 1990. At the time of publication, ARCGIS was

                                                 11
not much used. What the authors did was to aggregate counties, as defined by their boundaries in
1990, into larger units on the basis of earlier historical county boundary configurations. These clusters
are larger the further one goes back in time.
        The most commonly used approach is the one followed by Eckert et al. (2018). They provide
a crosswalk from historical county boundaries in every decade from 1790-2000 to the 1900 county
borders. Eckert et al. (2018) used ArcGIS to provide a crosswalk that disaggregate historical counties
into 1990 county boundaries based on their land area. They overlaid historical county shape files with
the 1990 county shape files and then calculate the share of land of each historical county that forms
part of a given recent county. Using such land partitions as weights, researchers can directly aggregate
historical information to spatial units as defined by the recent boundaries. The advantage compared
to Horan and Hargis (1995) is that the number of counties stay constant over time.
        A different approach has been followed by Hornbeck (2010) who started with historical U.S.
county boundary files (Carville, Heppen and Otterstrom, 1999) and intersected county borders in later
decades with historical county borders. When later counties fall within more than one 1870 county,
data for each piece are calculated by multiplying the later county data by the share of its area in the
1870 county. For these later periods, each 1870 county is then assigned the sum of all pieces falling
within its area.
        2.4. Detailed Data Presentation: A practical guide using GIS
        Maps serve many uses in papers.
        Presenting summary statistics as maps
        One frequent use of maps is to locate the area of interest, particularly when discussing areas
that the reader cannot be expected to be immediately familiar with. This is perhaps more frequent in
presentations than in papers, since the audience can't easily check reference material in a seminar
room.
        Generally speaking, most economics paper that include historical content could benefit from
the inclusion of one summary map. This can help the reader locate the area of the study in the world,
familiarize himself with any location names that are important in the story and see visually the relevant
sources of geographical variation. If the dataset contains less than a few hundred observations, it is
usually feasible to show all the observations at this stage.
        If understanding the story requires displaying multiple types of geographic data, it is generally
possible to consolidate into a smaller number of combined maps. For example instead of showing



                                                    12
side by side maps of waterways, it might be better to combine them into a single map showing both
types of data in different colors.
        Where the map is only used to show the geography of the area in question, such as a handful
of cities with some associated borders, backgrounds like Gray Earth (pictured below in Figure 5) 4 can
be more informative than showing just the coastlines and land borders. The map is ideal for many
uses because it exaggerates elevation in flatter areas. This allows e.g. the Hymalayas and the much less
prominent Appalachians to be visible on the same map.


                                     Figure 5. The Map of Gray Earth




        Showing all of the observations in a dataset as a map is also useful in that it can preempt
readers' doubts as to the representativeness of the sample.
        Showing causal effects using maps and integrating maps and scatterplots
        Communicating causal relationships through maps is often difficult. This is particularly true in
situations where both the independent and dependent variables are most easily represented by a raster,
since both can't be simultaneously visible. For example if we wanted to show with a map the
relationship between rainfall and population density, the simplest approach would be to show the two

4 The Grey Earth background, including versions with rivers and sea floor relief, is available from
https://www.naturalearthdata.com/downloads/10m-raster-data/10m-gray-earth/
                                                        13
maps side by side (Figure 6). This works reasonably well, since the relationship is generally strong (e.g.
in the US the area west of Texas is very dry and very unpopulated until you reach the Pacific Coast.)


                      Figure 6. Comparison of Rainfall and Population map




        However if we did the exercise for only e.g. the San Francisco Bay Area, the relationship might
no longer be as obvious, since for example mountain areas will have more rainfall, but less population.
As a side-by-side comparison might now be difficult to read, in this case it might be better to transform
the rainfall raster into a simple binary raster showing if rainfall is above or below a specific threshold,
This could then be overlaid over the vegetation map, to show more clearly how the preponderance
populated areas are in the locations with lower precipitations, i.e. population density is lower in the
mountains (Figure 7).




                                                    14
  Figure 7. Comparison of Rainfall and Population Density for the San Francisco Bay Area




        Mapping as a research tool
        So far we have assumed that the paper has already been written, and the researcher is simply
deciding how to best present her results to the profession. However, making maps can also be a
powerful tool at every step of the research process.
        For example, while conducting their literature review, researchers can make simple maps, e.g.
they can drop pins on every important city mentioned in the text, draw lines along the trade routes
mentioned, and start finding and adding potentially important variables to the map. Besides improving
their understanding of the historical events being studied, this can help them recognize patterns that
might be significant for their research, and will eventually make it easier to transition to the hypothesis
testing phase of the project.


                                                    15
        Once the results are ready, these same place-markers can be used as needed for any of the
maps necessary for the working paper.
        2.5. Other geographical data
        In this subsections we describe geographical data commonly used in economic research.
Unlike old maps that need to be digitized, most of these data are already available and ready to use.
We therefore just outline potential issues in using them.
                 2.5.1. FAO GAEZ
        The FAO's Global Agro-Ecological Zones dataset (GAEZ) (Fisher et al, 2002) was created to
document the extent to which agriculture is possible, and performed all over the world. It provides
freely accessible data in five main areas: land and water resources, agro-climatic resources, suitability
and potential yield for 280 crops under a variety of farming technologies, actual production data for
the main crops, and information on the gap in yield and production.
         As an illustration for the use of these data we can describe the application to the introduction
of the potato in Europe (Nunn and Qian, 2011). The idea being that while actual modern production
or productivity of potatoes is endogenous to current economic conditions, the soil and climate
suitability of different European regions to a crop which had never been cultivated in the Old World
before is plausibly exogenous. Similarly, Alesina, Giuliano, and Nunn (2013) used the relative
suitability for either plow positive or plow negative crops to instrument for the relative productivity
of women's labor. As the FAO GAEZ data covers an enormous variety of crops and cultivation
techniques, a wide range of hypothesis can be tested, such as the importance of irrigation in developing
state capacity (Bentzen et., al 2017), the role of subsistence versus cash crops (Nunn and Qian, 2011),
the implications of improved agricultural technology for structural transformation (Bustos et al., 2016),
and agriculture vs pastoralism (Voigtlander and Voth, 2013a).
        The model documentation is well written and worth reading, particularly if the GAEZ data is
central to the research project. For example, soil suitability for various crops is recorded for low,
intermediate, and high input levels. These levels correspond to using traditional methods and seeds,
improved methods and seeds, or fully mechanized agriculture. 5

5 The documentation tells how these values were calculated: nutrient availability is of utmost importance for

low level input farming; nutrient retention capacity is most important for high level inputs; nutrient availability
and nutrient retention capacity are considered of equal importance for intermediate level inputs farming;
nutrient availability and nutrient retention capacity are strongly related to rooting depth and soil volume
available, and oxygen available to roots, excess salts, toxicity and workability are regarded as equally important
soil qualities, and the combination of these four soil qualities is best achieved by multiplication of the most
limiting rating with the average of the ratings of the remaining three soil qualities.
                                                        16
        So if we use the increase in production going from low to high input levels, we will be largely
exploiting variation in the ratio of nutrient retention to nutrient availability. If any of these geological
factors are connected with our variable of interest in another way, for example greater risk of
landslides, higher slope, or mineral deposits, the analysis will naturally be invalid.
        The dataset also includes an enormous array of gridded geographic data, such as weather,
geology, and soil cover. Furthermore these data have already been harmonized across countries, and
derived consistently. They are therefore a natural first place to look for such data when needed. These
can be used for data analysis directly, or as derived measures tailored to specific empirical purposes.
        One important aspect to consider is that the FAO calculated the crop potentials for the
purpose of determining how the world could be fed today, under a variety of scenarios. This means
that care must be exercised when using the data in an historical context, as today's crops and
techniques are of course very different from those of the past.
        The usual workaround is to use the suitability using "low input levels", i.e. only hand power
and unimproved variety. While this assumption is often perfectly reasonable, it might become invalid
if this modern data is used to proxy for conditions many centuries or even millennia into the past.
        Over these extended timeframes, we can expect a certain degree of coevolution between the
crops and their farmers, as more efficient cultivation techniques are developed, and the plants
themselves adapt to their new conditions through both artificial and natural selection.
        For example, imagine we are interested in measuring the effect of the introduction of coffee
to a hypothetical Pacific archipelago in the 18th century on present day urbanization. We might be
tempted to use the FAO GAEZ productivity level with low inputs as a proxy for the exogenous
suitability for coffee before its introduction. Let us imagine that we find that in fact high suitability for
coffee production is a significant predictor of urbanization, which we attribute to agglomeration
economies and persistence of urban settlements.
        However, there is a potential confounding factor. The FAO is calculating present day
productivity. Even the traditional cultivars available today are very different from those that would
have initially have been brought over on the ship. For example, it could be that the coffee available at
the time grew best at higher altitudes, but that due to transportation issue the plantations were initially
created close to the harbor used for export. Over time, the local cultivars would have adapted to their
new conditions, and farmers would have learned how to coax the most output in the soil and weather
they were familiar with. By the time that transportation to the highlands became feasible, coffee
cultivation may in fact have become more productive in the lowlands, which is what we measure now.

                                                     17
          Therefore, if we had the true soil suitability for coffee in 1700, we would have found the
opposite effect --- that greater suitability led to less urbanization. The reason for finding a positive
effect was that the presence of a harbor drove both the location of cities, and of the first plantations.
In turn, the decision to plant those first coffee trees in a particular location ensured that the local
cultivars adapted to those conditions in the long run.
          Whether this scenario applies to particular historical instances is something that must be
determined by researchers on a case by case basis. What must be avoided are cases in which a) enough
time has elapsed since crop introduction to expect significant learning by doing and b) there is a
potential factor that could have both influenced the initial decision to plant a particular crop and
independently had an effect on the variable of interest.
                 2.5.2. Rivers
          Data on rivers is frequently included in economic history regressions, either as a variable of
interest, or as a control. Depending on the historical context, rivers have had remarkably varied
impacts on human societies. They are used as sources of irrigation and drinking water, transportation
(Bleakly and Lin, 2012), fish, mechanical energy (Caprettini and Voth, forthcoming), and obstacles to
be crossed by both traders and armies (Matranga and Nathkov 2019).
          Depending on the specific factor being analyzed, different types of data on rivers are most
appropriate. If the water source aspect is the primary interest, it is obviously necessary to know how
much water is actually in the river. For many regions, the annual water flow of rivers can be obtained
only at its mouth, and perhaps at a few of the important forks. If finer grained data is necessary,
ground elevation and precipitation data can be combined to calculate the Flow Accumulation, which
is the amount of water that should theoretically flow through each pixel of the map given its slope
and precipitation totals: While this methodology excludes the role of evaporation and ground water
transport, it should in most cases produce results that are at least ordinally consistent, particularly in
smaller areas (e.g. the Po's plain in Italy).
          From a transportation standpoint, besides the actual river network, the extent of each river's
watershed can also be used. Since river transport of bulk goods was generally much cheaper than
overland transport by pack or draft animal, the patchwork of watersheds will often be a reasonable
description of the areas that can form integrated markets for the major staple crops, or other bulky
trade items such as lumber. Historically important examples of such areas are the Po' Valley, the
Rhineland, the Yangtze and Yellow River basins, the Mississippi Valley, and the Indus and Ganges
Valley.

                                                   18
        While the tracks of rivers are generally fairly stable on human timescales, the lower portions
of many rivers (such as the Mississippi and the Yellow River) have experienced multiple changes in
their tracks during historical times, sometimes swinging by hundreds of miles. It is important therefore
to not accept data on river location blindly, but to instead check whether the data reflects the actual
location of the rivers at the time of the study.
        Data on modern rivers is available from Hydrosheds (Lehner et al., 2008). More detailed data
can generally be acquired by the various national geological offices.
                2.5.3. Elevation
        Elevation is another frequently used variable in economic analysis. Higher elevations areas are
generally colder, wetter, and harder to travel in. This has major impacts on the organization of
production of the human societies which inhabit it. High altitude areas are also much harder for armies
to conduct offensive operations in, giving an advantage to the defenders. In particular, since Nunn
and Puga (2012), the de facto standard for measuring the impenetrability of an area is the Terrain
Ruggedness Index (TRI) of Riley et al. (1999). The TRI is simply the power mean of the differences
in altitude between each cell and the neighboring eight cells. Note that in general, ruggedness
calculations will give different results depending on the resolution of the raster being used, therefore
consistency is key to obtaining a valid dataset.
        2.5.4. Climate data
        Many economic history papers have used climate data, as either variable of interest or control.
(see Dell et al. 2014 for a review). The two most frequently used variable are temperature and rainfall.
These variables have been used as instruments for warfare or agricultural productivity (Miguel et al
2004, Dell et al. 2012, Burke and Leigh 2010)). These two measures are also part of the de facto
standard set of controls for regressions in economic history, where available.
        If only cross sectional variation is required, it is sometimes appropriate to use modern climatic
averages as proxies for past average climatic conditions. This is easier to justify if the units of
observation are widely scattered in various climate zones and if the period of interest is not too remote,
or part of a known climatic anomaly. For example modern temperature averages could plausibly proxy
for past temperature in world national capitals in 1750. They would, however, likely not be a good
proxy for the temperatures of different cities on the shore of Lake of Geneva during a specific year
of the Little Ice Age.




                                                   19
3.   Ethnographic data
        A prolific strand of the economics literature has documented a strong persistence of economic
outcomes over time, including economic growth, political development and a variety of cultural traits
(Putternam and Weil, 2010, Spolaore and Wacziarg, 2013, Michalopoulos and Papaioannou, 2013,
Alesina, Giuliano and Nunn, 2013, Giuliano and Nunn, forthcoming,Voigtlaender and Voth, 2012).
        The historical dataset containing the most comprehensive information about societal
characteristics going back to pre-industrial times is the Ethnographic Atlas, assembled by Murdock
(1967a). The original dataset is collected at the ethnicity level and contains information on 1,265 ethnic
groups, all observed prior to industrialization or European contact. The earliest observation dates are
for groups in the Old World where early written evidence is available. For the parts of the world
without a written history, the information is from the earliest observers of these cultures. Overall, 23
ethnicities are observed during the seventeenth century or earlier, 16 during the eighteenth century,
310 during the nineteenth century, 876 between 1900 and 1950, and 31 after 1950. For nine ethnicities
an exact year is not provided. The dataset contains information on political, economic and cultural
traits of societies, and it has been used in various papers to analyze the long-term effects of historical
characteristics. 6 The variable in the original database are names v1, v2, etc. There are 115 variables in
the dataset. The type of variables present in the dataset is provided in Table 1.




6
  One issue with the original Ethnographic Atlas is that European groups are under-represented, the information
about these groups was available but anthropologists were interested in studying ethnicities that could be
actually be observed. Giuliano and Nunn (2018) created an extended version of the Ethnographic Atlas, adding
several additional ethnicities. Specifically, they use three sources. Two sources are data collections, one
containing 17 ethnic groups from Eastern Europe (Bondarenko, Kazankov, Khaltourina and Korotayev, 2005)
and the other containing information from Siberia (Korotayev, Kazankov, Borinskaya, Khaltourina and
Bondarenko, 2004). The third source, the World Ethnographic Sample, was also assembled by Murdock
(1967b), and it contains additional 17 European ethnicities not included in the original Ethnographic Atlas. The
complete sample contains information on 565 ethnic groups. Giuliano and Nunn (2018) construct three
versions to link the past to the present. One using only information contained in the Ethnographic Atlas, one
adding the Eastern European and Siberian identities, and the third one including the 17 additional ethnicities
contained in the World Ethnographic Sample.
                                                      20
                               Table 1. Ethnographic Atlas, variables
 Variables                                                 Societal characteristics
                                                             Economic characteristics
 v1-v5                               Main form of economic subsistence (agriculture, husbandry,
                                     fishing, hunting and gathering
 v39-v42                             Animals and plow cultivation, type of animal husbandry
 v44-v65                             Sex and age occupational specialization
 v79-v88                             Type of dwelling
                                                       Political and societal characteristics
 v32-v35, v72,v94                    Political organization and religion (jurisdictional hierarchy of
                                     local community and beyond the local community, the
                                     presence of high gods and which types of games the society
                                     was practicing), succession to the office of local headman
 v66-v69                             Class stratification
 v70-v71                             Type of slavery
 v73-v77                             Inheritance rules
 v90                                 Political integration
                                                             Cultural characteristics
 v6-v27, v43                         Various forms of societal organization, mostly related to
                                     marriage practices, and type of descent
 v36-v38, v78                        Societal behavior of boys and girls such as male genital
                                     mutilation, post-partum sex taboos, pre-marital sexual
                                     behavior
 v97-v99                             Linguistic Affiliation (by language continent, language
                                     phylum, subfamilies)
                                                           Geographical characteristics
 v91-v92                             Region (Africa, Mediterranean, East Eurasia, Insular Pacific,
                                     North and South America) and area within region
 v95-v96                             Climate
 v103-v106                           Latitude, longitude
                                                                  Miscellaneous
 v89, v93                            Inclusion in summary atlas volume, ethnographic atlas
                                     number
 v100-v102                           Date (millennium, century, year with century)
 v107-v111                           Society name (first, second....nine letters)

                 3.1.    Political characteristics
         The Ethnographic Atlas contains several measures of political and institutional characteristics.
One of the most widely used variable is the level of jurisdictional hierarchy beyond the local
community. The variable, which is generally interpreted as a measure of political centralization or
political sophistication, measures the level of political authority when one moves beyond the local
authority. It attributes the value of 0 to groups lacking any form of centralized political organization,
1 to petty chiefdoms, 2 to large paramount chiefdoms/small states and 3 or 4 to large states. For
                                                     21
example, if the local village chief is the highest level of authority, and he or she does not answer to
anyone above them, then the variable would take on a value of zero. If above the chief there was a
district leader, and above this the paramount chief, then this variable would take on the value of four.
Gennaioli e Rainer (2007) documents a strong correlation between the provision of public goods
(education, health and infrastructure) in Africa and the centralization of their ethnic groups'
precolonial institution.
        Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2013) also use the degree of centralization and study
whether it matters for contemporary economic performance, as proxied by satellite images of light
density at night. They find a strong correlation, which also holds within pairs of adjacent ethnic
homelands, with different legacies of pre-colonial institutions.
        Mayshar et a. (2015) argue that hierarchies and states were related to differences in the
appropriability of agricultural surplus, rather than to differences in land productivity. They provide
empirical evidence supporting the theory that the presence of cereals (a type of crop much easier to
appropriate than other crops) is strongly related to political hierarchy, calculated using data from the
Ethnographic Atlas.
        Another measure present in the Ethnographic Atlas is the extent of village democracy during
the pre-industrial period. This variable reports the traditional form of succession of the local headman
(or close equivalent such as clan chief). More specifically, the categories recorded in the data are:
patrilineal heir, matrilineal heir; appointment by a higher authority; seniority or age; influence, wealth,
or social status; formal consensus (including elections); and informal consensus. A given society has a
tradition of democracy if the appointment of the local headman was through either formal consensus
or informal consensus. Giuliano and Nunn (2013) show that having experienced local democracy in
the past makes it more likely to develop democratic institutions today. The evidence provided by the
authors suggest that the persistence comes from the development of more supportive beliefs of
national democracy today.
                3.2.       Economic characteristics
        Alesina, Giuliano and Nunn (2013) test the hypothesis that traditional agricultural practices
influenced the historical division of labor and the evolution of gender norms. They find that societies
that traditionally practiced plough agriculture in the past, today have less equal gender norms,
measured using reported gender-role attitudes and female participation in the workplace, politics and
entrepreneurial activities. They use a measure from the Ethnographic Atlas to calculate the historical



                                                    22
reliance on plough agriculture, and proxy plough agriculture using the agroclimatic suitability for crops
that benefit from the plough. The data is provided by the FAO GAEZ project (see Section 2.5.1).
        Becker (2019) studies how reliance on pastoralism has been relevant in determining
restrictions on women's sexuality, such as female genital cutting, restrictions on women's freedom of
mobility, and norms about their sexual behavior. For pastoralists it was hard to check paternity due to
extended periods of male absence from the settlement. Using within-country variation across 500,000
women, Becker (2019) shows that women coming from pastoral societies are more likely to have
undergone infibulation, adhere to more restrictive norms about women's promiscuity, are more
restricted in their freedom of mobility.
        She constructs a measure on historical dependence on pastoralism, by combining two variables
from the Ethnographic Atlas: the degree to which a society depended on animal husbandry (from 0 to
100%) combined with the predominant type of animal in that specific society. For the predominant
animals she defines a dummy if the societies has a herding animal (sheep, cattle, horses, reindeer,
alpacas, or camels) and 0 otherwise (pigs, dogs or poultry or not animals at all).
        Another commonly used variable is the measure of complexity of settlements. Ethnic groups
are classified as belonging to categories going from nomadic to having complex settlements. 7 This
variable has been used by a number of scholars as a measure of traditional economic development by
assigning each non-missing category an integer value from 1 to 8 (Alesina, Giuliano and Nunn, 2013,
Giuliano and Nunn, forthcoming, and Michalopoulos and Papaioannou, 2013).
                3.3.    Cultural characteristics
        Enke (2019) studies the long-term effect of different societal organization, based on how tight
the kinship structure was. He finds that societies with a historically tight kinship structure regulate
behavior through communal moral values, revenge taking, emotions of external shame, and notions
of purity and disgust. In loose kinship societies, cooperation is enforced through universal moral
values, internalized guilt, altruistic punishment, and the appearance of moralizing religions.
        He constructs an index measuring the extent to which people in preindustrial societies were
embedded in large, interconnected extended family networks. He follows Henrich (2020) and relies
on information on local family structures and descent systems. More specifically he identifies two
societal characteristics in the Ethnographic Atlas that reflect strong extended family networks: the


7  Categories in between are: Semi-nomadic, semi-sedentary, compact but not permanent settlements,
neighborhoods of dispersed family homesteads, separate hamlets forming a single community, compact and
relatively permanent settlements.
                                                   23
presence of extended family systems and post-marital residence with parents (family structure) and
the presence of lineages and localized clans (descent systems).
        For family structure, he creates a variable that equals 1 if the domestic organization is around
independent nuclear families and 0 otherwise. The idea is that living in extended family systems is an
indication of the presence of large interconnected family networks. He also creates a variable equal to
1 if the wife is expected to move in with the husband's group or viceversa, and 0 otherwise. Strong
kinship are indicated by norms that prescribe residence with the husband or wife group.
        On the descent systems, the distinction is between unilineal or bilateral descent, and between
segmented communities and localized clans. Unilineal descent systems track descent primarily through
one line (maternal or paternal) as opposed to through both lines, and induce strong and cohesive in-
groups. For segmented communities and localized clans, he defines a variable equal to 1 if people are
part of localized clans that live as segmented communities and 0 otherwise. Clans are important to
build very large extended family networks because they allow very distantly related people to feel
connected.
        Another cultural practice that has received considerable attention in recent research is the
practice of bride price, which is a transfer of money and/or other valuable assets that is made at
marriage from the groom and/or his parents to the bride's parents. The importance of this tradition
for female educational investments has recently been studied by Ashraf, Bau, Nunn and Voena (2020),
Corno and Voena (2016) and Corno, Hildrebrandts and Voena (2017).
        The Ethnographic Atlas categorizes the marriage customs of pre-industrial societies into the
following groups: Bride price, which is also known as bride wealth and is a transfer of a substantial
consideration in the form of goods, livestock, or money from the groom or his relative to the kinsmen
of the bride; token bride price is a small or symbolic payment only; bride service, which is a substantive
material consideration in which the principal element consists of labor or other services rendered by
the groom to the bride's kinsmen; gift exchange, which is a reciprocal exchange of gifts of substantial
value between the relatives of the bride and groom, or a continuing exchange of good and services in
approximately equal amounts between the groom or his kinsmen and the bride's relatives; female
relative exchange, which is a transfer of a sister or other female relative of the groom in exchange for
the bride; dowry, which is a transfer of a substantial amount of property from the bride's relative to
the bride, the groom, or the kinsmen of the latter; and no significant consideration, which is an absence
of any significant consideration, or giving of bridal gifts only.
                3.4.    Connecting the past to the present

                                                    24
        There are various ways in which researchers could link the historical characteristics of pre-
industrial societies to current outcomes. We review the main ones used in literature.
        Linking historical characteristics using the historical geographical location
        The Ethnographic Atlas records the centroid of each society (longitude and latitude in degree).
The question is how to associate the historical characteristics to current territory. One possibility is to
use a circular "buffer zone" of various distances around the centroid. For example, Mayshar et al.
(2015) use a circle of 20 mile radius around the centroid. This approach is shown in Figure 8A.
        There are several potential problems with this approach. If the buffer zones are chosen too
large, they overlap, making it difficult to allocate territory to mutually exclusive ethnic groups. If the
buffer zones are too small, they will be a poor approximation of the actual boundaries. An alternative
approach (Alsan, 2015) is to construct Thiessen polygons, which more nearly approximate boundaries.
The starting point to construct the Thiessen polygons are the centroids of the ethnic groups as
reported in the Ethnographic Atlas. For a set of points S in Euclidean space, a Thiessen polygon (also
known as a Voronoi diagram) is one such that every point in the constructed polygon is closer to one
such point p than to any other point in S. Within Africa, Thiessen polygons have a higher correlation
with the boundaries of ethnicities (that for this continent was provided by Murdock) than the buffer
zone technique.


                Figure 8. Thiessen Polygons and Buffer Zones (from Alsan, 2015)




        Linking historical characteristics using the current distribution of languages or ethnicities across the world


                                                           25
          Both the buffer zone and the Thiessen polygons techniques are valid if the current location of
the historical society is very similar to the current location of the society today. The further back into
the past one goes, the more the economic history of a given place tends to diverge from the economic
history of the people who currently live there. For example, the ethnicities reported in the Ethnographic
Atlas for the case of the United States were Native-American populations, mostly involved in hunting,
fishing and horticultural communities and organized into small, pre-state political units. By contrast,
if one looks at the actual composition of the population in the United States a large fraction comes
from ethnicities that lived in settled agricultural societies organized in large states. For the case of the
United States, therefore, if one would link current outcomes using the geographical method this would
lead to a misleading representation as the current distribution of population is very different than the
one represented in the Ethnographic Atlas.
          A better approach has been to link the historical information of the Ethnographic Atlas to the
current population distribution. We describe in detail the approach followed by Giuliano ad Nunn
(2018).
          To link the historical ethnicities with the current distribution of ethnicities, Giuliano and Nunn
(2018) use the sixteenth edition of the Ethnologue: Languages of the World (Gordon, 2009) a data source
that maps the current geographic distribution of over 7,000 different languages and dialects, which
were manually matched to one of the ethnic groups from the ethnographic data sources.
          The Ethnologue provides a shape file that divides the world's land into polygons, with each
polygon indicating the location of a specific language/dialect as of the data of publication. The
Ethnologue shapefile is combined with data on the global distribution of the world's population taken
from the Landscan 2007 database. The source reports estimates of the world's population in 2007 for
30 arc-second by 30 arc-second (roughly 1 km by 1 km) grid-cells globally. Combining these two
sources of data provides an estimate of the distribution of populations' mother-tongue and, hence,
the ancestral characteristics of populations across the globe today at a 1-km resolution. By combining
these data sources, the authors construct country-level estimates of the average ancestral
characteristics of populations for each modern country. The procedure can also be used to construct
average ancestral characteristics at the subnational level.
          We use the example of the authors to illustrate their procedure. In Alesina, Giuliano and Nunn
(2013) the authors' research question was to look at the historical persistence of plough agriculture on
current female labor force participation.



                                                     26
       The first step is to look at the distribution of languages in a given country. Figure 9A shows a
map of Ethiopia with the land inhabited by different ethnic groups, i.e. groups speaking different
languages. Each polygon represents the approximate borders of a group as found in the Ethnologue.
The map also shows the Landscan estimate of the population of each cell within the country. A darker
share indicates greater population.
       The second step in their procedure is to manually match each of the 7,612 Ethnologue language
groups to one of the 1,265 Ethnographic Atlas Ethnic groups. From the Ethnographic Atlas, they then
know whether a given ethnic group used the plough historically. Figure 9B shows whether the
ancestors of a given language group engaged in plough agriculture or not.
       The third step consists in overlaying political districts and construct, using the Landscan
population data (Figure 9C), an finally estimate for each district (or country) the fraction of the
population living that descends from ancestors that traditionally engaged in plough agriculture (Figure
9D).


              Figure 9A, Map of Ethiopia from Alesina et al. (2013), Ethnologue




                                                  27
Figure 9B, Map of Ethiopia with Plough/No Plough




Figure 9C, Map of Ethiopia with Political Districts




                        28
                    Figure 9D, Map of Ethiopia, Plough Use at the District Level




          While the use of the Ethnologue constitute an improvement compared to the matching using a
geographical radius, it has its own drawbacks. The first one is that the information is missing for some
part of the world. This is due to uncertainty or a lack of information about the boundaries of some
language groups, a problem particularly pronounced for Latin America.
          For those countries or districts in which the information is missing, a potential strategy is to
construct alternative measures, by making different assumptions regarding the missing language data.
The first is to assume that the inhabitants of unclassified territories all speak the official national
language of the country. The second strategy is to impute the missing data using information on the
spatial distribution of the ethnic groups taken from the Geo-Referencing of Ethnic Group (GREG) database
(Weidmann et al. 2010). Like the Ethnologue , the GREG database provides a shape file that divides the
world's land into polygons, with each polygon indicating the location of a specific ethnicity. The
shortcoming of the GREG database is that ethnic groups are much less finely identified relative to the
Ethnologue database. 8 The big advantage if this dataset is that provides a better distribution of ethnicities
for Latin America, where the Ethnologue provide only the official language.
Linking historical characteristic using a migration matrix



8   The GREG database identifies 1,364 ethnic groups, while the Ethnologue identifies 7,612 language groups.
                                                             29
         An alternative approach to account for migration is to follow Putternam and Weil (2010). The
authors use this measure to re-examine the hypothesis that early development of agrarian societies
(and states, their socio-political correlate) conferred development advantages that remain relevant
today. The authors formally address the issue of migration by constructing a matrix detailing the year-
1500 origins of the current population of almost every country in the world. Before them, Acemoglu,
Johnson and Robinson (2001, 2002) calculated the share of the population that is of European descent
for 1900 and 1975. Putternam and Weil (2010) was an improvement because they broke down ancestor
populations much more finely than Europeans and non-Europeans.
         Putterman and Weil (2010) use 1500 as a rough starting point for the era of European
colonization of other continents. To estimate the proportion of the ancestors of today's inhabitants
they use a wide range of secondary sources. A crucial challenge in their methodology is the attribution
of mixed populations (for instance mestizos) to their original source countries. The authors, whenever
possible, use genetic evidence as the basis for dividing the ancestry of modern mixed groups that
account for large fractions of their country's population. In cases where genetic evidence on the
ancestry of mixed groups was not available, the authors rely on textual accounts and generalizations
from countries with similar histories for which genetic data were available.
         The authors construct a matrix of migration since 1500. The matrix has 165 rows, each for a
present-day country, and 172 columns (the same 165 countries plus seven other source countries with
current populations of less than one half million). Using the authors' example: Malaysia has five
entries, corresponding to the five source countries for the current Malaysian population: Malaysia
(0.6), China (0.27P, India (0.075), Indonesia (0.04) and the Philippines (0.025).
Linking historical characteristics using individual level data at the ethnicity level
         The final way of linking current outcomes to ancestral characteristics is to use individual level
information on the ethnicity or language spoken by the person. Each current ethnicity/language can
be manually matched to the historical ethnicity name. This procedure has the advantage that one can
control for county and also finer geographical fixed effects. The direct link has been used in different
papers, including Alesina, Giuliano and Nunn (2013) and Becker (2019).


4.     Censuses
4.1.     The use of complete count population censuses
         Research in economic history has advanced very recently with the use of historical complete
count population censuses, mostly for the United States. Besides the enormous sample size, an

                                                             30
important advantage of these datasets is that they provide individuals' names, allowing researchers to
link information across time, creating large panel datasets, which can then be used to answer questions
on intergenerational mobility or immigrant assimilations, often with illuminating results. For example,
cross-sectional work had concluded that immigrants to the United States started from lower-paid
positions than U.S. born workers but converged over time. Abramitzky et al. (2014) instead used
individual-linked, and find that even recent immigrants to the U.S. earned just as much as the native
born, and further that their wages then grew at similar rates.
        Linking historical data across censuses present various challenges. For modern data,
administrative datasets contain social security numbers (SSN), allowing researchers to link individuals
using SSN, names and place of birth. Social security numbers are however not present in historical
records. Without SSN linking individuals with census frequency is extremely challenging especially for
individuals with common names. Various methods have been developed to improve the matching.
Abramitzy et al. (2019b) provide a detailed overview. Here we briefly describe each them, together
with their advantages and disadvantages.
        One approach is to try to match individuals by using their name and last name directly, as
initially done by Ferrie (1996), and later improved by Abramitzky, Boustan and Erikson (2012, 2014,
2019a). The second is a machine-learning approached developed by Feigenbaum (2016). The third
one is a fully automated probabilistic algorithm (Abramizky, Mill and Perez (2019c)).
4.2.    Linking historical information using names
        This method has been followed by Ferrie (1996) and more recently by Abramitzky, Boustan
and Eriksson (2012, 2014, 2019a). The algorithm consists in uniquely identifying a name in a given
Census Year. In their case the name is identified using first and last name, place and date of birth. The
information is further restricted to individuals who are unique. They then search for these unique
individuals in the following Census-year. If there is unique match, this is considered a match. If there
are multiple matches, this information is discarded. If there are no matches, the algorithm searches
for matches within two years of reported birth (one year before or one year after) first, and if this is
unsuccessful within 4 years (two years before and two years after). Only unique matches are accepted.
If there are no unique matches the observation is discarded. The procedure is then repeated for each
record in the second database. Finally the intersection of the two matched samples is taken. 9


9The authors also propose additional strategies to improve the match. For example, to limit the possibility of
misspelling, they use the New York State Identification and Intelligence System (NYSIIS) standardized
names, rather than actual names (this system standardize names based on their pronunciation). Another
                                                      31
        Abramitzky, Mill and Perez (2019c) developed a probabilistic approach. For each observation
in a given dataset, they identify a set of potential matches in the second dataset. The potential matches
are identified by looking for individuals with the same place of birth, the same estimated year of birth
(plus/minus five years), and the same first letter in their first and last names. For each pair of potential
matches, they compute a measure of similarity in the reported year of birth and name, where they use
the Jaro-Winkler score for the first and last names. Similarity in age is calculated using the absolute
value of the difference in reported years of birth. They then look at the combination of distances in
reported names and ages, which is a good approximation of the probability that both records belong
to the same individual.
4.3.    Machine learning algorithm
        Feigenbaum (2016) uses a machine learning algorithm which train the algorithm using hand
linked data. The procedure has the following steps. First, for each observation in dataset A, he
identifies a set of potential matches in dataset B (see Feigenbaum for the specific rule followed).
Second, a human researchers helps with the construction of a training dataset on a small share of the
possible links. This training dataset is used for the matching algorithm, by using a probit model, taking
the value of 1 if the human researcher matched these records and 0 if not. The fitted model is then
applied to the full data and generate a predicted probability of being a match for each pair of records
in A and B (see Feigenbaum, 2016, for details.)
        Abramitksy et al. (2019c) describe in details the accuracy of the different methods and the
trade-off that they have between type I and type II errors, where the trade-off is between low
discrepancy rates (their false positive) at the cost of having a relatively low true match rate. The other
option is to have higher true match rates but also higher discrepancy rates. Finally, the authors also
discuss how different automated linking methods can affect inferences.


5. Other historical data
        In this section we describe some other historical data commonly used by economic historians.
5.1.    Military history
         Understanding the causes and consequences of wars, and their outcomes, has been one of
the perennial objective of historiography since its very inception. A number of economic historians



possibility is to use the Jaro-Winkler string distance adjustment which gives a measure of the similarity of two
strings, placing more weight on characters at the beginning of the strings.
                                                      32
have contributed to this area, some focusing on the causes (Gennaioli and Voth, 2015), and others on
the effects (Voigtländer and Voth, 2013 ).
           If the number of conflicts is needed, one approach is to digitize the battles catalogued in
reference material, such as Chandler (1987) or Jacques (2006). In more localized settings, specialized
sources should be sought where possible. For example, in their paper on the long run effects of
Sherman's March to The Sea in the US Civil War, Feigenbaum et al. (2019) digitized maps of the US
Army's routes of advance prepared by the US Department of War. Indeed the US government edited
an entire War of the Rebellion Atlas, comprising over 1,000 such maps, detailing the war at both the
strategic and tactical scale.
           In reading contemporaneous accounts of specific campaigns, or the memoirs of their
combatants, researchers should always maintain some level of skepticism. The participants of every
conflict are keen to embellish their successes and hide or dismiss their defeats. Before using such data,
researchers should ask themselves whether the source would have had an interest to misreport in ways
that could be significant to the analysis, and whether it would have been likely to be caught if they had
tried to do so.
5.2.       Transportation networks
           The economic history of transportation was of course one of the first fields to receive modern
cliometric techniques (Fogel 1964). For more recent times, data is often already available digitized, or
at least contemporaneous maps are available to be scanned and geocoded. For example, the US
Military has mapped enormous areas of the world at a high level of detail, and many of the maps from
the WWII era are freely available online from the Perry Castadena Library Map Collection at the
University of Texas, Austin. All these maps include many features of potential economic interest, such
as roads (often separated by surface type, canals, railways, ports and airfields.) For many important
European and North American areas, maps of similar quality were being made already in the 19th
century, but for earlier periods researchers will typically have to rely on maps that were prepared well
after the fact, usually by historians or archaeologists basing themselves on the lay of the land,
archaeological remains, narrative knowledge of which cities were connected, and other contextual
factors.
           Often the researcher has to guess about the historical nature of roads. For example, if the
compiler knew that cities A and B were connected by a road, but did not know its exact lay, she might
guess that it probably followed more or less the track of the modern road. This guess would be fairly



                                                    33
accurate only when the location of transportation routes are extremely persistent, for example, the
Roman road network is known with very high precision for the vast majority of its extent.


6. Conclusions
       The use of historical data has become a standard tool in economics. This chapter describes
the main sources of data used by economic historians, specifically looking at geographical data,
ethnographic data and censuses. For each group, we describe where to obtain these data, how to use
or manipulate them and the main methodologically advances which allow economists to overcome or
minimize the problems in using them. We finally discuss a variety of issues that they raise, such as the
constant change in national and administrative borders; the reshuffling of ethnic groups due to
migration, colonialism, natural disasters, and many other forces.

References

Abramitzsky, R., Boustan, L. and K. Eriksson, 2012, "Europe's tired, poor, huddled masses: Self-
       selection and economic outcomes in the age of mass migration", American Economic Review, 102
       (5), 1832-1856
Abramitsky, R., Boustan, L. and K. Eriksson, 2014, "A Nation of Immigrants: Assimilation and
       Economic Outcomes in the Age of Mass Migration", Journal of Political Economy, 112 (3), 467-
       717
Abramitzky, R., Boustan, L. and K. Eriksson, 2019a, "To the New World and Back Again: Return
       Migrants in the Age of Mass Migration", Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 72 (20), 300-322
Abramitzky, R., Boustan, L., Erikson, K., Feigenbaum, J. and S. Perez, 2019b, "Automated Linking
       of Historical Data", Stanford University, mimeo
Abramizky, R., Mill, R. and S. Perez, 2019c, "Linking Individuals Across Historical Sources: A Fully
       Automated Approach", Historical Methods.
Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S. and J. Robinson, 2001, `The Colonial Origins of Comparative
       Development: An Empirical Investigation", American Economic Review, 91(5), 1369-1401
Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S. and J. Robinson, 2002, "Reversal of Fortunes: Geography and Institutions
       in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117
       (4), 1231-1294.
Alesina, A., P. Giuliano and N. Nunn, 2013, "On the Origins of Gender Roles: Women and the
       Plough", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128 (2), 469-530.

                                                  34
Alsan, M., 2015, "The Effect of the TseTse Fly on African Development", American Economic Review,
        105 (1), 382-410
Ashraf, N., Bau, N., Nunn., N. and A. Voena, 2020, "Bride Price and Female Education", Journal of
        Political Economy, 128 (2): 591-641
Becker, A., 2019, "On the Economic Origins of Restrictions on Women's Sexuality", Harvard mimeo
Bentzen, J.S., Kaarsen, N. and Wingender, A.M., 2017, "Irrigation and Autocracy", Journal of the
        European Economic Association, 15 (1), 1-53
Bleakley, Hoyt and Jeffrey Lin, 2012, "Portage and path dependence," The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
        127 (2): 587-644.
Bondarenko, D., Kazankov, A., Khaltourina, D. and A. Korotayev, 2005, "Ethnographic Atlas XXI:
        People of Eastermost Europe", Ethnology, 44. 261-289
Burke, Paul J., and Andrew Leigh. 2010. "Do Output Contractions Trigger Democratic Change?"
        American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2 (4): 124­57.
Bustos, P., Caprettini, B. and J. Ponticelli, "Agricultural Productivity and Structural Transformation:
        Evidence from Brazil", American Economic Review, 106 (6), 1320-1365.
Caprettini, Bruno and Hans-Joachim Voth. "Rage against the machines: labor-saving technology and
        unrest in England, 1830-32."American Economic Review: Insights, forthcoming.
Card, D. and A. Krueger, 1994, "Minimum wages and Employment: A Case Study of the Fast-Food
        Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania", American Economic Review, 84 (4), 772-793.
Carville, E., Heppen, J. and S. Otterstrom,1999, HUSCO 1790-1999: Historical United States County
        Boundary Files, Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University
Chandler, David G., 1987, Dictionary of Battles: The World's Key Battles from 405 BC to Today, Ebury Press.
Corno, L. and A. Voena, 2016, "Selling daughters: Age of marriage, income shocks, and the bride
        price tradition", IFS W16/08, Institute for Fiscal Studies
Corno, L., Hildebrandt, N. and A. Voena, 2017, "Age of Marriage, weather Shocks, and the Direction
        of Marriage Payments", NBER WP 23604.
Dell, Melissa, Benjamin F. Jones, and Benjamin A. Olken. 2012, "Temperature Shocks and Economic
        Growth: Evidence from the Last Half Century," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4 (3):
        66­95
Dell, Melissa, Benjamin F. Jones, and Benjamin A. Olken, 2014, "What do we learn from the weather?
        The new climate-economy literature," Journal of Economic Literature, 52 (3): 740-98.



                                                      35
Eckert, F., Gvirtz, A. and M. Peters, 2018, "A Consistent County-Level Crosswalk for US Spatial Data
        Since 1790", Yale University, mimeo.
Enke, B., 2019, "Kinship, Cooperation, and the Evolution of Moral Systems", Quarterly Journal of
        Economics, 134 (2), 953-1019.
Feigenbaum, J. J., 2016, "Automated Census Record Linking: A Machine Learning Approach", WP
        https://open.bu.edu/handle/2144/27526.
Feigenbaum, J. J., Lee, J. and F. Mezzanotti, "Capital Destruction and Economic Growth: The Effects
        of Sherman's March, 1850-1920, NBER WP 25392.
Ferrie, J. P., 1996, "A new sample of males linked from the public use microdata sample of the 1850
        US federal census of population to the 1860 US federal census manuscript schedules",
        Historical Methods, 29 (4), 141-156.
Fischer, Gunther, Harrij van Nelthuizen, Mahendra Shah, and Freddy Nachtergaele, Global Agro-
        Ecological Assessment for Agriculture in the 21st Century: Methodology and Results (Rome:
        Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2002)
Fogel, Robert William, 1964, Railroads and American economic growth, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press,
        1964.
Gennaioli, N. and I. Reiner, 2007, "The modern impact of precolonial centralization in Africa", Journal
        of Economic Growth, 12 (3), 185-234.
Gennaioli, N. and H.J. Voth, 2015, "State Capacity and Military Conflict", The Review of Economic Studies,
        82 (4), 1409-1448.
Giuliano, P. and N. Nunn, 2013, "The Transmission of Democracy: From the Village to the Nation-
        State", American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 103 (3): 86-92.
Giuliano, P. and Nunn, "Understanding Cultural Persistence and Change", The Review of Economic
        Studies, forthcoming.
Giuliano, P. and N. Nunn, 2018, "Ancestral Characteristics of Modern Populations", Economic History
        of Developing Regions, 33 (1): 1-17
Gordon, R.G., 2009, "Ethnologue: Languages of the World", 16th ed. SIL International, Dallas.
Henrich, J., 2020, The WEIRDest People in the World: How the West Became Psychologically Peculiar and
        Particularly Prosperous, Princeton, Nj, Princeton University Press
Horan, P. M. and P. G. Hargis, 1995, "County Longitudinal Template, 1840-1990", Ann Arbor, MI:
        Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social Research



                                                        36
Hornbeck, R., 2010, "Barbed Wire: Property Rights and Agricultural Development", Quarterly Journal
        of Economics, 125 (2): 767-810.
Jaques, T., 2007, Dictionary of Battles and Sieges: Vol. 3: P-Z., Greenwood Publishing Group.
Korotayev, D., Kazankov, A. Borinskaya, S., Khaltourina, D. and D. Bondarenko, 2004,
        "Ethnographic Atlas XXX: People of Siberia", Ethnology, 43, 83-92
Lehner, B., Verdin, K., and Jarvis, A, 2008, "New global hydrography derived from spaceborne
        elevation data," Eos, Transactions, American Geophysical Union, 89(10): 93­94.
Matranga, Andrea and Timur Nathkov, 2019, "All Along the Watchtower: Linear Defenses and the
        Introduction of Serfdom in Russia", Chapman University mimeo
Mayshar, J., Moav, O., Neeman, Z. and L. Pascali, 2015, "Cereals, Appropriability and Hierarchy",
        CEPR WP 10742
Michalopoulos and Papaioannou, 2013, "Pre-colonial Ethnic Institutions and Contemporary African
        Development", Econometrica, 81, 113-152.
Miguel, Edward, Shanker Satyanath, and Ernest Sergenti. 2004. "Economic Shocks and Civil Conflict:
        An Instrumental Variables Approach." Journal of Political Economy 112 (4): 725­53.
Murdock, G. P., 1967a, Ethnographic Atlas, University of Pittsburgh Press.
Murdock, G. P., 1967b, "World Ethnographic Sample", American Anthropologist, 59, 664-687.
Nunn, N. and D. Puga, 2012, "Ruggedness: The Blessing of Bad Geography in Africa", Review of
        Economics and Statistics, 94 (1): 20-36
Nunn, N. and N. Qian, 2011, "The Potato's Contribution to Population and Urbanization: Evidence
        from a Historical Experiment", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126 (2), 593-660.
Putternam, L. and D. Weil, 2010, "Post-1500 Population Flows and the Long-Run determinants of
        Economic Growth and Inequality", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125, 1627-1682
Riley, S. J., De Gloria, S. D. and R. Elliot, 1999, "A Terrain Ruggedness Index That Quantifies
        Topographic Heterogeneity", Intermountain Journal of Science, 5, 1-4, 23-27
Spolaore and Wacziarg, 2013, "How Deep Are the Roots of Economic Development?", Journal of
        Economic Literature, 51, 325-369.
Voigtländer, N. and J. Voth, 2012, "Persecution Perpetuated: The Medieval Origins of Anti-Semitic
        Violence in Nazi-Germany", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127, 1339-1392.
Voigtländer, Nico, and Hans-Joachim Voth, 2013a, "How the West "Invented" Fertility Restriction."
        American Economic Review, 103 (6): 2227-64.



                                                   37
Voigtländer, Nico and Hans-Joachim Voth, 2013b, "The Three Horsemen of Riches: Plague, War,
       and Urbanization in Early Modern Europe," The Review of Economic Studies, 80 (2), 774­811.
Weidmann, Nils B., Jan Ketil Rod, and Lars-Erik Cederman, 2010, ``Representing Ethnic Groups in
       Space: A New Dataset,'' Journal of Peace Research, 47 (4), 491­499




                                                  38
