                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     DO ACQUIRER ANNOUNCEMENT RETURNS REFLECT VALUE CREATION?

                                       Itzhak Ben-David
                                       Utpal Bhattacharya
                                       Stacey E. Jacobsen

                                      Working Paper 27976
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27976


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2020

We first thank our RAs, Zhuowei Huang and Runzhao Huang, for their help. Their funding was
provided by Hong Kong Research Grants, grant GRF 16500118. We are thankful for the helpful
comments from Hank Bessembinder, Justin Birru, Nickolay Gantchev, John Graham, Douglas
Hanna, Jarrad Harford, Cam Harvey, David Hirshleifer, Gerard Hoberg, Pab Jotikasthira,
Byungwook Kim, James Linck, John Lynch, Darius Miller, Adam Kolasinski, Mattia Landoni,
Christian Leuz, Jack Liebersohn, Vojislav Maksimovic, Antonio Macias, Ulrike Malmendier, Rik
Sen, Amin Shams, Wayne Shaw, Jared Stanfield, Mike Stegemoller, René Stulz, Rex Thompson,
Kumar Venkataraman, Mike Weisbach, James Weston, Mike Wittry, seminar participants at
Baylor University, the Chinese University of Hong Kong, the Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology, Southern Methodist University, The Ohio State University (Accounting), The
Ohio State University (Finance Departments), the University of Buffalo, and Texas Tech
University. We also thank participants at the Asian Bureau of Finance and Economic Research
(ABFER) Conference, the Midwest Finance Association Conference, and the Financial Research
Network (FIRN) seminar series. Ben-David is with The Ohio State University and the National
Bureau of Economic Research (NBER). Bhattacharya is with the Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology. Jacobsen is with Southern Methodist University. Ben-David is a co-
founder and a partner in an investment advisor that manages investment accounts. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Itzhak Ben-David, Utpal Bhattacharya, and Stacey E. Jacobsen. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Acquirer Announcement Returns Reflect Value Creation?
Itzhak Ben-David, Utpal Bhattacharya, and Stacey E. Jacobsen
NBER Working Paper No. 27976
October 2020
JEL No. G02,G14,G32,G34

                                         ABSTRACT

Stock returns around acquisition announcements are widely viewed as being reflective of the net
present value created by these transactions. As such, announcement returns should correlate with
acquisition outcomes. Using a new measure of realized transaction-level acquisition failure, as
well as acquirer firm-level performance, we show that while these outcomes can be predicted
based on observable deal and firm characteristics, they are largely uncorrelated with
announcement returns. Our results cast doubt on the usefulness of announcement returns as a
measure of the value created in acquisitions and call for caution in other contexts.


Itzhak Ben-David                               Stacey E. Jacobsen
The Ohio State University                      Southern Methodist University
Fisher College of Business                     Cox School of Business
606A Fisher Hall                               6212 Bishop Blvd.
Columbus, OH 43210-1144                        Dallas, TX 75275
and NBER                                       staceyj@cox.smu.edu
ben-david.1@osu.edu

Utpal Bhattacharya
Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology
Clear Water Bay, Kowloon
HONG KONG, S.A.R.
ubhattac@ust.hk
1         Introduction

        Following the introduction of the efficient market hypothesis to financial economics in
the 1970s (Fama, 1976), economists began using event studies to measure value creation in
firms. Researchers have explored value creation around announcements such as corporate
transactions, new corporate policies, and regulatory actions (e.g., Jarrell, Brickley, and Net-
ter, 1988; MacKinlay, 1997; Campbell, Lo, and MacKinlay, 1997; Kaplan, 2006; Kothari and
Warner, 2007). The implicit assumption in these tests is that cumulative abnormal returns
(CAR) in the period surrounding the announcement of such news reflect the net present
value (NPV) of expected cash flows caused by the announced event. A few decades later,
CAR has become the most widely used approach by financial economists to measure value
creation in mergers.1 One would assume that a widely-used measure for value creation has
been thoroughly-validated by prior literature.
        In fact, the existing evidence supporting this relationship is not overwhelming, to say the
least. Two early studies that use small and overlapping samples find evidence of a correlation
between acquirer CAR and ex-post outcomes (Healy, Palepu, and Ruback, 1992; Kaplan and
Weisbach, 1992).2 Two later studies find that CAR is weakly correlated with some outcomes
in select specifications: expected (Hoberg and Phillips, 2018) and realized (Li, 2013).3 Other
studies indicate that CAR may not be correlated with outcomes (winner underperformance
in contested mergers: Malmendier, Moretti, and Peters, 2018), but rather with less value-
    1
       We find that between 2007 and 2016, 6.4% of articles published in the Journal of Finance, Journal of
Financial Economics, and Review of Financial Studies focused on mergers and acquisitions (M&As). (We
consider an article to focus on M&As if its abstract contains any of the following words: merger, acquisition,
M&A, deals, acquirer, target, takeover, market reaction to acquisition, goodwill, or synergy.) Of these
articles, 62.4% computed measures of acquisition value creation; of this subset, 95.6% used the event study
methodology.
     2
       Healy et al. (1992) find that CAR is correlated with changes in industry-adjusted return on assets
(ROA) in a sample of 42 acquisitions in 1979­1984. Kaplan and Weisbach (1992) study divestiture outcomes
of earlier acquisitions in the 1971­1982 period and find that the 37 unsuccessful acquisitions (divested at a
loss or portrayed as unsuccessful) had lower acquisition CAR than that of the 71 successful divestitures.
     3
       Hoberg and Phillips (2018) find a weak correlation between CAR and only one of their expected in-
tegration measures. Importantly, however, they find the largest stock market consequences for integration
difficulty in long-term returns rather than in announcement returns. Li (2013) finds a weak (and controls-
dependent) correlation between CAR and realized future increases in productivity.



                                                      1
relevant variables: earnings-per-share (Dasgupta, Harford, and Ma, 2019) and hot markets
(Rosen, 2006; Bouwman, Fuller, and Nain, 2009). Furthermore, several studies indicate
that CAR is not likely to capture all available information, since characteristics known at
the time of the announcement predict acquirers' future stock performance.4 The ambiguity
about CAR's information content is reflected in the conflicting inferences that researchers
draw when using different measurement methods and different samples.5 Furthermore, in
contrast to the compelling idea that merger announcement CAR could flag horizontal mergers
that extract value by shrinking the consumer surplus (Pittman, 2007), in practice, there
is no correlation between CAR and antitrust actions over the 1964­1972 and 1980­2009
periods (Stillman, 1983; Gao, Peng, and Strong, 2017).6 Finally, and more broadly, hundreds
of studies have documented that stock prices often do not efficiently incorporate readily
available information.7
    In this study, we put merger announcement CAR through a battery of tests to assess
whether it is correlated with ex-post transaction- and acquirer-level outcomes. We utilize
nearly 1,900 merger announcements during the 2003­2013 period.8 We consider both a new
transaction-level measure of acquisition failure that provides a direct and quantifiable repre-
sentation of acquisition performance--large goodwill write-downs or divestiture-at-a-loss--as
    4
      Examples of such characteristics are engaging in stock acquisitions (Mitchell and Stafford, 2000), having
abnormally high market-to-book (Rhodes-Kropf and Viswanathan, 2004; Dong, Hirshleifer, Richardson, and
Teoh, 2006), and having abnormally high short interest (Ben-David, Drake, and Roulstone, 2015).
    5
      For example, there is no strong consensus among economists as to whether mergers create value for the
average acquirer. The sign and magnitude of acquirer CAR computed by researchers have varied depending
on the time period of the study, on whether percentage or dollar returns are computed, and on the method-
ology used to tease out acquirer overvaluation information in stock-financed transactions. See the discussion
on this issue in Andrade, Mitchell, and Stafford (2001), Moeller, Schlingemann, and Stulz (2004), Moeller,
Schlingemann, and Stulz (2005), Malmendier and Tate (2008), Savor and Lu (2009), Netter, Stegemoller,
and Wintoki (2011), Fich, Nguyen, and Officer (2018), and Malmendier et al. (2018).
    6
      Demonstrating the deep belief in the validity of CAR, Gao et al. (2017) conclude that the lack of corre-
lation indicates that "antitrust enforcement is not consistent with the stated aim of consumer protection."
    7
      E.g., post-earnings-announcement drift (Bernard and Thomas, 1989), the accruals anomaly (Sloan,
1996), predictable events (Chang, Hartzmark, Solomon, and Soltes, 2017; Hartzmark and Solomon, 2018), lin-
guistic information available on financial reports (Cohen, Malloy, and Nguyen, 2020), and parent-subsidiary
valuation arbitrage (Lamont and Thaler, 2003).
    8
      Our sample ends in 2013 rather than a more recent period because our methodology follows the acquirer
for five years following the deal effective date. Our sample begins in 2003 following enhancements to goodwill
disclosure rules in 2002.



                                                      2
well as traditional acquirer-level measures of operating and stock performance. We docu-
ment that while ex-post performance outcomes can be predicted using information known
at the time of the announcement (deal and acquirer characteristics), acquirer announcement
returns have little relation to merger outcomes. We discuss the potential explanations for
the failure of CAR to provide meaningful information. Overall, our findings cast doubt on
the usefulness of CAR as a measure of acquisition value creation.
       The ex-post outcome measures that we use are at the deal- and acquirer-levels. We in-
troduce a new indicator for acquisition failure that combines large goodwill impairments and
target divestiture-at-a-loss. Both components capture deals for which the realized economic
value of the acquisition is less than the original purchase price, i.e., transactions that likely
had a negative net present value ex-post. Prior literature has used divestiture-at-a-loss as
an indicator of negative NPV;9 however, because it is conditional on a sale, this measure
likely captures only a small fraction of failed transactions. Since 2003, accounting rules have
required acquirers to record goodwill at the reporting-unit level and impair it (i.e., recognize
a loss) if indicated by routine tests. As such, we can identify failure at the transaction level
without conditioning on a sale. We validate that large impairment serves as a robust signal of
value destruction by relating our measure to several indirect symptoms of merger failure: Im-
paired firms are more likely to experience poor stock and operating performance, distressed
delisting, and management turnover following impairment news. Our sample contains 372
transactions (or 20% of the sample) with goodwill impairment or divestiture-at-a-loss.
       Because our failure measure only captures the left tail of outcomes, we also employ widely
used acquirer-level performance measures that capture both value creation and destruction:
abnormal ROA and buy-and-hold returns (BHAR) adjusted to size, market-to-book, and
momentum following Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1997) (DGTW). Importantly,
the three ex-post measures are positively correlated.
       In our main analysis, we use three different approaches to test the validity of CAR. All
   9
     Previous studies have also used target divestiture-at-a-loss as an indicator of an unsuccessful acquisition,
see, e.g., Mitchell and Lehn (1990), Kaplan and Weisbach (1992), and Kaplan, Mitchell, and Wruck (2000).


                                                       3
Figure 1. Ex-Post Merger and Acquirer Outcomes, by CAR [-1, 1] Deciles
The figure shows deal and acquirer averages by CAR decile. Panel (a) reports the fraction of failed trans-
actions, as measured by impaired goodwill or divestiture-at-a-loss (within five years of the announcement
date). Panel (b) reports the average percentile of abnormal ROA in the three years after the transaction, and
the average percentile of buy-and-hold (BHAR) DGTW-adjusted three-year returns after the transaction.
The shaded areas represent 95% confidence intervals. The dashed line indicates the sample average of all
the variables.
                                         (a) Transaction failure                                                 (b) Abnormal ROA and BHAR




                                                                             Average percentile at y + 3
    Frequency of failure (%)




                               100                                                                         100
                                                                                                                  Abnormal ROA
                               80                                                                           80    BHAR

                               60                                                                           60

                               40                                                                           40

                               20                                                                           20

                                0                                                                            0
                                     2       4        6         8   10                                            2      4       6         8   10
                                           CAR [-1, 1] decile                                                         CAR [-1, 1] decile


three indicate that CAR has little meaningful correlation with the ex-post outcomes.
    In the first approach, we conduct in-sample tests in which we measure the correlation
between outcomes (deal failure, loss magnitude given failure, abnormal ROA, and DGTW-
adjusted BHAR) and CAR. Figure 1 provides a simple graphical representation of the non-
parametric association between CAR and ex-post outcomes. Panel (a) shows the fraction
of failed transactions for each CAR decile, and Panel (b) shows the average abnormal ROA
and buy-and-hold abnormal return (BHAR) percentiles for each CAR decile. The lines in
both charts are flat, showing no material association.
    We extend this analysis to a large set of in-sample regression analyses. We find no mean-
ingful correlation between outcomes and CAR. In 24 regressions--including four different
acquisition outcome variables, two estimation techniques, three event windows, and the in-
clusion of various sets of controls--CAR achieves statistical significance at the 5% level in
only one and at the 10% level in only three regressions. The adjusted R2 in these regressions
is minuscule. CAR, at best, explains 0.1% of the variation in the probability of deal failure
and 0.2% of the variation in abnormal ROA and DGTW-adjusted BHAR. Our results are
robust to excluding acquisition failures during the financial crisis (2008) and to the inclusion

                                                                         4
of combined acquirer and target returns.
   Given the weak performance of CAR, it is tempting to conclude that ex-post outcomes
are simply hard to predict with the information available to investors. However, this does not
seem to be the case. In fact, a standard set of acquirer and deal characteristics--known at
the time of the announcement--predict ex post outcomes with adjusted R2 ranging between
6.7% and 9.2%.
   In the second approach, we conduct out-of-sample tests in which we fit regression models
in the first half and predict outcomes in the second half of the sample. Again, we observe
a wide disparity between the predictive ability of CAR and a characteristics model. Acqui-
sitions in the top CAR quintile have the same realized failure rate as those in the bottom
quintile: 16%. In contrast, acquisitions in the top quintile of predicted failure likelihood using
characteristics have a realized failure rate of 18%, compared to 5% for those in the bottom
quintile. Moreover, CAR is uncorrelated with the "predictable" component of acquisition
outcomes, as predicted by characteristics known at the time of the transaction.
   We corroborate our inference from the out-of-sample tests by forming portfolios of ac-
quirers based on the predictions of CAR and characteristics. We repeat this exercise for each
of the three outcome variables. The performance spread in the three-year return between
the top and bottom three deciles as defined by CAR is statistically indistinguishable from
zero. Conversely, the return spread between the top and bottom three deciles as determined
by characteristics ranges between 7.8% and 11.5%, and is statistically significant at the 1%
to 10% confidence levels.
   In the third and final approach, we evaluate the reliability of economic inferences often
made in academic research based on CAR. These inferences are typically based on charac-
teristics. For example, diversifying acquisitions have negative CAR; hence, economists infer
that these transactions have negative NPV, on average. To systematically perform this task,
we estimate the association between CAR and each deal and acquirer characteristic. We
then repeat the process for the three ex-post outcomes and each characteristic. In a final


                                                5
step, we compare the correlation of CAR with each characteristic to the related ex-post
outcomes. Overall, we find little association between the signs and the magnitudes of the
predictions by CAR and the ex-post outcomes. For example, CAR is negatively associated
with acquisitions of public targets, payment with stock, acquisitions by large acquirers, large
deals, and acquirers with a high Tobin's Q. The ex-post outcomes for most of these types
of transactions (except stock proceeds) are positive, on average. Hence, inferences based on
CAR about the value created in deals with certain characteristics do not correlate with the
realized acquisition outcome measures.
   In the final section, we explore potential explanations for the lack of predictability by
CAR and find that the first two of the following four explanations shed some light on this
issue. We caution that the economic significance of these results is minimal.
   First, CAR may capture some information beyond the value created by the acquisition
(e.g., information regarding acquirer standalone value). We strip the variation related to
the acquirer-specific characteristics from CAR and then repeat our main analysis with the
residualized CAR. We find that residualized CAR is marginally better at explaining ex-post
outcomes than CAR, yet its explanatory power is minimal (maximum R2 of 0.003). Second,
uncertainty about merger outcomes could limit CAR's predictive power. Indeed, CAR has
small explanatory power for the 30% of failures that take place in the first year and no ex-
planatory power for the remaining 70%. Similarly, in the cross-section, CAR has marginally
better explanatory power for acquisitions with a superior information environment. Still,
even in the most favorable specification, CAR's adjusted R2 does not exceed 0.008, whereas
characteristics' explanatory power is at least quadruple that. Third, we find that variations
in the size of the window used to measure CAR do not make a difference. Fourth, CAR's
explanatory power might be moderated by the potential attenuation from truncation due
to cancelled bids (about 7% of bids). We reweight the sample by the inverse probability
weighting of completion (Wooldridge, 2007), but find no improvement in CAR's explana-
tory power. Moreover, there is a possibility that ex-post outcomes are endogenous in CAR


                                              6
(e.g., managers may "listen" to CAR). This does not seem to be an important factor since
characteristics can predict outcomes (including future stock performance).
    To conclude, announcement returns cannot reliably be used as a proxy for the value cre-
ated in mergers. Researchers should approach inferences generated from CAR with caution.
Our findings also call for caution in interpreting announcement returns in other contexts--
for example, as measures of the economic value created by other types of corporate decisions
or by policies announced by regulatory authorities.



2     Measuring Merger Outcomes

2.1    Transaction-Level Ex-Post Failure

    Few would argue that acquisition decisions do not affect firm value. However, measuring
this effect at the transaction level is challenging. Because the target is typically merged into
the acquiring entity, we cannot directly observe the ex-post performance of the target or the
synergies generated from the combined firms. Although prior studies have used the ex-post
realized performance of acquisitions as observed in target divestiture-at-a-loss (Healy et al.,
1992; Kaplan and Weisbach, 1992), this measure is conditional on the acquirer deciding to
divest and on the availability of a buyer. In our sample period, divestiture-at-a-loss is rare,
representing only about 1% of transactions.
    We devise a new transaction-level measure of acquisition failure: goodwill impairment.
While similar to the divestiture-at-a-loss measure in that it reflects a loss relative to the
purchase price, goodwill impairment is not conditional on the sale of the target.
    We manually construct a sample of transactions with large goodwill write-downs, which
we believe yields a new and powerful setting to measure ex-post value destruction to the
acquiring firm. To our knowledge, we are the first to construct a comprehensive data set
that includes transaction-specific goodwill balances and transaction-specific impairment out-




                                               7
comes.10 In our sample, the goodwill of about 19% of transactions was impaired within five
years.
    Because both measures capture deals for which the realized value is lower than the orig-
inal purchase price, we combine goodwill impairment and divestiture at-a-loss into a single
"failure" measure. We describe both measures below.
    In some settings, our failure measure could produce misleading results. Specifically,
consider the hypothetical example that all transactions have the same failure probability
but different NPV conditional on success. In that case, CAR could predict the expected
NPV well; however, our failure measure would show that there is no relation between CAR
and the likelihood of failure (since it is constant across transactions in this example). This
is, of course, a shortcoming of a binary outcome variable. An implicit assumption in using
the failure binary variable is that the likelihood of failure is negatively correlated with NPV.
If this assumption does not hold, then we should not expect CAR to be correlated with the
failure variable.
    Given this critique of the failure measure, we also construct firm-level acquisition per-
formance measures that are not subject to this shortfall. Importantly, we find that the
transaction-level failure proxy is correlated with both firm-level proxies and that inferences
are largely similar across measures.


2.1.1    Goodwill Impairment

    In an acquisition, the acquirer exchanges consideration (cash, stock, or both) for the
target's stock or assets. In most cases, the acquirer pays more than the value of the identi-
fiable assets of the target. As such, on the acquirer's balance sheet, the value of the target
is recorded as a combination of the value of the identifiable assets and goodwill. Good-
will is the account on the acquirer's balance sheet that captures the difference between the
   10
      Hayn and Hughes (2006) also trace initial goodwill balances and subsequent impairments at the trans-
action level, yet they exclude 55% of transactions due to insufficient information. Overall, they focus largely
on the pre-2001 period, when disclosure of initial goodwill and the source of the impairment was generally
less comprehensive than during our sample period.


                                                      8
consideration paid in the acquisition and the value of the identifiable net assets:


                        Goodwilli = Pricei - Value(Identifiable Assets)i                                   (1)


From an economic point of view, goodwill can include the value of (a) a standalone going-
concern element, which reflects the higher value of a collection of assets over assets held
independently; (b) a synergy element, which reflects the value from combining the acquirer
and target businesses; and (c) any overpayment or overvaluation of the stock consideration
(Johnson and Petrone, 1998; Henning, Lewis, and Shaw, 2000).
       In some instances, accounting rules require occasional downward adjustments to the good-
will account (called goodwill write-downs or impairments). The impairment of goodwill can
arise because of any of the following factors: overvaluation of existing target assets, overesti-
mated synergies, or the inability to realize synergies due to firm, industry, or economy-wide
shocks.11
       The Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) published a new financial accounting
standard, SFAS 142, effective December 2001, with the goal of increasing transparency and
generating goodwill balances that better reflect the underlying economic value of the acqui-
sition on an ongoing basis (Foster, Fletcher, and Stout, 2003). SFAS 142 introduced four
significant changes to the existing rules. First, goodwill assignment and impairment tests
must be conducted at the "reporting unit" level (an operating segment or one component
level below a segment), making it easier to identify the goodwill recorded and the source of
future impairments at the transaction level. Second, acquirers can "write up" the target's
existing assets to fair value at the time of the acquisition.12 Third, goodwill is no longer
amortized but is considered an asset that can stay on the firm's balance sheet indefinitely.13
  11
     According to Bloomberg, in August 2018, the total goodwill for all listed firms worldwide was $8 trillion
relative to $14 trillion of physical assets. Examples of well-known impairments of goodwill include Microsoft's
$7.6 billion 2014 write-off of Nokia goodwill, Hewlett-Packard's $8.8 billion 2012 write-off of Autonomy
goodwill, and Jones Apparel Group's $810 million 2009 write-off of Nine West and Maxwell Shoe goodwill.
  12
     Identifiable intangible assets, such as patents and customer lists, are no longer included in goodwill
balances.
  13
     Before SFAS 142, acquisition goodwill was amortized over a maximum of 40 years.


                                                      9
Fourth, firms must conduct annual impairment tests and tests following "material" events
for reductions in the value of goodwill. If the appraised value is less than the recorded value,
then a goodwill "impairment" occurs. The amount of goodwill is reduced on the balance
sheet, and an impairment expense is incurred on the income statement as a component of
income from continuing operations.14
       Goodwill reflects the premium paid over the identifiable assets in nominal terms. Thus,
the impairment of goodwill indicates that the remaining value of the target is lower than the
nominal value paid a few years earlier at acquisition. A large goodwill impairment, therefore,
likely captures value destruction. Due to the increased precision and timelines of goodwill
reporting due to SFAS 142, we are able to construct goodwill balances and impairment at
the transaction level, which yields a direct and quantifiable representation of acquisition
failure that is transaction-specific. Appendix A.1 explains the relation between goodwill
impairment and economic value destruction.
       Using goodwill impairment as a measure of acquisition failure has two drawbacks. First,
researchers have documented managerial discretion in the write-down decision, mainly im-
pacting the amount and timing of the impairment.15 In this paper, we focus on substantial
impairments of goodwill, a setting in which strategic manipulation is less viable because
extreme losses must be disclosed at some point. Moreover, we do not focus on the timing of
write-downs. Second, goodwill cannot be increased to reflect underestimated value creation.
As such, we only observe the left tail of deal outcomes.
       In Appendix A, we validate goodwill impairment as a signal of value destruction. Because
  14
      Prior to this rule change, SFAS 121 prescribed only nonroutine impairment tests following certain trig-
gering events that indicated that goodwill might no longer be recoverable. Under SFAS 142, the impairment
amount must be determined using a fair value approach, based on a two-step impairment test. In the first
step, the fair value of the reporting unit is compared to the book value; if the fair value is less than the book
value, then the second step is performed. In the second step, the fair value of the unit's (non-goodwill) net
assets is determined, and the fair value of goodwill is the difference between the fair value of the unit and
the fair value of the unit's identifiable net assets. The impairment amount is the excess of the book value
of goodwill and the newly assessed fair-value estimate of goodwill. Firms often use a weighted combina-
tion of discounted cash flow, public comparable company multiples, and precedent merger and acquisition
transaction multiples valuation techniques to determine fair value.
   15
      See Elliott and Shaw (1988), Francis, Hanna, and Vincent (1996), Beatty and Weber (2006), Ramanna
and Watts (2012), and Li and Sloan (2017).


                                                       10
there are no other direct indicators of acquisition failure, we relate our impairment measure
to several indirect symptoms of merger failure. We conduct four tests. First, Appendix A.2.1
shows that the market reaction to earnings announcements that contain goodwill impairment
news is negative and large in magnitude, -2.6%, on average.16 Second, Appendix A.2.2 shows
that CEOs are more likely to be fired in the period surrounding goodwill impairments than
they are following negative CARs surrounding the original merger announcements. This find-
ing indicates that the labor market regards impairment as an important signal for managerial
discipline. Third, Appendix A.2.3 shows that acquirers that impair goodwill are more likely
to subsequently experience distressed delisting than acquirers without impairment. Fourth,
Appendix A.2.4 shows that acquirers with goodwill impairment experience poor operating
and stock performance in the years following the acquisition relative to acquirers without
impairment. Industry-adjusted operating performance measures such as sales growth, oper-
ating costs, and cash flows, and financial performance measures such as ROE, Tobin's Q, and
cumulative returns begin to materially diverge in the years following the deal announcement
for the impairment sample versus the nonimpairment sample. This finding indicates that
impairment firms experience significant firm-level adverse shocks in the years following the
acquisition.


2.1.2      Divestitures-at-a-Loss

       The second component in the measure of deal failure is divestiture-at-a-loss. Selling
a target at a loss means that the proceeds are lower than what was originally paid, less
depreciation. As such, divestiture-at-a-loss likely implies a negative ex-post net present
value of the acquisition. This variable was used by many canonical studies as a proxy for
deal failure (e.g., Mitchell and Lehn, 1990; Kaplan and Weisbach, 1992; Healy et al., 1992;
Berger and Ofek, 1996).
  16
    Note that impairment news is a strictly negative piece of news about an event that has already happened.
The fact that the market reaction is negative given the negative news does not conflict with the main finding
of the study that CAR is not associated with future changes in cash flows.



                                                     11
2.2     Firm-Level Operating and Stock Performance

   The value created or destroyed in a merger should express itself through the operating
performance of the acquirer, and to a lesser extent, through the financial performance of the
acquirer's stock.
   We rely on earlier literature and use two acquirer firm-level outcomes to gauge acqui-
sition ex-post outcomes. The acquirer-level performance measures have advantages and
disadvantages relative to our transaction-level failure indicator. First, the deal failure indi-
cator is binary and captures extreme value loss. In contrast, CAR is a continuous measure
that can take both positive or negative values and may potentially capture nuanced out-
comes. Our firm-level measures are continuous, can take both positive or negative values,
and may potentially capture nuanced outcomes. Second, unlike our goodwill impairment
and divestiture-at-a-loss measures, which are measured at the transaction level, firm-level
proxies may be impacted by firm, industry, or market outcomes unrelated to the transaction.
As such, they may be noisy measures of acquisition performance.


2.2.1   Abnormal ROA

   First, we construct a measure of abnormal ROA, which was previously used in Healy et al.
(1992), Chen, Harford, and Li (2007), and Fu, Lin, and Officer (2013). The motivation is
that the "value created" in a merger needs to be reflected in future cash flows. The abnormal
ROA measure reflects the change in ROA in the years following the acquisition relative to
the years prior. Section 3 provides further details about this measure.
   Tests that use abnormal ROA as the outcome variable are also subject to critique. In
particular, our tests assume that higher NPV translates to higher cash flows in the first
three years. In extreme cases, however, this might not be the case. For example, when a
firm acquires a competitor, the benefits of the merger could potentially only become apparent
in the very long term.
   This issue, however, is not likely to be critical to our inferences. Such a scenario, while


                                              12
definitely present in some transactions, is likely not common. Furthermore, as we saw in
Section 5.3, CAR's predictive power is tiny for outcomes in the first year after completion
and nonexistent for later periods. Hence, there is no support for the claim that CAR captures
some long-term benefits from rare types of mergers.


2.2.2      Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Returns

       Second, we construct a measure of long-term abnormal stock returns. We note that if
the market is truly efficient and prices capture the relevant information at the time of the
announcement, CAR should not be correlated with future stock performance. However, our
choice to consider long-term abnormal stock returns is motivated by the large literature that
links long-term abnormal returns with merger characteristics.17 Building on this literature, a
finding that characteristics predict future stock performance would indicate that CAR does
not capture all available information at the time of the announcement.
       The abnormal returns measure is subject to the critique that an observation of no cor-
relation between CAR and BHAR does not necessarily discredit CAR. Such a finding could
simply be evidence that markets are efficient. This critique would be valid if there were no
other variables that could predict BHAR. As we show later (and also as found in the literature
as discussed in the introduction), characteristics have some predictive power over BHAR.
Hence, lack of correlation between CAR and BHAR is likely to indicate that announcement
returns do not incorporate all the available information at the time of the announcement.



3        Data

       The sample of mergers and acquisitions we use comes from the Thomson Reuters Se-
curities Data Company (SDC) Domestic Merger and Acquisition database. We include
transactions that satisfy the following criteria: (a) The merger or acquisition was announced
  17
    For example, several studies have documented that acquirers have low stock returns following acquisitions
paid for with stock, e.g., Mitchell and Stafford (2000), Rhodes-Kropf and Viswanathan (2004), Rhodes-Kropf,
Robinson, and Viswanathan (2005), Dong et al. (2006), Fu et al. (2013), and Ben-David et al. (2015).

                                                     13
on or after January 1, 2003, and completed by December 31, 2013; (b) the transaction value
exceeds $10 million and is at least 5% of the acquirer's market capitalization at the end of
the fiscal year before the deal was announced; (c) the acquirer is a U.S. company; (d) the
acquirer is a publicly traded firm; (e) the status of the deal is completed; (f) the deal is not
classified as a repurchase, self-tender, recapitalization, acquisition of partial or remaining
interest, reverse merger, leveraged buyout, privatization, or bankruptcy acquisition; (g) the
percentage sought is at least 50%; (h) both the acquirer and target are not financial firms
(SIC codes 6000­6999); and (i) Compustat has accounting data on the bidder and the Center
for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) database has stock data for the month of the deal
announcement.18 These requirements result in an initial sample of 2,981 deals. Next, we ex-
clude 258 transactions of acquirers that did not report firm-level goodwill in Compustat for
the full period between the year prior to the transaction and 10 years after the transaction.
We eliminate 646 deals that are not structured using purchase accounting and transactions
for which we are unable to identify the deal-level goodwill allocation amount, and we omit
110 transactions that lack CRSP and Compustat data to compute key variables. These
filters result in 1,967 transactions.


3.1       Announcement Returns

       We follow the literature in measuring announcement returns. We estimate daily abnormal
returns using the market model and a value-weighted index. The market model parameters,
i and i , are estimated from 361 to 61 trading days before the deal announcement day,
and rmt is the CRSP value-weighted index. CARs are then computed by summing the daily
abnormal returns over various event horizons. We estimate CARs for the three-day period
[-1, 1] and the 11-day period [-5, 5] surrounding the acquisition announcement, and over
the entire merger process beginning two days before the announcement and ending two days
  18
     Our sample begins in 2003 because SFAS 142 was not effective until 2003 (2002 was considered a
transition period). Our sample ends in 2013 as we track firms' impairment and divestiture outcomes over a
five-year period.



                                                   14
following deal completion [Announcement - 2, Close + 2].


3.2     Goodwill Impairments

   Linking goodwill impairment to specific transactions is not straightforward as goodwill
and impairment data reported on financial statements are based on aggregate firm-level
data. As a result, we manually collect goodwill and impairment (if any) data. Appendix B
provides further details about this data collection procedure. We begin by identifying all
sample firms with firm-level goodwill impairments (600 deals). For these potentially impaired
transactions, we used the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in the impairment year
and Factiva to determine whether and how much of the impairment is due to the specific
transaction in our sample. We focus on impairment within five years of the deal effective
date.
   Appendix Table B.1 shows that we successfully linked impairment events to specific
transactions. Of the 600 transactions flagged as potentially impaired, we can credibly classify
59% as large impaired, 22% as not impaired, and 3% as small impaired (and so excluded),
and we are unable to classify only 16% of transactions. We exclude 18 transactions with
minor impairment (less than 25% of original goodwill) as our focus is on outcomes with a
strong valuation impact. Moreover, for deals classified as impaired, for 84% of transactions,
we know the source and the amount of the impairment unambiguously. Our data screening
yields 355 firms with goodwill impairment within the first five years following the transaction.


3.3     Divestiture-at-a-Loss

   The source data for divestiture-at-a-loss is SDC. We pull all transactions classified as
divestitures, equity carve-outs, spinoffs, or two-step spinoffs. We match this sample to our
main sample if the SDC target name of the divested firm matches the SDC target name
of the firm in the original sample, or if the target state and target SIC code (as identified
by SDC) are the same for both the divested firm and the firm in the original sample. We

                                              15
then manually read through each match to determine whether the divestiture is related to
the original transaction. Once we verify this relation, we retain targets that were divested
within five years of the deal effective date, whose divestiture transaction value is reported,
and whose divestiture price is less than the original transaction price (e.g., the target was
divested at a loss). We further eliminate partial divestitures of the target. Appendix B.2
describes how we collect divestiture data in more detail.
   These screening procedures yield 17 transactions that were divested at a loss. Guenzel
(2019) finds a similar rate of divestiture activity using SDC data. For 5,893 transactions
over a 36-year period, he finds that 1.8% of targets are fully divested. His divestiture rate is
slightly higher as he focuses on all divestitures, whereas we focus on divestiture-at-a-loss.


3.4    Abnormal ROA

   We follow Chen et al. (2007) and compute abnormal ROA over the three-year period
following the acquisition. We use three years as a plausible horizon since the median acquirer
impairs or divests at a loss in the third year following the acquisition. To measure abnormal
ROA, we regress the post-merger industry-adjusted three-year average ROA (t +1, t +2, t +3)
on the pre-merger corresponding measure (t - 3, t - 2, t - 1) and a constant:

              3                                        -1
         1                                         1
                   [ROAi,t - ROAIndustry,t ] =  +         [ROAi,t - ROAIndustry,t ] + i ,   (2)
         3   t=1
                                                   3 t=-3


where the residual i measures the abnormal change in ROA. We define the post-merger
(pre-merger) period as the three years beginning the year after (before) the deal effective
date. Industry definitions are based on the Fama-French 48 industries (Fama and French,
1997). As discussed in Chen et al. (2007), this model takes into account the possibility that
pre-merger operating performance could predict post-merger operating performance.




                                                 16
3.5    DGTW-Adjusted Buy-and-Hold Return

   We measure cumulative buy-and-hold returns by accumulating DGTW-adjusted monthly
returns (Daniel et al., 1997). The DGTW adjustment procedure involves adjusting returns
to the returns of benchmark portfolios that are based on characteristics. Each month, we
form 5 × 5 × 5 portfolios based on size, book-to-market, and 12-month past returns. The
monthly adjusted returns are accumulated to form buy-and-hold returns over the period of
interest. In most specifications, we use a three-year horizon.
   Alternative ways to adjust returns would be to use a market adjustment, beta adjust-
ment, industry adjustment, or no adjustment at all. In unreported tests, we find that our
conclusions are not sensitive to the choice of return adjustment.


3.6    Descriptive Statistics

   Table 1, Panel A, shows the frequency of goodwill impairment and divestitures in event
time, where the event is the year of the deal effective date. Overall, 20% of deals failed within
five years (372 failed deals out of 1,870 completed deals). Of the failed sample, 30% (113)
occur the year of or year after the deal effective date, and the remaining 70% happen in the
following four years. In our main tests, we focus on completed transactions. In Section 5.4,
we find 7% of transactions are cancelled and discuss the potential effects of withdrawn deals.
   Table 1, Panel B, shows statistics for the impairment and divestiture samples. The initial
goodwill allocated to the total purchase consideration is economically large. The mean
dollar goodwill allocated to deals that fail is $328 million. On average, transaction-level
goodwill represents 53% of the purchase price and 14% of the total assets of the acquiring
firm. Goodwill impairment losses are also economically large. The average transaction-level
impairment loss is $253 million, representing 87% of initial goodwill and 11% of assets.
Similarly, divestiture losses are large, representing 58% of the purchase price.
   Table 1, Panel C, shows summary statistics for our firm-level outcomes, abnormal ROA
and DGTW-adjusted buy-and-hold returns, and Panel D shows statistics for our key deal

                                               17
and acquirer characteristics.

Table 1. Sample Statistics
This table provides summary statistics. Panel A shows sample statistics for the percentage of transactions
with goodwill impairment or divestiture within five years of the deal effective date. Panel B shows statistics
for the impairment and divestiture samples. Panel C shows summary statistics for our firm-level outcomes,
abnormal ROA and DGTW-adjusted buy-and-hold returns, and Panel D shows statistics for our key deal
and acquirer characteristics.
                     Panel A: Transaction-Level Failure Sample
                                                                        %           N
                     Year 0­1                                          6.0%        113
                     Year 2­3                                          9.1%        170
                     Year 4­5                                          4.8%         89
                     Impaired or divested at a loss by year 5         19.9%        372
                     Not impaired or divested at a loss by year 5     80.1%       1,498
                     Total completed deals                           100.0%       1,870

                     Panel B: Transaction-Level Failure Statistics
                                                                      Mean      Std dev
                     $ Goodwill ($m)                                   328.2     1,310.2
                     Goodwill/Net purchase price                       53%        23%
                     Goodwill/Total assets                             14%        12%
                     Impairment $ loss ($m)                           -253.4     1,150.0
                     Impairment/Goodwill                               87%        21%
                     Impairment/Purchase price                         45%        22%
                     Impairment/Total assets                           11%        10%
                     Divestiture $ loss                               -67.3        89.2
                     Divestiture loss/Purchase price                  -58%        23%

                     Panel C: Firm-Level Outcome Statistics
                                                                      Mean      Std dev
                     Abnormal ROA                                    -0.005%     7.784%
                     DGTW-adjusted buy-and-hold returns               -2.7%       51.5%

  Panel D: Deal and Acquirer Statistics
                                             Mean    Std dev                               Mean    Std dev
  Acquirer market cap ($m)                   3,187     10,413   Deal value ($m)             710     2,842
  Debt/Assets (y - 1)                        19%        19%     Stock only dummy            4%       20%
  Free cash flow/Assets (y - 1)               5%        16%     Mixed payment dummy         44%      50%
  Tobin's Q (y - 1)                          1.88       1.19    Diversifying dummy          37%      48%
  Past return (mkt-adj; q - 1)               3.5%      20.0%    Competed dummy             0.7%      8.6%
  Short interest (mean-adj; m - 1)           1.2%       4.8%    Hostile dummy              1.0%     10.0%
  Relative size (deal value/market cap)      32%        44%     Public target dummy        19.2%    39.4%



    We report additional descriptive statistics in the Appendix. Appendix Table C.1 presents


                                                       18
statistics by subsamples split by failure outcomes. It shows that transactions with future
deal failures have larger deal sizes scaled by acquirer size (i.e., larger relative sizes), are more
likely to include only stock in the form of payment, and are associated with smaller acquirer
firms. There are no statistically significant differences between the two samples in terms of
industry relatedness, the number of bidders, unsolicited or hostile bids, and target public
status. Appendix Table B.3 presents the timing of goodwill impairments and divestitures-at-
a-loss and shows that these events cluster in the financial crisis period, with a weak upward
trend in the number of deal failures in the post-crisis period relative to the pre-crisis period.
Appendix Table C.2 reports the correlation between the different outcome variables and
CAR measured over various event windows. The table shows that the absolute value of the
correlation coefficients across the three ex-post outcome variables ranges between 0.216 and
0.310, suggesting that the transaction- and firm-level measures capture similar outcomes. In
contrast, CAR stands out as having a minuscule correlation with these variables: absolute
correlation coefficients in the range of 0.002 and 0.051.
   Table 2 presents average CAR and the dollar value created or destroyed, as implied by
CAR. Panels A to C split the sample by transaction failure, quintiles of abnormal ROA,
and quintiles of DGTW-adjusted BHAR, respectively. Panel A shows that acquirer CAR is
different for the failure and no failure samples for only one of the event windows and only
at the 10% statistical significance level. The average acquirer CAR [-1, 1] for transactions
that failed is 0.5%, while it is 1.4% for deals that did not fail within five years (p = 0.067).
Interestingly, CARs measured over longer windows ([-5, 5] or [Announcement - 2, Close+2])
show no correlation. There is no difference in dollar returns between the two subsamples.
Panels B and C show few statistical differences in CAR across abnormal ROA and DGTW-
adjusted BHAR quintiles.
   To summarize, across the three ex-post measures--transaction failure, abnormal ROA,
and DGTW-adjusted BHAR--we observe only very weak correlations between CAR and
acquisition outcomes. Next, we turn to formal tests of this correlation.


                                                19
Table 2. Univariate Tests of the Difference in CAR, by Ex-Post Outcome
This table presents univariate statistics for subsamples defined by ex-post outcomes (Panal A: transaction
failure/no failure, Panel B: quintiles of abnormal ROA, Panel C: quintiles of DGTW-adjusted BHAR). We
report means for each subsample and Wilcoxon p -values for tests of differences between the subsamples.
    Panel A: Acquirer Announcement Return by Transaction-Level Failure
                               Window          Failure             No failure         Diff p -value
    Acquirer CAR               [-1, 1]          0.5%                 1.4%                0.067
                               [-5, 5]          1.3%                 1.3%                0.954
                           [Ann-2, Cls+2]      -0.4%                 0.9%                0.250
    Acquirer $ return          [-1, 1]         -38.4                 -17.7               0.532
    at announcement ($m)       [-5, 5]         -43.7                 -12.9               0.347
                           [Ann-2, Cls+2]       78.5                 88.8                0.888

    Panel B: Acquirer Announcement Return by Firm-Level Outcome: Abnormal ROA
                             CAR window       Q1 (low)   Q2­Q4     Q5 (high)    Diff p -value (Q1 vs Q5)
    Acquirer CAR               [-1, 1]          0.5%      1.3%       1.2%                0.393
                               [-5, 5]          0.9%      1.4%       1.5%                0.554
                           [Ann-2, Cls+2]      -0.6%      1.1%       0.3%                0.523
    Acquirer $ return          [-1, 1]           49.2      27.9      -3.5                0.356
    at announcement ($m)       [-5, 5]           35.4      19.7      22.4                0.857
                           [Ann-2, Cls+2]       201.9      98.8      38.7                0.365

    Panel C: Acquirer Announcement Return by Firm-Level Outcome: DGTW-Adj BHAR
                             CAR window       Q1 (low)   Q2­Q4     Q5 (high)    Diff p -value (Q1 vs Q5)
    Acquirer CAR               [-1, 1]          1.2%      1.3%       0.9%                0.695
                               [-5, 5]          2.0%      1.3%       0.7%                0.133
                           [Ann-2, Cls+2]       0.6%      0.7%       0.7%                0.899
    Acquirer $ return          [-1, 1]          39.1       10.5      45.5                0.864
    at announcement ($m)       [-5, 5]          19.8        7.2      57.9                0.281
                           [Ann-2, Cls+2]       90.2       79.1      197.9               0.428


4      Does CAR Predict Merger Outcomes?

     Our primary goal in this study is to test whether CAR predicts merger outcomes. To do
so, we explore three empirical settings: in-sample tests, out-of-sample tests, and assessment
by characteristic clusters.




                                                   20
4.1     In-Sample Tests

4.1.1   Visual Tests

   We begin by examining the unconditional relation between transaction and firm outcomes
and CAR in Figure 2. We split our transaction sample into 20 equally sized bins (about 90
transactions in each bin). In Panel (a), we present, for each bin, the fraction of transactions
that failed (based on goodwill impairment and divestiture at-a-loss). The panel shows little
correlation between the realized likelihood of deal failure and CAR [-1, 1].
   Panel (b) presents a scatterplot of the realized loss (either through impairment or sale
at a loss) and the expected dollar loss amount implied by CAR. Both numbers are scaled
by the amount of goodwill, and we constrain each scaled measure to be between zero and
one. We condition the sample on deals with negative CAR [-1, 1]. In addition, we plot the
regression line (solid red line) between the realized loss and the predicted loss by CAR. If
CAR is a good predictor of the loss amount, it should align with the diagonal dashed line.
The chart shows that there is no meaningful relation between the realized magnitude of the
loss and the expected loss implied by CAR.
   Panels (c) and (d) show firm-level outcomes. Panel (c) presents the relation between
the average realized percentile of abnormal ROA and CAR. Panel (d) presents the relation
between the DGTW-adjusted buy and hold returns (in percentiles) and CAR. Neither chart
shows any meaningful correlation between firm-level outcomes and CAR.
   Overall, the visual tests reveal little association between transaction- and acquirer-level
outcomes and CAR.


4.1.2   Univariate and Multivariate Tests

   We next consider simple in-sample tests in which we explore whether CAR has explana-
tory power in regressions of future deal failure on announcement returns. The results are
shown in Table 3. This table reports regressions with goodwill impairment and divestiture-



                                              21
Figure 2. Ex-Post Outcomes and CAR [-1, 1]
Panel (a) plots the propensity of impairment or divestiture (the percentage of transactions with realized
failure) for each acquirer CAR [-1, 1] quantile (the solid red line). Observations are sorted into 20 equally
sized bins based on their CAR [-1, 1]. The light red shading indicates 95% confidence intervals. The
horizontal black dashed line represents the unconditional likelihood of impairment/divestiture in our sample
(19.9%). Panel (b) presents a scatterplot of realized versus expected value loss implied by CAR. Both
realized and expected loss are scaled by initial goodwill. This panel is constructed using only firms with
a negative market response to the acquisition announcement, and measures are bounded between zero and
the value of goodwill. We compute the acquirer dollar loss at announcement by multiplying CAR [-1, 1] by
the acquirer market capitalization 50 days prior to the announcement. The dashed line shows a diagonal
line (representing perfect alignment). The solid red line is the regression line between the realized loss and
the predicted loss by CAR. Panels (c) and (d) present the average realized percentile of abnormal ROA
and DGTW-adjusted buy and hold returns, respectively, for each quantile of CAR. The light red shading
represents 95% confidence intervals.

                                          (a) Likelihood of transaction failure                                                      (b) Magnitude of loss
    Realized failure frequency (%)




                                                                                       Realized loss/goodwill
                                                                                                                     1
                                     40
                                                                                                                    0.8
                                     30
                                                                                                                    0.6

                                     20                                                                             0.4

                                     10                                                                             0.2

                                                                                                                     0
                                      -0.2      -0.1     0       0.1      0.2                                             0        0.2      0.4       0.6         0.8         1

                                          Cumulative abnormal return [-1, 1]                                                             CAR loss/goodwill
                                             (c) Percentile of abnormal ROA                                                   (d) Percentile of DGTW-adj BHAR
     Realized percentile




                                                                                              Realized percentile




                                     60                                                                             60



                                     50                                                                             50



                                     40                                                                             40

                                      -0.2      -0.1     0       0.1      0.2                                         -0.2         -0.1           0         0.1         0.2

                                          Cumulative abnormal return [-1, 1]                                                  Cumulative abnormal return [-1, 1]


at-a-loss outcomes as the dependent variable and acquirer CARs over various windows sur-
rounding the deal announcement as the key independent variable of interest. The regressions
use various estimation windows commonly used in the literature: three-day (±1 trading days)
around the announcement, ten-day (±5 trading days) around the announcement, and two
days before the announcement to two days after the completion date. CAR may understate
absolute value expectations if the probability of deal completion is uncertain; the use of the

                                                                                  22
long window that includes the deal completion date overcomes this issue as the probability
of completion has moved toward one. Panel A reports the results of ordinary least squares
(OLS) and logit regressions that model the probability of goodwill impairment or divestiture
within five years of the deal effective date. Panel B reports the results of OLS and tobit
regressions that focus on the magnitude of the impairment or divestiture loss.
      The results in Table 3, Panel A, show that CAR, at best, explains 0.1% of the variation
in the probability of goodwill impairment or divestiture-at-a-loss (Columns (2)­(4)).19 The
coefficient on CAR is not statistically significant in any of the six models. CAR remains
insignificant when year (Column (5)); year and industry (Column (6)); and year, industry,
firm, and deal characteristics (Column (7)) are included as controls. The characteristics are
log market capitalization, leverage, and free cash flow scaled by previous-year assets, Tobin's
Q, previous-quarter market-adjusted stock returns, previous-month short interest, relative
deal size, and indicators for stock-only consideration, mixed payment, diversifying acquisi-
tion, hostile deal, competed bidding, and public targets. In terms of economic significance,
for the logit regression in Column (4) of Table 3, Panel A, a dramatic move from the high-
est quartile of announcement returns (+4.5% CAR) to the lowest quartile of announcement
returns (-2.3% CAR) only increases the probability of impairment from 20.2% to 21.2%.
      We next examine the ability of CAR to predict the magnitude of future impairment
or divestiture losses. After all, CAR is often interpreted to reflect the dollar value lost or
gained by the acquirer stemming from the transaction (Agrawal, Jaffe, and Mandelker, 1992;
Smith and Kim, 1994, among others). However, observed goodwill impairment cannot be
larger than the goodwill allocated at the time of the transaction. Hence, we scale both
the dependent variable (dollar impairment or divestiture loss) and the independent variable
(acquirer dollar CAR [-1, 1]) by the transaction's initial goodwill. Therefore, scaled-dollar
failure is set to zero for transactions without impairment or divestiture loss, and scaled-
dollar CAR is set to zero if CAR is positive. Table 3, Panel B, shows that the coefficient
 19
      Note that our sample drops from 1,870 to 1,805 due to missing data for specific controls.



                                                      23
Table 3. Acquirer CAR and the Probability and Magnitude of Deal Failure
This table reports results from regressions of transaction failure measures on acquirer cumulative abnormal
returns (CAR). In Panel A, the dependent variable is a dummy for impairment or divestiture loss. In Panel B,
we scale both the dependent variable (dollar impairment or divestiture loss) and the independent variable
(acquirer dollar CAR [-1, 1]) by initial goodwill. Scaled dollar failure is set to zero for transactions without
impairment or divestiture loss, and scaled dollar CAR is set to zero for transactions with positive CAR.
Column (1) includes only year, industry, and the following characteristics as independent variables: the log
of market capitalization, leverage and cash flows scaled by previous-year assets, Tobin's Q, previous-quarter
market-adjusted stock returns, previous-month short interest, relative size, and a dummy variable for stock-
only, mixed-payment, diversifying, hostile deals and deals with competition and public targets. Standard
errors are reported in parentheses under coefficients. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the
1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. All regressions include constants (coefficients not reported).
Panel A: Probability of Failure
Dependent variable:                                           Failure Dummy
CAR window:                   n.a.       [-1, 1] [-5, 5] [Ann-2, Cls+2]                        [-1, 1]
                              (1)          (2)         (3)        (4)             (5)       (6)             (7)
Regression:                                                        OLS
Acquirer CAR               Controls       -0.194 -0.012          -0.087           -0.133 -0.140            -0.214
                            only         (0.132) (0.099)        (0.059)          (0.131) (0.132)          (0.132)

Controls               Year, Ind, Char   ­            ­            ­             Year Year, Ind Year, Ind, Char
Observations                1,805      1,805        1,805        1,804           1,805  1,805        1,805
Adjusted R2                 0.092      0.001       -0.001        0.001           0.040  0.043        0.093
Regression:                                                        Logit
Acquirer CAR               Controls       -1.248 -0.075          -0.552           -0.891 -0.974           -1.500*
                            only         (0.861) (0.634)        (0.376)          (0.881) (0.889)          (0.852)

Controls               Year, Ind, Char   ­           ­             ­             Year Year, Ind Year, Ind, Char
Observations                1,805      1,805       1,805         1,804           1,805  1,805        1,805
Pseudo R2                   0.117      0.001       0.000         0.001           0.049  0.057        0.119

Panel B: Magnitude of Failure
Dependent variable:                                           Scaled $ Failure
Regression:                                      OLS                                              Tobit
CAR window:                   n.a.       [-1, 1] [-5, 5] [Ann-2, Cls+2]          [-1, 1]   [-5, 5]   [Ann-2, Cls+2]
                              (1)          (2)         (3)        (4)             (5)       (6)             (7)
Scaled $ CAR               Controls       0.023 -0.020          -0.012            0.282 -0.263            -0.127
(imputed from CAR)          only         (0.025) (0.021)        (0.020)          (0.308) (0.272)          (0.246)

Controls                Year, Ind Char   ­           ­             ­               ­         ­              ­
Observations                 1,805     1,805       1,804         1,803           1,805     1,804          1,803
Adjusted R2                  0.087     0.000       0.000         0.000
LR chi-squared                                                                   0.830     0.940          0.270
Prob > chi-squared                                                               0.361     0.331          0.605




                                                         24
on scaled-dollar CAR is not statistically significant at the 10% level in any of the OLS
(Columns (2)­(4)) or tobit regressions (Columns (5)­(7)).
   To provide a relative benchmark, we now test whether the deal and acquiring firm char-
acteristics that were known at the time of the acquisition announcement are correlated
with future deal failure. To do so, we include the log of market capitalization, debt scaled
by previous-year assets, free cash flow scaled by previous-year assets, Tobin's Q, market-
adjusted stock returns in the previous quarter, short interest in the previous month, relative
size (deal value relative to acquirer market capitalization), and a dummy variable for stock-
only, mixed-payment, diversifying, and hostile deals and deals with competition and with
public targets. The full results are reported in Appendix Table D.1.
   The results in Table 3, Panel A, Column (1) show that year and industry controls and deal
and firm characteristics alone can explain 9.2% of the variation in merger failure, measured
as goodwill impairment or divestiture. In contrast, CAR, at best, explains 0.1% of the
variation (Column (2)­(4)). Column (7) shows that adding CAR to the model with industry
controls and deal and firm characteristics provides little benefit: Adjusted R2 increases from
9.2% to 9.3%. The results in Table 3, Panel B, which focuses on the magnitude of losses,
yield similar inferences.
   If the market reaction to the announcement provides additional information related to
deal value creation over and above the information contained in deal and firm characteristics,
then the CAR-alone model (Table 3, Panels A and B, Columns (2)­(4)) should perform
well--however, it does not. And the CAR and characteristics model (Column (7)) should
outperform the characteristics-only model (Column (1))--it does not either. Deal and firm
characteristics, also known ex-ante at the deal announcement date, dominate acquirer CAR
as predictors.
   In Table 4, we conduct in-sample tests for our firm-level ex-post acquisition outcome
measures: abnormal ROA (Panel A) and DGTW-adjusted BHAR (Panel B). The results
are reported in a similar manner to Table 3. In Panel A (where abnormal ROA is the de-


                                             25
Table 4. Acquirer CAR and Acquirer Operating and Financial Performance
This table reports OLS regressions of acquirer outcome measures on acquirer cumulative abnormal returns
(CAR) measured over various windows. In Panel A, the dependent variable is abnormal ROA. In Panel B,
the dependent variable is DGTW-adjusted buy-and-hold returns. In both panels, Column (1) includes only
year, industry, and characteristics as independent variables. In Columns (2)­(4) CAR is the only independent
variable, and Column (5)­(7) include both CAR and controls as independent variables. The characteristics
we include as controls are log market capitalization, leverage and free cash flow scaled by previous-year
assets, Tobin's Q, previous-quarter market-adjusted stock returns, previous-month short interest, relative
deal size, and a dummy variable for stock-only, mixed-payment, diversifying, competed, hostile, and public
target deals. Standard errors are reported in parentheses under coefficients. ***, **, and * indicate statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. All regressions include constants, the coefficients of
which are not reported.
Panel A: Abnormal ROA
Dependent variable:                                             Abnormal ROA
CAR window:                  n.a.        [-1, 1]   [-5, 5] [Ann-2, Cls+2]                    [-1, 1]
                             (1)          (2)       (3)             (4)          (5)       (6)           (7)
Acquirer CAR              Controls      0.051* 0.008               0.013        0.049     0.047        0.064**
                           only         (0.031) (0.021)           (0.013)      (0.030)   (0.030)       (0.030)

Controls              Year, Ind, Char   ­            ­               ­         Year Year, Ind Year, Ind, Char
Observations               1,707      1,707        1,707           1,707       1,707  1,707        1,707
Adjusted R2                0.064      0.002        0.000           0.000       0.008  0.034        0.067

Panel B: DGTW-Adjusted Buy-and-Hold Return
Dependent variable:                                            DGTW-adj BHAR
CAR window:                  n.a.        [-1, 1]   [-5, 5] [Ann-2, Cls+2]                    [-1, 1]
                             (1)          (2)       (3)             (4)          (5)       (6)           (7)
Acquirer CAR              Controls      -0.193 -0.219*             0.001       -0.203    -0.152        -0.091
                           only         (0.178) (0.123)           (0.076)      (0.178)   (0.180)       (0.182)

Controls              Year, Ind, Char   ­            ­               ­         Year Year, Ind Year, Ind, Char
Observations               1,805      1,805        1,805           1,804       1,805  1,805        1,805
Adjusted R2                0.029      0.000        0.001           0.000       0.000  0.006        0.028


pendent variable) and Panel B (where DGTW-adjusted BHAR is the dependent variable),
Columns (2)­(4), the coefficient on acquirer CAR has the correct sign and is statistically sig-
nificant at the 10% level for only one of the six regressions. In Table 4, Panel A, Column (2),
CAR explains 0.2% of the variation in abnormal ROA. Similarly, in Columns (5)­(7), which
include year and industry controls and firm and deal characteristics, the coefficient on ac-
quirer CAR is the correct sign and statistically significant at the 5% level for one of six
regressions. Similar to the results in Table 3, the results in Table 4, Panels A and B,


                                                          26
Column (1), show that year and industry controls and deal and firm characteristics alone
can explain 6.4% and 2.9% of the variation in abnormal ROA and buy-and-hold returns,
respectively, relative to the CAR-only models in Columns (2)­(4) that never exceed 0.2%.
   We conduct several robustness tests of our in-sample results. First, in Appendix Ta-
ble G.1, Columns (1) and (2), we show that our results are robust to including transactions
that were announced both before (2003­2007) and after (2010­2013) the financial crisis. As
in the results reported in Table 3, the coefficient on acquirer CAR is not statistically signif-
icant in either period. Overall, we find little evidence that the lack of predictive power of
announcement returns is driven by the massive, and arguably unanticipated, financial crisis.
   Second, we examine the combined returns of the target and the acquirer. Our main tests
explore whether acquirer announcement returns can detect ex-post acquisition outcomes.
Here, we instead look at whether the combined returns of the target and acquirer, which
reflect total expected synergy gains (as opposed to the division of synergy gains), can predict
acquisition outcomes. We focus on the subsample of transactions with public targets (only
19% of the sample) and compute combined dollar gains by summing the product of acquirer
CAR and acquirer market capitalization 50 days prior to the deal announcement date and
the product of target CAR and target market capitalization 50 days prior to the deal an-
nouncement date. We compute combined percentage returns by dividing combined dollar
gains by the sum of acquirer and target market capitalization. The results are reported in
Appendix Table G.1, Column (3). As with the results reported in Table 3, the coefficient on
combined CAR is not statistically significant.
   Third, indicators of transaction-level failure may not be apparent for well-performing
firms. Recall that goodwill impairment tests are performed at the reporting-unit level. When
several targets operate under a single reporting unit, operating performance improvements
by one target may obscure poor operating performance of the failed acquisition, thereby
stalling goodwill impairment. We address this issue in Appendix Table E.1. Our results are
similar when we consider relatively large transactions. For acquisitions that are large relative


                                              27
to the size of the acquirer, it is less likely that other businesses can hide value reductions
in the target. Although the coefficient on CAR is statistically significant at the 10% level
for failure and abnormal ROA outcomes, the R2 indicates that CAR explains only 0.3% and
0.4% of the variation in merger failure and ROA, respectively. Further, for our transaction-
level failure measure, we focus on extreme impairments and do not consider the timing of
the impairment--such value destruction is difficult to mask over time.
   To summarize, our in-sample tests indicate that CAR is unable to detect merger out-
comes. In most specifications, the relation between CAR and the merger outcome is not
statistically different from zero. When CAR is statistically significant, the economic mag-
nitude of the relation is small. Our in-sample tests also show that, in fact, characteristics
known at the time of the announcement perform materially better than CAR in predicting
merger outcomes.


4.2     Out-of-Sample Tests

   In this section, we delve deeper into the predictive properties of CAR and characteristics.
Thus far, we have used only in-sample tests. In this section we compare the ability of CAR
versus characteristics-based model to predict deal and acquirer outcomes out-of-sample.


4.2.1   Out-of-Sample Predictions Versus Realized Outcomes

   To conduct our out-of-sample tests, we use the following approach. We estimate a CAR-
only OLS regression model that uses our transaction- and firm-level ex-post outcome mea-
sures as the dependent variable and CAR as the independent variable. We also estimate a
characteristics-only OLS regression model that uses our transaction- and firm-level ex-post
outcome measures as the dependent variable and the characteristics used in Table 3 as the
independent variables. (Note that we do not include industry and year controls.) For both
regressions, we use the first half of the sample, 2003­2007, as a fit period to estimate coef-
ficients. Then, we use the parameter estimates from this first period to predict outcomes in


                                             28
the second half of the sample, 2008­2013 (i.e., the imputed probability of transaction failure
within five years of the deal effective date). Our analysis examines the ability of character-
istics and CAR to predict failure in the second period, which is out-of-sample, i.e., was not
used to estimate the model's parameters.20

Table 5. Out-of-Sample: Predicted Versus Realized Outcomes
We first estimate OLS regressions of deal outcome measures on CAR [-1, 1] only and characteristics only
using only the first half of transactions (2003­2007) as a fit period to estimate coefficients. We then use
the parameter estimates from this first half to predict outcomes in the second half of the sample. In
Panel A, we assess the correlation between realized outcomes and predicted outcomes by the CAR-only
model (Columns (1), (3), (5)) and the characteristics-only model (Columns (2), (4), (6)). In Panel B, we
assess the correlation between the predicted outcome by the characteristics-only model and acquirer CAR.
Standard errors are reported in parentheses below coefficients. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance
at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
 Panel A: Predicted Versus Realized Outcomes
 Dependent variable:                                             Realized Outcome
                                         Failure dummy            Abnormal ROA            DGTW-adj BHAR
                                          (1)        (2)           (3)        (4)           (5)        (6)
 Predicted based on CAR                  1.093                    0.572                   -0.228
                                        (1.235)                  (0.674)                  (0.446)
 Predicted based on characteristics               0.421***                 0.516***                  0.340**
                                                   (0.094)                  (0.127)                  (0.136)

 Observations                             882        882          841         841           882        882
 Adjusted R2                             0.000      0.021        0.000       0.024         0.000      0.006

 Panel B: Is CAR Correlated with the "Predictable" Component of Outcomes?
 Dependent variable:                              Predicted Outcome by a Characteristics Model
                                         Failure dummy            Abnormal ROA            DGTW-adj BHAR
                                          (1)        (2)           (3)        (4)           (5)        (6)
 Acquirer CAR [-1, 1]                    0.062                  -0.015                    -0.106
                                        (0.069)                 (0.009)                   (0.065)
 Acquirer CAR [-5, 5]                               0.066                  -0.017**                  -0.073
                                                   (0.047)                  (0.007)                  (0.049)

 Observations                             882        882          841         841           882        882
 Adjusted R2                             0.000      0.002        0.002       0.005         0.004      0.003



       We next assess the quality of the predictions made by CAR and the characteristics-
  20
     One drawback of this methodology is that market participants could not have implemented it. Specifi-
cally, the window of observing some of the outcomes of transactions that took place during the first period
overlaps with the second period.



                                                      29
based model out-of-sample. We present the results in Table 5, Panel A, which shows that
the predicted outcome by CAR is not correlated with the realizations of any of the three
outcomes. In contrast, the predicted outcome by the characteristics-based model is positive
(correct direction) and significant at the 1% and 5% confidence levels.
   Our analysis so far has identified a set of characteristics that are useful in predicting
acquisition outcomes out-of-sample. When acquisitions are announced, is the announcement
CAR correlated with the out-of-sample characteristics-based prediction (which we already
know is a good one)? We investigate this issue in Panel B of Table 5. Results show that
acquirer CAR in the later sample is not even correlated with the predictable part of merger
outcomes.
   In Figure 3, we present out-of-sample tests graphically that are similar in spirit to the tests
reported in Table 5. For the transaction-level failure measure (impairment or divestiture-
at-a-loss), we estimate logit models of failure on CAR or characteristics. We then use the
coefficients estimated in the first half of the sample to estimate the predicted probability of
failure decile in the second half of the sample. Then, for each predicted probability decile,
we report the fraction of transactions with realized failure. Similarly, for the abnormal ROA
and DGTW-adjusted buy-and-hold outcome variables, we estimate OLS models of outcomes
on CAR or characteristics. We again use the coefficients estimated in the first half of the
sample to estimate the predicted outcome decile in the second half of the sample. Then, for
each predicted outcome decile, we report the realized outcome decile.
   If the model has predictive power, then the realized impairment/divestiture rate should
increase monotonically as we move from decile 1 (low predicted probability) to decile 10 (high
predicted probability). Alternatively, if the model lacks predictive power, the realized failure
rate should be close to 12% (the unconditional failure rate in the second half of the sample)
for all deciles. Focusing first on Panel (a), we see little evidence of significant predictive power
for the CAR-only model. The realized failure rate is nonmonotonic as we move from decile
1 to 10. Moreover, realized failure rates are close to 12% for many deciles, although there is


                                                30
Figure 3. Out-of-Sample: Predicted Versus Realized Outcomes
These figures report out-of-sample results. We use the first half of the sample, 2003­2007, to fit logit models
of deal failure and OLS regressions of abnormal ROA and DGTW-BHAR deciles. Using the estimates, we
obtain predicted outcome deciles in the second half of the sample, 2008­2013. For our transaction-level
measure, for each predicted probability decile, we report the fraction of transactions with realized failure.
For our firm-level measures, for each predicted decile, we report the realized outcome decile. Panels (a),
(c), and (e) include only acquirer CAR [-1, 1] as an independent variable. Panels (b), (d), and (f) include
only deal and firm characteristics as the independent variables. The dashed line indicates the unconditional
realized failure rate and the unconditional realized outcome decile (for ROA and BHAR) for the second half
of the sample. The shaded portion represents the 95% confidence interval.

                                                                  (a) Failure: CAR [-1, 1]                        (b) Failure: Characteristics
      Realized failure frequency




                                                 0.3                                                   0.3


                                                 0.2                                                   0.2


                                                 0.1                                                   0.1


                                                      0                                                 0
                                                              2         4      6      8      10                   2      4       6      8        10

                                                           (c) Abnormal ROA: CAR [-1, 1]                      (d) Abnormal ROA: Characteristics
    Realized abnormal




                                                      7                                                 7
       ROA decile




                                                      6                                                 6


                                                      5                                                 5


                                                      4                                                 4
                                                              2         4      6      8      10                   2      4       6      8        10

                                                          (e) DGTW-adj BHAR: CAR [-1, 1]                     (f) DGTW-adj BHAR: Characteristics
                                                      7                                                 7
                               Realized BHAR decile




                                                      6                                                 6


                                                      5                                                 5


                                                      4                                                 4
                                                              2         4      6      8      10                   2      4       6      8        10
                                                            Predicted decile (CAR [-1, 1])                     Predicted decile (Characteristics)


an elevated fraction of failures in the highest predicted probability decile (i.e., transactions
with the most negative CARs). In contrast, Panel (b), the characteristics-only model, shows
a stable positive upward trend, indicating that deciles with higher predicted failure are

                                                                                                  31
associated with a higher fraction of realized failure rates. In Panel (a), the CAR-only model,
the realized failure rate average is 16% for the two highest predicted probability deciles and
16% for the two lowest predicted probability deciles. In Panel (b), the characteristics-only
model, the realized failure rate average is 18% for the two highest predicted probability
deciles and only 5% for the two lowest predicted probability deciles.
   The results for the firm-level outcome variables are generally similar. In Panels (c)
and (e)--the CAR only model--realized outcome deciles vary little from the unconditional
average decile in the second half of the sample (as indicated by the dashed line) across
predicted outcome deciles, whereas Panels (d) and (f)--the characteristics-only model--
show an upward trend in realized outcome deciles as we move from low predicted to high
predicted deciles.
   In sum, the out-of-sample tests reiterate the conclusion from the earlier in-sample tests:
CAR has only very weak predictive power in regard to predicting merger outcomes.


4.2.2   Trading on CAR Versus Characteristics

   We further substantiate our conclusion about CAR's lack of predictability by devising
a trading strategy. In Table 6, similar to our out-of-sample tests in Table 5, we use the
first half of the sample of completed acquisitions to estimate models of ex-post performance
measures (deal failure, abnormal ROA, and DGTW-adjusted BHAR) as a function of either
CAR or deal and acquirer characteristics. We use these estimates to predict outcomes in the
second half of the sample. We then formulate a trading strategy in which we buy the top
30% of acquirers based on the predicted outcome and sell the bottom 30% of acquirers. The
positions are held for three years starting 10 days from the deal effective date.
   We summarize the trading results (using DGTW-adjusted BHAR to compute returns) in
Table 6. Column (1), for example, shows that buying a portfolio that contains acquirers with
the highest CARs (top three deciles) yields abnormal returns of -2.2% over three years. The
portfolio that contains acquirers with the worst CARs (bottom three deciles) yields similar


                                              32
Table 6. Trading Strategy Based on CAR and Characteristics
This table reports three-year equal-weighted DGTW portfolio returns computed beginning 10 days following
the deal effective date. In Column (1), we estimate a logit regression of deal failure, and in Columns (3)
and (5) we estimate OLS regressions of abnormal ROA and DGTW-adjusted BHAR, respectively, on
CAR [-1, 1] using the early 50% of the sample (sorted by deal effective date). We then compute the
imputed outcome for the late 50% of the sample and sort predicted values into 10 outcome deciles. We
report the equal-weighted three-year DGTW buy-and-hold returns for acquirers in the bottom three and top
three deciles and the p -value for the difference test between the two portfolios. Columns (2), (4), and (6)
are computed analogously except we use the characteristics model to predict outcomes.

 Predicted variable:         Failure dummy                   Abnormal ROA           DGTW-adj BHAR
 Prediction model:       CAR      Characteristics      CAR       Characteristics   CAR     Characteristics
                          (1)           (2)                (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)
                                                    3-Year DGTW-Adjusted BHAR
 Buy top 3 deciles     -2.2%           4.7%            -2.4%          2.9%         -2.6%        2.4%
 Sell bottom 3 deciles -2.6%          -6.8%            -3.0%         -4.9%         -2.2%       -6.8%

 Difference              0.4%         11.5%            0.6%          7.8%          -0.4%       9.2%
 p -value                0.926        0.004            0.882         0.058         0.926       0.022


abnormal returns of -2.6%. These two abnormal returns are not statistically different. In
contrast, in the characteristics model, the portfolio with the lowest predicted failure likeli-
hood yields 4.7% after three years, and the portfolio based on the highest predicted failure
likelihood yields -6.8%. The performance difference between these portfolios is +11.5% and
is statistically different at the 1% significance level. We find similar, albeit slightly weaker,
results for the other ex-post measures.


4.3     Performance by Category: Which Deals Create Value?

    Another way to investigate the validity of CAR is to cluster transactions by characteristics
and examine ex-post outcomes per cluster. The M&A literature often groups transactions
by deal or acquirer characteristics and makes inferences about the value created for specific
types of transactions. For example, if CAR for the average public target is negative, one
might infer that acquiring a typical public target destroys value. How reliable are these
inferences? We address this question in multiple ways.




                                                      33
4.3.1      Univariate Tests: One Characteristic at a Time

       First, we explore univariate associations of CAR and characteristics. Specifically, we run
14 regressions of CAR on observed characteristics (one characteristic per regression). After
recording the coefficients, we replace CAR with the three ex-post outcomes and repeat the
exercise. Overall, we have 56 coefficients (14 × 4). All acquirer characteristics are computed
prior to the announcement. Leverage, free cash flows, assets, and Tobin's Q are computed
in the year prior to the announcement, and past returns and short interest are computed in
the quarter and month prior to the announcement, respectively.21
       To compare predictions of CAR across characteristics and to the realized outcomes, we
standardize the coefficients and present them in Figure 4. The coefficients are sorted by
characteristics that predict the lowest CAR (public target and stock-only transactions and
large acquirers) to those that predict the highest CAR (large relative size transactions and
acquirers with high leverage and free cash flow). In general, the relations between CAR
and characteristics that we document in our sample match those found in earlier studies
that explored the relationship between CAR and characteristics, although often in different
time periods and samples. We also add to the figure the standardized coefficients from the
remaining regressions, i.e., the coefficients of ex-post outcomes on characteristics. To ease
interpretation, we switch the sign on the failure regressions so that they are comparable to
the other measures of performance and to CAR.
       The results in Figure 4 show that the three ex-post outcomes are correlated among
themselves. In other words, characteristics that are associated with a high likelihood of failure
(e.g,. high relative size) are also associated with poor ex-post performance, as indicated by
low abnormal ROA and low BHAR. This fact provides further validation that our newly
introduced measure of deal failure indeed captures acquisition failure.
  21
    This test also helps address an errors-in-variables critique. Specifically, our main tests regress ex-post
outcomes on announcement returns. Standard regression analysis assumes that regressors are observed
without noise. CAR, however, could be noisy, and hence may lead to coefficients that are attenuated--an
econometric issue often referred to as errors-in-variables in the literature. However, in this section, CAR is
the dependent variable rather than the independent variable.


                                                     34
Figure 4. CAR and Ex-Post Performance, by Characteristic
The bar chart shows the standardized coefficient for regressions for which the dependent variable is CAR,
failure, abnormal ROA, or DGTW-adjusted buy-and-hold returns (BHAR) on various deal and firm charac-
teristics. Each characteristic enters each regression individually (univariate regressions). We switch the sign
on the failure regressions so that they are comparable to the other measures of performance and to CAR.
The red bar indicates the standardized coefficient from regressions in which CAR is the dependent variable,
and the three lighter bars indicate regressions for which failure, abnormal ROA, and DGTW-adjusted BHAR
are the dependent variables. The patterned portion of the bars indicate a coefficient that is larger than 1.96
standard errors of the standardized coefficient, i.e., statistically significant at least at 5% level. All acquirer
characteristics are computed prior to the announcement: Leverage, free cash flows, assets, and Tobin's Q
are computed in the year prior to the announcement and past returns and short interest are computed in
the quarter and month prior to the announcement, respectively.

    Public target

       Stock only

     Acquirer size

         Deal size
        Tobin's Q

      Diversifying

      Past return

    Short interest
        Competed

  Mixed payment

            Hostile                                                                                         CAR
                                                                                                            Failure
      FCF/Assets
                                                                                                            ROA
                                                                                                            BHAR
     Debt/Assets

     Relative size
                       -0.12 -0.1 -0.08 -0.06 -0.04 -0.02    0    0.02   0.04   0.06   0.08   0.1   0.12   0.14   0.16
                                     Standardized coefficient of CAR or ex-post performance


    Strikingly, Figure 4 shows no association (in terms of sign and relative importance)
between the characteristics for which CAR predicts failure or success and the characteristics
that are associated with failure or success ex-post. For example, transactions with public
targets or large acquirer size are associated with lower CARs but are not associated with an
increased rate of failure, low abnormal ROA, or low BHAR.


                                                        35
   One might wonder whether the mismatch between the characteristics-based predictions
of CAR is an artifact of our specific sample period. To check whether our results can be
generalized, we split the sample (transactions completed in 2003­2007 and 2008­2013) and
reproduce the chart for the two time periods. The results are in Appendix E (Figure E.1).
The charts show that the patterns are similar for the two periods and the full sample in
Figure 4. For both time periods, there is often a mismatch between the characteristics that
CAR links to acquisition success or failure and the characteristics that are associated with
ex-post outcomes.
   Overall, the results in this section show that the inferences about the quality of merger
decisions by deal and acquirer characteristics are inconsistent with the outcomes ex post.
This does not appear to be a fluke, but rather a robust result over time.


4.3.2   Multivariate Tests

   Next, we generalize these tests. Instead of conducting 14 regressions of CAR on charac-
teristics, we run a single regression of CAR on all characteristics. And instead of comparing
the outcomes characteristic-by-characteristic, we compare them all at once.
   In Table 7, we regress CAR (calculated using different windows) on deal and acquirer
characteristics. In the right columns, we report the sign that we would expect CAR to
have, based on similar specifications in which ex-post outcomes are regressed on deal and
acquirer characteristics. For example, CAR loads negatively on acquirer size, which could be
interpreted as transactions with negative NPV. In contrast, ex-post outcomes reflect greater
success for transactions associated with larger acquirers.
   Overall, the results in Table 7 show that when deal and firm characteristics predict
successful (unsuccessful) realized merger outcomes, these same characteristics often predict
unsuccessful (successful) outcomes if we regard the sign of CAR as a proxy for the success
of the outcome.




                                             36
Table 7. Acquirer Announcement Returns and Characteristics
This table reports the results of the regression of announcement returns over three return windows ([-1, 1],
[-5, 5], [Announcement - 2, Close + 2]) on deal and firm characteristics using OLS. The results are based on
the full sample of both completed and withdrawn deals in Columns (1) and (2) and completed deals in (3).
Standard errors are reported in parentheses under coefficients. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance
at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. All regressions include constants, the coefficients of which are
not reported.

 Dependent variable:                            Acquirer CAR
 CAR window:                        [-1, 1]      [-5, 5]      [Ann-2, Cls+2]      Predicted Sign Implied by. . .
                                      (1)          (2)             (3)            Failure   ROA       BHAR
 Log acquirer market cap ($b)     -0.003** -0.008***            -0.011***          (+)      (+)         (+)
                                   (0.001)   (0.002)             (0.003)
 Debt/Assets (y - 1)               2.554**   3.941**             4.645*            (+)      (+)         (+)
                                   (1.117)   (1.610)             (2.657)
 FCF/Assets (y - 1)                0.025**  0.067***             0.063**                                (+)
                                   (0.012)   (0.017)             (0.029)
 Tobin's Q (y - 1)                 -0.001    -0.001              -0.005
                                   (0.002)   (0.002)             (0.004)
 Past return (adj; q - 1)          -0.002    -0.008              -0.029                     (+)
                                   (0.011)   (0.017)             (0.025)
 Short interest (adj; m - 1)        0.014    -0.003              -0.058            (-)
                                   (0.041)   (0.054)             (0.084)
 Relative size                    0.025***   0.020**              0.019            (-)                  (-)
                                   (0.006)   (0.008)             (0.017)
 Stock-only dummy                 -0.040*** -0.037**            -0.113***          (-)
                                   (0.011)   (0.015)             (0.032)
 Mixed-payment dummy               -0.005     0.001              -0.006            (-)      (-)         (-)
                                   (0.004)   (0.005)             (0.008)
 Diversifying dummy                -0.004     0.002              -0.008            (-)      (-)         (-)
                                   (0.004)   (0.005)             (0.008)
 Competed dummy                     0.015     0.004               0.035                                 (-)
                                   (0.013)   (0.035)             (0.075)
 Hostile                            0.021     0.035               0.043
                                   (0.023)   (0.027)             (0.053)
 Public target                    -0.022*** -0.012*              -0.019
                                   (0.005)   (0.007)             (0.015)

 Industry controls                    No           No              No
 Observations                        1,934        1,934           1,804
 Adjusted R2                         0.052        0.039           0.039


4.3.3      Combining CAR-Based Inferences into a Single Predictor

    We can also construct a single measure of predicted deal success based on characteristics.
For example, a stock transaction of a public target by a large acquirer would be considered to
be a value-destroying transaction as all of these characteristics are associated with negative


                                                         37
CAR. Using the sample of completed transactions, we compile the individual coefficients
by predicting CAR from Table 7, Column (1). The in-sample predicted CAR summarizes
the associations of CAR with all of the regressors. We then sort the predicted CAR into
deciles such that the top (bottom) deciles contain transactions that have characteristics
associated with high (low) CAR, implying that, on average, they should predict high (low)
NPV transactions.

Figure 5. A Single CAR-Based Predictor and Realized Outcomes
We utilize the coefficients in Table 7 Column (1) (the regression of CAR on characteristics) to obtain an
in-sample predicted CAR for the sample of completed transactions, i.e., a summary of what CAR would
be given the set of deal and acquirer characteristics. We then sort the predicted CAR into deciles. For
each predicted CAR decile, we report (solid red line) realized failure frequency (Panel (a)), average realized
abnormal ROA (Panel (b)), and average realized DGTW-adjusted BHAR (Panel (c)). The red shading
indicates the 95% confidence intervals.
                                                 (a) Failure                                                                             (b) Abnormal ROA
  Realized failure frequency




                                                                                                Realized abnormal ROA




                                                                                                                         0.02
                               0.3


                               0.2                                                                                           0


                               0.1
                                                                                                                        -0.02

                                         2      4                    6         8       10                                            2        4   6      8     10
                               Decile of Predicted CAR (using characteristics)                                           Decile of Predicted CAR (using characteristics)

                                                                                       (c) DGTW-adj BHAR

                                                                         0.1
                                                     Realized BHAR




                                                                           0


                                                                     -0.1


                                                                     -0.2
                                                                                   2        4                            6       8       10
                                                                         Decile of Predicted CAR (using characteristics)



                         Our analysis uses these predictive regressions to explore whether high-NPV transactions
according to CAR are indeed associated with better ex-post outcomes. In Figure 5, Pan-
els (a), (b), and (c), we present the ex-post occurrence of failure and outcomes with respect


                                                                                                38
to predicted CAR deciles. Panel (a) shows that the likelihood of failure is higher for trans-
actions with characteristics for which CAR is higher, on average--the sign is clearly wrong.
Panels (b) and (c) show no relation between ex-post performance, as measured by abnormal
ROA and BHAR, and the combined CAR predictor.
    Overall, our results indicate that CAR is not associated with outcomes either directly
or indirectly via characteristics. These results are in contrast to the moderate ability of
characteristics to predict transaction- and firm-level acquisition outcomes.



5     The Information Contained in CAR

    So far, we have seen that CAR has little predictive power over merger outcomes. However,
as described earlier, CAR is widely viewed as informative of the value created or destroyed
by the transaction.
    We consider four potential explanations for the lack of predictability by CAR: i) CAR is
an aggregated signal that includes both deal and non-deal related information, ii) CAR is
noisy due to uncertainty about acquisition outcomes at the time of the announcement, iii)
CAR is mismeasured (i.e., window size around announcement), iv ) CAR has an attenuation
due to truncation from cancelled bids or endogeneity due to feedback effects.


5.1    Separating NPV from Standalone Information

    We begin this analysis by decomposing CAR into four components:


                CARi,j = p · Deal NPVi,j + Acquirer Infoi,j + Noisei,j + i,j .            (3)


where CARi,j is the CAR associated with the announcement of i by acquirer j . p·Deal NPVi,j
is CAR's approximation of the NPV of transaction i, which could potentially depend on
the characteristics of firm j and has probability of completion p. Acquirer Infoi,j is the
information in CAR that is revealed through the transaction about standalone value of the

                                             39
acquirer j , which could in principle be related to the characteristics of i.22 Noisei,j is a
systematic noise component. Since it is systematic, this component is correlated with the
characteristics of the transaction i or the acquirer j . It reflects information that investors
believe is related to value creation, but, in reality, is not.23 i is a noise component that is
uncorrelated with characteristics, perhaps due to market frictions and limits to arbitrage.24
    Our objective is to isolate the NPV component. To do so, we first strip variations in
announcement returns that are related to the acquirer j . Ideally, we would decompose the
components of CAR, isolate the component related to expected value creation, and explore
whether this component of CAR contains information that is correlated with the ex-post
outcomes. While we are not able to seamlessly achieve this goal, we conduct two tests to
ascertain the role that information unrelated to value creation plays in the ability to detect
ex-post outcomes.

Table 8. Ex-post Outcomes and Residualized Acquirer CAR
This table reports regressions of ex-post outcomes on residualized CAR [-1, 1]. The residual is computed
from the regression in Table 7, Column (1). Standard errors are reported in parentheses under coefficients.
***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. All regressions
include constants, the coefficients of which are not reported.

     Dependent variable:                 Failure dummy        Abnormal ROA         DGTW-adj BHAR
                                               (1)                  (2)                    (3)
     Residual of acquirer CAR [-1, 1]       -0.214*              0.065***                -0.091
                                            (0.127)               (0.025)                (0.165)

     Observations                             1,805                1,707                  1,805
     Adjusted R2                              0.001                0.003                  0.000



    In the first test, we regress CAR on the deal and firm characteristics presented in Ta-
  22
     For example, CAR may include information related to acquirer overvaluation (Shleifer and Vishny, 2003).
CAR may also reflect an update about the skill of the management, its acquisition policy, or the growth
potential of the acquirer (e.g., Schipper and Thompson, 1983; Asquith, Bruner, and Mullins, 1983; Roll,
1986; Hietala, Kaplan, and Robinson, 2003; Barraclough, Robinson, Smith, and Whaley, 2013; Malmendier,
Opp, and Saidi, 2016; Wang, 2018; Bennett and Dam, 2019; Irani, 2020).
  23
     One example is the fixation of investors on earnings-per-share (EPS) dilution or accretion (Dasgupta
et al., 2019). Another example is wishful thinking of investors, e.g., driven by sentiment. This component
could be correlated with the characteristics of the transaction i or the acquirer j .
  24
     For example, announcement returns may also reflect price pressure from arbitrageurs (e.g., Mitchell,
Pulvino, and Stafford, 2004).


                                                      40
ble 7 and obtain the residual--the element of CAR that is orthogonal to characteristics
(i.e., information related to characteristics of firm j and to acquisition i). We then regress
our transaction-level and firm-level acquisition outcomes on this residual. The results are
reported in Table 8. In Column (1), failure is explained by the residualized CAR with a
10% statistical significance level, and in Column (2), abnormal ROA is explained by the
residualized CAR with a 1% statistical significance level; both coefficients' signs are correct.
Column (3) shows that residualized CAR is not correlated with BHAR. Although these re-
sults might seem to signal that CAR contains some information relevant to value creation,
we note that the R2 is virtually zero: it ranges from 0.000 to 0.003.
   Overall, the results in this section indicate that while CAR contains some information
relevant to value creation--information that is not captured by characteristics--this is not
likely to be a full explanation for the inability of CAR to capture ex-post outcomes.


5.2    Outcome Uncertainty and Information Environment

   M&A transactions are inherently complex and involve a high degree of uncertainty. It
is possible that due to this uncertainty, outcomes are difficult to predict. Our results in
Section 4.1.2 show that this explanation cannot be complete, as outcomes are sufficiently
predictable by characteristics known at the time of the transaction, both in-sample and
out-of-sample.
   Nevertheless, we conduct two additional tests that consider the information environment
at the time of the acquisition announcement.
   First, we test whether CAR is better at predicting short-term outcomes than long-run
ones, e.g., failure within the first year as opposed to within five years.
   We rerun the earlier regressions (as in Tables 3 and 4), where the dependent variable is
the outcome within a particular time period relative to the deal effective date (up to five
years). In Figure 6, we plot the coefficient on CAR (Panels (a), (c), and (e)) and the adjusted
R2 (Panels (b), (d), and (f)). In addition, to provide a benchmark, we add to the latter set


                                               41
Figure 6. Performance of CAR Versus the Characteristics-Based Model
Panel (a) reports the coefficients of OLS regressions of failure on CAR [-1, 1]. Panels(c) and (e) are similar,
except the dependent variable is abnormal ROA and DGTW-adjusted BHAR, respectively. Panel (b), (d),
and (f) report the adjusted R2 from these regressions of acquisition outcomes on CAR and also the adjusted
R2 for similar regressions of acquisition outcomes on the deal and firm characteristics reported in Table 3.
In Panels (a) and (b), in the Year 1 regression, a goodwill impairment or divestiture within one year dummy
is the dependent variable. In the Year 2 regression, firms with impairment or divestiture within one year
are excluded, and the dependent variable is a dummy for impairment or divestiture in Year 2. In the Year 3
regression, firms with impairment or divestiture in Years 1 or 2 are excluded, and the dependent variable is
a dummy for impairment or divestiture in Year 3. Year 4 and Year 5 regressions are computed in a similar
fashion. In Panels (c)­(f) we measure abnormal ROA and BHAR at the end of Years 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5. In
Panels (a), (c), and (e) the light shaded region indicates the 95% confidence interval.

                                            (a) Failure: CAR coefficients                                     (b) Failure: Adj R2

                                                                                                                            Characteristics model
    Coefficient on CAR




                              0.2
                                                                                              0.03                          CAR[-1, 1] model

                                0


                                                                                     Adj R2
                                                                                              0.02

                             -0.2
                                                                                              0.01

                             -0.4                                                               0

                                      0­1        2        3       4         5                        0­1       2        3          4          5

                                     (c) Abnormal ROA: CAR coefficients                                    (d) Abnormal ROA: Adj R2
        Coefficient on CAR




                              0.1                                                             0.04
                                                                                     Adj R2




                             0.05
                                                                                              0.02


                                0
                                                                                                0
                                      0­1        2        3       4         5                        0­1       2        3          4          5

                                    (e) DGTW-adj BHAR: CAR coefficients                                (f) DGTW-adj BHAR: Adj R2
    Coefficient on CAR




                              0.2                                                             0.02

                                0
                                                                                     Adj R2




                             -0.2                                                             0.01

                             -0.4

                             -0.6                                                               0
                                      0­1        2        3       4         5                        0­1       2        3          4          5
                                               Years after transaction                                       Years after transaction


of panels the R2 from the standard regression of deal and acquirer characteristics (without
industry or year fixed effects).

                                                                                42
   The figure shows that CAR is statistically significant only for failure and abnormal ROA
outcomes that take place in the first year. The R2 for first-year predictions is 0.008 for
failure. Later outcomes are unrelated to CAR, despite the fact that they can be predicted
using deal and acquirer characteristics with R2 of 1% (failure dummy) to 4% (abnormal
ROA).
   Overall, these results provide evidence that CAR performs better for outcomes that occur
in a short period relative to the deal completion date. However, the weak explanatory power,
as well as the superior performance of characteristics, makes CAR a somewhat ineffective
predictor of value creation even in the short term.
   We next consider the information environment at the time of the announcement. Does the
market have enough information to accurately measure value creation? Appendix E shows
that, on the margin, CAR's ability to detect value destruction is better in certain subsamples
that likely have superior information environments. For example, when transaction-level
failure is the dependent variable, the coefficient on CAR is statistically significant for stock
deals (which often result in a shareholder vote), for public targets, and for large acquirers
and large deals. (More information is likely to be generated by analysts and other news
sources.) We note that although the coefficient on CAR is statistically significant in certain
subsamples, the R2 remains very low in all subsamples.


5.3     Timing of Information Incorporation

   Another possibility we consider is that the window around the event is not defined prop-
erly. So far, our results in Section 4.1.2 show that the lack of predictability exists for both
short windows (three or 10 trading days) around the announcement and a longer window
between the announcement and deal completion date. These windows are typically used in
the M&A literature.
   The information included in CAR may be an update of an earlier information or prior
that investors had. In other words, part of the information about the expected value created


                                              43
by the merger may already be impounded in the price before the announcement due to
leakage or anticipation of the acquisition.25 To address this concern, we follow Schipper
and Thompson (1983) and extend the measurement period of CAR to begin 41 days prior
to the announcement and end one day following the announcement. The results, reported
in Table G.1, Column (4), show that extending the window does not change our inference
about CAR's lack of predictability. Although we are unable to identify the exact timing of
the acquisition-related information incorporation, the consistency of our results across event
windows indicates this is unlikely the primary driver of the inability of CAR to capture
outcomes.


5.4       Truncation Due to Withdrawals or Feedback Endogeneity

       So far, our analysis implicitly assumes that the deals that are completed are a random
sample of those that were announced, and that ex-post outcomes are not affected by man-
agement who heed announcement returns. These assumptions may not hold. This empirical
issue plagues the few papers that provide some support for CAR (e.g., Healy et al., 1992;
Kaplan and Weisbach, 1992) and most studies that use CAR to make inferences about value
creation.


5.4.1      Truncation Effect: Withdrawn Deals

       To put things in perspective, 129 transactions were cancelled in our sample (6.7% of all
announcements). Despite the low occurrence, withdrawn deals may result in a truncation
bias (due to the elimination of 6.7% of transactions) if the truncation is not random. For
example, if CAR is very negative--implying that the merger destroys value--managers may
be more likely to withdraw the bid before the merger is completed.
       Our sample allows us to draw limited conclusions about the existence of truncation effects.
  25
    See the following studies that raise this possibility: Schipper and Thompson (1983), Schwert (1996),
Bhattacharya, Daouk, Jorgenson, and Kehr (2000), Mitchell et al. (2004), Edmans, Goldstein, and Jiang
(2012), Offenberg and Officer (2012), Wang (2018), Bennett and Dam (2019), and Irani (2020).



                                                  44
It is reasonable to assume that withdrawing a transaction in response to negative CAR serves
as an upper bound for the feedback effects, i.e., the extent to which management listens to
CAR conditional on deal completion.
    We first consider the distribution of acquirer announcement returns. Of the completed
deals in our sample, 20% are associated with a large and negative market reaction (i.e., CAR
of less than -4%), indicating that many transactions are completed despite a negative CAR.
Moreover, of our impaired or divested-at-a-loss transactions, 27% are associated with large
positive CARs (i.e., CAR greater than 4%), indicating that the market often gets the sign
of the outcome incorrect.

Table 9. Probability of Withdrawal and Acquirer CAR
This table reports regressions of deal withdrawal on acquirer cumulative abnormal returns (CAR) measured
over various windows. The top panel uses OLS regressions and the bottom panel uses logit regressions.
Column (1) reports an OLS model using only deal and firm characteristics. Standard errors are reported in
parentheses under coefficients. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively. All regressions include constants, the coefficients of which are not reported.

 Dependent variable:                                    Withdrawn Dummy
 CAR window:                   n.a.         [-1, 1]        [-5, 5]                          [-1, 1]
                               (1)            (2)           (3)                (4)        (5)            (6)
 Regression:                                                         OLS
 Acquirer CAR               Controls       -0.147*    -0.116**               -0.131     -0.137         -0.094
                             only          (0.084)     (0.059)               (0.083)    (0.084)        (0.073)

 Controls               Year, Ind, Char        ­             ­               Year      Year, Ind   Year, Ind, Char
 Observations                1,934           1,934         1,934             1,934       1,934          1,934
 Adjusted R2                 0.404           0.002         0.002             0.024       0.036          0.394
 Regression:                                                         Logit
 Acquirer CAR               Controls       -2.407*    -1.890**               -2.223     -2.305         -2.087
                             only          (1.362)     (0.939)               (1.399)    (1.460)        (1.610)

 Controls               Year, Ind, Char        ­             ­               Year      Year, Ind   Year, Ind, Char
 Observations                1,805           1,934         1,934             1,934       1,934          1,934
 Pseudo R2                   0.447           0.004         0.005             0.051       0.082          0.449



    We explore this issue further in Table 9. We focus on the full sample of withdrawn and
completed deals, and in Columns (2) and (3) we regress a withdrawn dummy on acquirer
CAR in both an OLS and logit model. In Column (1), we include only the characteristics


                                                      45
used in Table 4, and in Columns (4), (5), and (6) we include CAR and year; year and
industry; and year, industry, and characteristics controls, respectively. In Columns (2)
and (3), the correlation between withdrawal and CAR is statistically significant at least at
the 5% level. When controls are included in Columns (4)­(6), the coefficient on CAR is
no longer significant. CAR has little economic significance: In Column (2), the marginal
effect indicates that for every one percentage point reduction in CAR, the probability of
withdrawal increases by 0.12%, or increases from the unconditional probability of 6.67% to
6.79%. This weakness can also be observed in the small R2 , which ranges from 0.002 to
0.005. In contrast, in Column (1), the R2 in the characteristics model ranges from 0.404 to
0.447.
      To further assess whether CAR's lack of predictive power is driven by selection through
withdrawals, we implement a correction by using inverse probability weighting (Wooldridge,
2007).26 This method has two stages. In the first stage, the likelihood of completion (= 1 -
Withdrawal) is estimated as in Table 9 using the full sample. Specifically, we estimate a logit
regression of the probability of completion on acquirer CAR and deal and firm characteristics.
In the second stage, we rerun the main analysis (as in Tables 3 and 4), this time weighting
observations with the inverse probability of completion. This method provides greater weight
to observations that are more likely to have been withdrawn. The results of the analysis are
presented in Appendix F. Overall, the results are similar to those in Tables 3 and 4.


5.4.2      Feedback Effects

      In addition to truncation effects that happen because of withdrawals, there could be feed-
back effects, meaning that managers adjust their actions in response to CAR. For instance,
given a negative CAR, managers may allocate more resources to ensure that the combined
entity is well-integrated. Such feedback would mute the result between CAR and outcomes.
      The empirical evidence on whether management indeed listens to the market and changes
 26
      A similar method was implemented in Bhagat, Dong, Hirshleifer, and Noah (2005).



                                                   46
its course of action is mixed. Several studies test whether mergers are likely to be withdrawn
following negative announcement returns. Jennings and Mazzeo (1991) find no evidence of
such a relationship. Conversely, Luo (2005) and Kau, Linck, and Rubin (2008) present
findings that are consistent with this idea.
    Our dataset does not allow us to test the distortion that feedback effects create. However,
we note that feedback effects will also be incorporated into the hundreds of M&A studies
that use CAR to draw conclusions about value creation. If management listened to the
market and modified its resource allocation in response to CAR, CAR would not capture
much about value creation after this adjustment has been made. Furthermore, the fact that
characteristics can predict outcomes in-sample and out-of-sample suggests that the feedback
effect may not be very substantial.



6     Conclusion

    We investigate whether CAR measured around merger announcements can be interpreted
as a viable metric of value creation, as widely used in the M&A literature. We propose a new
transaction-level measure of realized deal failure, which combines impairment of acquisition
goodwill and divestiture-at-a-loss. In addition, we use acquirer-level measures of ex-post
performance: abnormal ROA and characteristics-adjusted stock performance.
    We document that CAR has no meaningful correlation with the deal outcomes or acquirer
future performance. CAR fails to predict both the occurrence and magnitude of transaction
failure. Our tests produce non-results across different specifications, in-sample and out-of-
sample, for CAR measured over different event windows, and with the inclusion of year or
industry controls, or deal and firm characteristics. We find that a simple prediction model
that uses standard deal and firm characteristics, all known ex-ante at the deal announce-
ment date, dominates announcement returns in predicting future acquisition outcomes in all
horizons and specifications.



                                               47
   One might wonder why CAR fails to predict value creation in the context of mergers
but succeeds in other contexts. We argue that while CAR in other contexts may get the
direction of the news right, it is not clear that it can assess the likelihood and impact
of future events. It is not a surprise that positive earning surprise news are followed by
positive CAR, and that news about lawsuits result in negative CAR. However, once there is
uncertainty about future outcomes (e.g., lawsuit outcome), there is no evidence, to our best
knowledge, that the CAR truly reflects the expected impact of the news. In other words,
there is no evidence that within a population of news, e.g., lawsuits, CAR correlates with the
expected outcome: probability of success and magnitude conditional on success. Such tasks
are extremely difficult, especially for relatively rare events, like mergers, lawsuits, and new
governance policies. In fact, even in the most frequent and standardized events--earnings
announcements--investors appear to process information inefficiently. Investors understand
that beating a forecast is good news, and therefore stock prices react positively to earnings
surprises. Yet, despite thousands of earnings announcements events every quarter, investors
systematically underreact to earnings surprises (Bernard and Thomas, 1989) and do not fully
account for seasonal patterns (Hartzmark and Solomon, 2018) and accruals reversals (Sloan,
1996).
   Unlike earnings announcements, acquisitions are rare and are not tainted a priori as good
or bad news. Acquirers typically engage in arm's length transactions in which they exchange
cash (or stock) for physical and intangible assets. Therefore, a reasonable assumption would
be that acquisitions have zero NPV. Investors typically have little knowledge about the
critical factors for successful integration such as the nature of synergies, the talent of the
mid-level management team, and the compatibility of merged information systems. Hence, it
makes sense that CAR does not convey much information. In addition, in light of the research
showing inefficiencies in the reaction to earnings announcements, it may not be surprising
that characteristics have some predictive power that has gone unnoticed by investors. What
is surprising, however, is the importance that economists give to CAR.


                                              48
   Our paper makes two main contributions to the literature. First, our results indicate
that the CAR, computed at the announcement date, is not a reliable predictor of ex-post
value creation or destruction. Second, for ex-ante evaluations of deal quality, some other
forecasting variables (deal characteristics) dominate CAR. For ex-post evaluations of deal
quality, goodwill impairment and divestiture-at-a-loss are sound measures for deal failure.
   The main takeaway from our analysis is that CAR should not be trusted as a valid
forward-looking measure of the value created in mergers and potentially in other corporate
events and policies.




                                             49
References
Agrawal, Anup, Jeffrey F Jaffe, and Gershon N Mandelker, 1992, The post-merger per-
  formance of acquiring firms: A re-examination of an anomaly, Journal of Finance 47,
  1605­1621.

Andrade, Gregor, Mark Mitchell, and Erik Stafford, 2001, New evidence and perspectives
 on mergers, Journal of Economic Perspectives 15, 103­120.

Asquith, Paul, Robert F. Bruner, and David Mullins, 1983, The gains to bidding firms from
  merger, Journal of Financial Economics 11, 121­139.

Barraclough, Kathryn, David T Robinson, Tom Smith, and Robert E Whaley, 2013, Us-
  ing option prices to infer overpayments and synergies in M&A transactions, Review of
  Financial Studies 26, 695­722.

Beatty, Anne, and Joseph Weber, 2006, Accounting discretion in fair value estimates: An
  examination of SFAS 142 goodwill impairments, Journal of Accounting Research 44, 257­
  288.

Ben-David, Itzhak, Michael S Drake, and Darren T Roulstone, 2015, Acquirer valuation and
  acquisition decisions: Identifying mispricing using short interest, Journal of Financial and
  Quantitative Analysis 50, 1­32.

Bennett, Benjamin, and Robert A Dam, 2019, Merger activity, stock prices, and measuring
  gains from M&A, Working paper, Tulane University.

Bens, Daniel A, Wendy Heltzer, and Benjamin Segal, 2011, The information content of
  goodwill impairments and SFAS 142, Journal of Accounting, Auditing & Finance 26, 527­
  555.

Berger, Philip G, and Eli Ofek, 1996, Bustup takeovers of value-destroying diversified firms,
  Journal of Finance 51, 1175­1200.

Bernard, Victor L, and Jacob K Thomas, 1989, Post-earnings-announcement drift: Delayed
  price response or risk premium?, Journal of Accounting Research 27, 1­36.

Bhagat, Sanjai, Ming Dong, David Hirshleifer, and Robert Noah, 2005, Do tender offers
  create value? New methods and evidence, Journal of Financial Economics 76, 3­60.

Bhattacharya, Utpal, Hazem Daouk, Brian Jorgenson, and Carl-Heinrich Kehr, 2000, When
  an event is not an event: The curious case of an emerging market, Journal of Financial
  Economics 55, 69­101.

Bouwman, Christa HS, Kathleen Fuller, and Amrita S Nain, 2009, Market valuation and
  acquisition quality: Empirical evidence, Review of Financial Studies 22, 633­679.

Campbell, John Y, Andrew W Lo, and A Craig MacKinlay, 1997, The Econometrics of
  Financial Markets (Princeton University press).

                                             50
Chang, Tom Y, Samuel M Hartzmark, David H Solomon, and Eugene F Soltes, 2017, Being
 surprised by the unsurprising: Earnings seasonality and stock returns, Review of Financial
 Studies 30, 281­323.

Chen, Changling, Mark J Kohlbeck, and Terry Warfield, 2004, Goodwill valuation effects of
 the initial adoption of SFAS 142, Working paper, University of Wisconsin.

Chen, Xia, Jarrad Harford, and Kai Li, 2007, Monitoring: Which institutions matter?,
 Journal of Financial Economics 86, 279­305.

Cohen, Lauren, Christopher Malloy, and Quoc Nguyen, 2020, Lazy prices, Journal of Finance
  75, 1371­1415.

Daniel, Kent, Mark Grinblatt, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers, 1997, Measuring mutual
 fund performance with characteristic-based benchmarks, Journal of Finance 52, 1035­
 1058.

Dasgupta, Sudipto, Jarrad Harford, and Fangyuan Ma, 2019, EPS-sensitivity and mergers,
 Working paper, University of Washington.

Dong, Ming, David Hirshleifer, Scott Richardson, and Siew Hong Teoh, 2006, Does investor
 misvaluation drive the takeover market?, Journal of Finance 61, 725­762.

Edmans, Alex, Itay Goldstein, and Wei Jiang, 2012, The real effects of financial markets:
  The impact of prices on takeovers, Journal of Finance 67, 933­971.

Elliott, John A, and Wayne H Shaw, 1988, Write-offs as accounting procedures to manage
  perceptions, Journal of Accounting Research 26, 91­119.

Fama, Eugene F, 1976, Foundations of finance: Portfolio decisions and securities prices
  (Basic Books (AZ)).

Fama, Eugene F, and Kenneth R French, 1997, Industry costs of equity, Journal of Financial
  Economics 43, 153­193.

Fich, Eliezer M, Tu Nguyen, and Micah Officer, 2018, Large wealth creation in mergers and
  acquisitions, Financial Management 47, 953­991.

Foster, Benjamin P, Robin Fletcher, and William D Stout, 2003, Valuing intangible assets,
  CPA Journal 73, 50.

Francis, Jennifer, J Douglas Hanna, and Linda Vincent, 1996, Causes and effects of discre-
  tionary asset write-offs, Journal of Accounting Research 34, 117­134.

Fu, Fangjian, Leming Lin, and Micah S Officer, 2013, Acquisitions driven by stock overval-
  uation: Are they good deals?, Journal of Financial Economics 109, 24­39.

Gao, Ning, Ni Peng, and Norman Strong, 2017, What determines horizontal merger antitrust
 case selection?, Journal of Corporate Finance 46, 51­76.


                                            51
Gu, Feng, and Baruch Lev, 2011, Overpriced shares, ill-advised acquisitions, and goodwill
 impairment, Accounting Review 86, 1995­2022.

Guenzel, Marius, 2019, In too deep: The effect of sunk costs on corporate investment,
 Working paper, UC Berkeley.

Hartzmark, Samuel M, and David H Solomon, 2018, Recurring firm events and predictable
  returns: The within-firm time series, Annual Review of Financial Economics 10, 499­517.

Hayn, Carla, and Patricia J Hughes, 2006, Leading indicators of goodwill impairment, Jour-
  nal of Accounting, Auditing & Finance 21, 223­265.

Healy, Paul M, Krishna G Palepu, and Richard S Ruback, 1992, Does corporate performance
  improve after mergers?, Journal of Financial Economics 31, 135­175.

Henning, Steven L, Barry L Lewis, and Wayne H Shaw, 2000, Valuation of the components
  of purchased goodwill, Journal of Accounting Research 38, 375­386.

Henning, Steven L, and Toby Stock, 1997, The value-relevance of goodwill write-offs, Work-
  ing paper, Southern Methodist University.

Hietala, Pekka, Steven Kaplan, and David Robinson, 2003, What is the price of hubris?
  Using takeover battles to infer overpayments and synergies, Financial Management 32,
  5­31.

Hoberg, Gerard, and Gordon M Phillips, 2018, Product integration and merger success,
  Working paper, Tuck School of Business Working Paper.

Irani, M. Vahid, 2020, The real merger gains: Correcting for partial anticipation, Working
   paper, University of South Carolina.

Jarrell, Gregg A, James A Brickley, and Jeffry M Netter, 1988, The market for corporate
  control: The empirical evidence since 1980, Journal of Economic Perspectives 2, 49­68.

Jennings, Robert H, and Michael A Mazzeo, 1991, Stock price movements around acquisition
  announcements and management's response, Journal of Business 64, 139­163.

Jenter, Dirk, and Katharina Lewellen, 2020, Performance-induced CEO turnover, Review of
  Financial Studies forthcoming.

Johnson, L Todd, and Kimberly R Petrone, 1998, Is goodwill an asset?, Accounting Horizons
  12, 293­303.

Kaplan, Steven N, 2006, Mergers and acquisitions: A financial economics perspective, Pre-
 pared for the Antitrust Modernization Commission Economists Roundtable on Merger En-
 forcement 1­17.

Kaplan, Steven N, Mark Mitchell, and Karen Wruck, 2000, A clinical exploration of value
 creation and destruction in acquisitions, organizational design, incentives, and internal
 capital markets, in Mergers and Productivity , 179­238 (University of Chicago Press).

                                           52
Kaplan, Steven N, and Michael S Weisbach, 1992, The success of acquisitions: Evidence
 from divestitures, Journal of Finance 47, 107­138.

Kau, James B, James S Linck, and Paul H Rubin, 2008, Do managers listen to the market?,
 Journal of Corporate Finance 14, 347­362.

Kothari, Sagar P, and Jerold B Warner, 2007, Econometrics of event studies, in Handbook
 of Empirical Corporate Finance , 3­36 (Elsevier).

Lamont, Owen A, and Richard H Thaler, 2003, Can the market add and subtract? Mispricing
  in tech stock carve-outs, Journal of Political Economy 111, 227­268.

Lehn, Kenneth M, and Mengxin Zhao, 2006, CEO turnover after acquisitions: Are bad
  bidders fired?, Journal of Finance 61, 1759­1811.

Li, Kevin K, and Richard G Sloan, 2017, Has goodwill accounting gone bad?, Review of
  Accounting Studies 22, 964­1003.

Li, Xiaoyang, 2013, Productivity, restructuring, and the gains from takeovers, Journal of
  Financial Economics 109, 250­271.

Li, Zining, Pervin K Shroff, Ramgopal Venkataraman, and Ivy Xiying Zhang, 2011, Causes
  and consequences of goodwill impairment losses, Review of Accounting Studies 16, 745­
  778.

Luo, Yuanzhi, 2005, Do insiders learn from outsiders? Evidence from mergers and acquisi-
  tions, Journal of Finance 60, 1951­1982.

MacKinlay, A Craig, 1997, Event studies in economics and finance, Journal of Economic
 Literature 35, 13­39.

Malmendier, Ulrike, Enrico Moretti, and Florian S Peters, 2018, Winning by losing: Evidence
 on the long-run effects of mergers, Review of Financial Studies 31, 3212­3264.

Malmendier, Ulrike, Marcus M Opp, and Farzad Saidi, 2016, Target revaluation after failed
 takeover attempts: Cash versus stock, Journal of Financial Economics 119, 92­106.

Malmendier, Ulrike, and Geoffrey Tate, 2008, Who makes acquisitions? CEO overconfidence
 and the market's reaction, Journal of Financial Economics 89, 20­43.

Mitchell, Mark, Todd Pulvino, and Erik Stafford, 2004, Price pressure around mergers,
 Journal of Finance 59, 31­63.

Mitchell, Mark L., and Kenneth Lehn, 1990, Do bad bidders become good targets?, Journal
 of Political Economy 98, 372­398.

Mitchell, Mark L, and Erik Stafford, 2000, Managerial decisions and long-term stock price
 performance, Journal of Business 73, 287­329.



                                            53
Moeller, Sara B, Frederik P Schlingemann, and Ren´
                                                 e M Stulz, 2004, Firm size and the gains
 from acquisitions, Journal of Financial Economics 73, 201­228.

Moeller, Sara B, Frederik P Schlingemann, and Ren´e M Stulz, 2005, Wealth destruction on
 a massive scale? A study of acquiring-firm returns in the recent merger wave, Journal of
 Finance 60, 757­782.

Netter, Jeffry, Mike Stegemoller, and M Babajide Wintoki, 2011, Implications of data screens
  on merger and acquisition analysis: A large sample study of mergers and acquisitions from
  1992 to 2009, Review of Financial Studies 24, 2316­2357.

Offenberg, David, and Micah S Officer, 2012, Anticipation and returns in event studies,
 Working paper, Loyola Marymount University.

Parrino, Robert, 1997, CEO turnover and outside succession a cross-sectional analysis, Jour-
  nal of Financial Economics 46, 165­197.

Pittman, Russell W, 2007, Consumer surplus as the appropriate standard for antitrust en-
  forcement, Discussion paper, Antitrust Division, U.S. Department of Justice.

Ramanna, Karthik, and Ross L Watts, 2012, Evidence on the use of unverifiable estimates
  in required goodwill impairment, Review of Accounting Studies 17, 749­780.

Rhodes-Kropf, Matthew, David T Robinson, and Sean Viswanathan, 2005, Valuation waves
 and merger activity: The empirical evidence, Journal of Financial Economics 77, 561­603.

Rhodes-Kropf, Matthew, and Steven Viswanathan, 2004, Market valuation and merger
 waves, Journal of Finance 59, 2685­2718.

Roll, Richard, 1986, The hubris hypothesis of corporate takeovers, Journal of Business 59,
  197­216.

Rosen, Richard J, 2006, Merger momentum and investor sentiment: The stock market reac-
  tion to merger announcements, Journal of Business 79, 987­1017.

Savor, Pavel G, and Qi Lu, 2009, Do stock mergers create value for acquirers?, Journal of
  Finance 64, 1061­1097.

Schipper, Katherine, and Rex Thompson, 1983, The impact of merger-related regulations
  on the shareholders of acquiring firms, Journal of Accounting Research 21, 184­221.

Schwert, G William, 1996, Markup pricing in mergers and acquisitions, Journal of Financial
  Economics 41, 153­192.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W Vishny, 2003, Stock market driven acquisitions, Journal of
  Financial Economics 70, 295­311.

Sloan, Richard G, 1996, Do stock prices fully reflect information in accruals and cash flows
  about future earnings?, Accounting Review 71, 289­315.


                                            54
Smith, Richard L, and Joo-Hyun Kim, 1994, The combined effects of free cash flow and
  financial slack on bidder and target stock returns, Journal of Business 67, 281­310.

Stillman, Robert, 1983, Examining antitrust policy towards horizontal mergers, Journal of
  Financial Economics 11, 225­240.

Wang, Wenyu, 2018, Bid anticipation, information revelation, and merger gains, Journal of
 Financial Economics 128, 320­343.

Weisbach, Michael S, 1995, CEO turnover and the firm's investment decisions, Journal of
 Financial Economics 37, 159­188.

Wooldridge, Jeffrey M, 2007, Inverse probability weighted estimation for general missing
 data problems, Journal of Econometrics 141, 1281­1301.




                                           55
Appendix A              The Economics and Validation of the Good-

                        will Impairment Measure

   Our main measure of transaction-level deal failure is goodwill impairment. We first
explain how the accounting for goodwill and its impairment can help detect value destruction
in mergers.
   We then provide tests that validate goodwill impairment events as a signal of value
destruction. We first conduct an event study surrounding earnings announcement dates for
which goodwill impairment news is released. To further validate impairment as a robust
measure of deal failure, we conduct three additional tests that focus on ex-post firm-level
indirect symptoms of deal failure around goodwill impairments: CEO turnover, distressed
delisting, and poor stock and operating performance.


A.1     The Relation Between NPV and Goodwill Impairment

   Financial reports, guided by accounting principles, are designed to mirror the economic
activity of firms subject to some principles, e.g., conservativeness. Merger accounting, es-
pecially since the introduction of SFAS 142 as discussed below, reports declines (but not
appreciation) in the value of acquired targets below the nominal acquisition price through
goodwill impairment. To a great extent, the interpretation of goodwill impairment is similar
to that of a divestiture-at-a-loss--the value of the target is lower than what was paid. The
difference is that the valuation is made by the firm's auditors rather than by a transaction
price in an arm's length transaction.
   Figure A.1 illustrates the evolution of the acquirer's balance sheet around the transaction
and in the long run. Once the transaction is completed, the value of the acquirer's net assets
does not change: Cash (or own-issued stock) is replaced by the assets of the target.
   There is one caveat though. Often, the acquirer pays above the market value of the
identifiable assets. SFAS 142 dictates that identifiable assets (e.g., buildings, intellectual


                                             56
Figure A.1. Illustration of Acquirer's Economic and Accounting Balance Sheets

The figure presents the evolution over time of an acquirer's economic balance sheet (top three panels) and
accounting balance sheet (bottom three panels) around the acquisition.

                                         Transaction announcement                           5 years later
                            Right before transaction     Right after transaction

                             Operating   Debt             Operating        Debt       Operating      Debt
   Economic balance sheet




                             assets                       assets                      assets

                             Cash                         Target's                    Target's
                                         Equity           assets           Equity     Assets         Equity
                                                                                     Going concern
                                                         Going concern
                                                         and expected                and synergies
                                                         synergies
                                                         (captured by
                                                                                     Ex post value
                                                         target)
                                                                                     destructed
                                                                                                     Long-term
                                                                                                     negative
                                                         Market estimate   CAR                       returns
                                                         of NPV                      Ex post
                                                         (Value created)
                                                                                     overreaction
 Accounting balance sheet




                             Operating   Debt             Operating        Debt       Operating      Debt
                             assets                       assets                      assets

                             Cash                         Target's                    Target's
                                         Equity           assets           Equity     assets         Equity

                                                          Goodwill                    Goodwill

                                                                                     Impairment       Loss


property that was purchased by the target) are registered on the acquirer's balance sheet at
market value. The remaining gap in value between the acquisition price and the value of the
identifiable assets is registered as goodwill on the acquirer's balance sheet. This process is
shown in the bottom-left panels of Figure A.1.
                       Notice that the accounting balance sheet and the economic balance sheet divert once the
acquisition takes place. The financial statements always record a new acquisition as a zero-
NPV transaction, i.e., the value of the acquirer's net assets does not change. However, when

                                                                    57
the acquirer is a public firm, the market value of the equity often adjusts once an announce-
ment is made. Economists often believe that the adjustment reflects the NPV due to the
acquisition. Hence, the market value of the acquirer is believed to already incorporate the
present value of the market's expectation of the cash flows associated with the transaction.
       In the years following the transaction, the value of the assets registered on the financial
statements may change in various ways. In particular, SFAS 142 requires the firm to conduct
periodic reviews of the value of the goodwill and adjust it downward (called impairment),
if needed. Except perhaps for extreme cases, the impairment of the goodwill means that
the value of the acquired assets is lower than the nominal proceeds originally paid for the
acquisition, implying that the ex-post NPV of the transaction is negative.
       For example, consider a transaction which was impaired in year 3. Let the value of the
target in year 3 be expressed as a fraction of what was paid for in year 0, P V3 = C0 . Hence,
the NPV of this transaction, would be

                                    C1        C2          C3        P V3
                   NPV = -C0 +           +        2
                                                    +         3
                                                                +                                         (4)
                                   1 + r (1 + r)       (1 + r)    (1 + r)3
                              C1       C2         C3                
                           =      +        2
                                             +        3
                                                        - 1-               C0 .
                             1 + r (1 + r)     (1 + r)           (1 + r)3

       If 50% of the purchase price were recorded as goodwill (similar to the average transaction
in our sample; see Table 1) and half of this goodwill were impaired in year 3, then  = 0.75.
Let us further assume that the discount rate r is 10%. With the reasonable assumption that
the intermediate cash flows were not unusually large, this transaction has a negative NPV.27
       Divesting a subsidiary at a loss works in a similar manner. Selling at a loss means that
the proceeds from the sale are lower than what was paid, implying that the transaction was
a negative NPV transaction. This was the motivation in Kaplan and Weisbach (1992), who
  27
     In this case, in order for the transaction to have a positive NPV, the present value of the cash flows in
                                                 0.75
the first three years should be at least 1 - (1+   r )3 C0 = 0.44C0 . In other words, the present value of the
cash flows in the first three years should be greater than 44% of the amount that was originally paid. This
is highly unlikely.




                                                     58
classify unsuccessful acquisitions primarily as divestitures-at-a-loss.
    The right panels of Figure A.1 presents the hypothetical economic value decline and the
impairment of goodwill. The firm is required by SFAS 142 to conduct annual reviews of
the value of the goodwill. The firm's auditors may realize sometime in the future that the
value ascribed to the transaction in the past can no longer be justified, and therefore, the
goodwill will be impaired. Hence, the accounting system mirrors value declines through the
impairment of goodwill.


A.2       Validating Goodwill Impairment as a Measure of Value De-

          struction

    In this section, we provide evidence that the impairment of goodwill is indeed likely to
reflect an unsuccessful transaction. To do so, we examine (a) the market's reaction to the
news that goodwill of a past transaction has been impaired, (b) management turnover around
the announcement about the impairment, (c) distressed delistings following the impairment
announcement, and (d) the operating and financial performance of the acquirer after the
deal announcement.


A.2.1      Market Response to Impairment News

    We test whether goodwill impairment is perceived by investors as conveying negative
news, i.e., a recognition that value has been lost. Our test replicates prior research in
the accounting literature that has documented that goodwill impairment events are value
relevant.28
    We use Compustat quarterly data to identify the first quarter in which each transac-
tion in our impairment sample experienced a goodwill write-down as well as the earnings
announcement date for that quarter. Unique earnings announcement dates for an acquirer
  28
     In tune with this literature, we interpret this result as a response to a revelation of past value destruction.
See, e.g., Henning and Stock (1997), Chen, Kohlbeck, and Warfield (2004), Bens, Heltzer, and Segal (2011),
Gu and Lev (2011), and Li, Shroff, Venkataraman, and Zhang (2011).


                                                        59
are included in the sample only once if multiple transactions experience a goodwill impair-
ment announcement for a particular acquirer on the same earnings announcement date. We
create three control samples. First, for the nonimpairment sample, we generate pseudo im-
pairment dates on earnings announcements three years following the deal effective date (the
mean time to impairment is 2.8 years from Table 1). Our second control sample, "Matched
Control Sample 1" includes firms that announce earnings in the same quarter and have the
same fiscal year-end and two-digit SIC code as the impaired firm. Our third control sample,
"Matched Control Sample 2" includes firms that announce earnings in the same quarter and
have the same fiscal year-end and two-digit SIC code as the impaired firm, and are in the
same market capitalization tercile as the impaired firm. To avoid the estimation of market
model parameters in both the pre- and post-acquisition periods, we compute market-adjusted
returns using the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) value-weighted index.
   Table A.1 shows the results over four event windows. For the impairment sample, cumu-
lative abnormal returns are negative and statistically different from zero for all four event
windows (mean CARs range from -2.3% to -3.0%). For the three control samples, the
market response to earnings announcements is not statistically different from zero for most
event windows and is significantly positive in some windows. Importantly, the market re-
sponse to earnings announcements containing goodwill impairment is statistically lower than
the three control samples for all event windows. Although earnings announcements contain
other information in addition to goodwill impairment news, the results are suggestive that
the market considers goodwill impairment events to be bad news.


A.2.2   CEO Turnover Around Goodwill Impairment

   We consider both the likelihood of CEO turnover following the deal and the timing of
turnover for the impairment sample. We track turnover events between deal announcement
and four years subsequent to the first impairment event. This analysis is conducted at the
CEO-impairment level. If a CEO is associated with multiple impairment events, we retain


                                             60
Table A.1. Market Reaction to Goodwill Impairment News
This table reports the mean cumulatative abnormal returns (CAR) surrounding quarterly earnings announce-
ment dates. For the Impairment sample, we focus on the first earnings announcement for which a goodwill
impairment is announced for a particular transaction. Unique earnings announcement dates for an acquirer
are included in the sample only once if multiple transactions experience a goodwill impairment announce-
ment for a specific acquirer on the same earnings announcement date. For the Nonimpairment sample, we
generate "pseudo" impairment dates three years (the mean time to impair) following the deal close date.
We also create two matched samples of control firms that did not announce impairment news. "Control1"
is a matched sample that includes firms that announce earnings in the same quarter and have the same
fiscal year-end and two-digit SIC code as the impaired firm. "Control2" is a matched sample that includes
firms that announce earnings in the same quarter and have the same fiscal year-end and two-digit SIC code
and are in the same market capitalization tercile as the impaired firm. CARs are based on market-adjusted
returns using the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) value-weighted index. The event period is
listed in brackets. Difference refers to the differences between the Impairment and Control samples. Tests
for differences are based on the t -test. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% level, respectively. "ns" denotes mean CARs or differences that are not statistically different from zero.

 Sample:           Impairment Nonimpair       Control1        Control2              Difference (t -test)
 Window               (1)            (2)        (3)             (4)       (1)-(2)        (1)-(3)           (1)-(4)
 CAR   [-1, 1]     -2.6%    ***   0.3%   ns   0.3%   ns  0.0% ns         -2.9%   ***   -2.9%    ***   -2.6%     ***
 CAR   [0, 1]      -2.7%    ***   0.2%   ns   0.1%   ns -0.3% ns         -2.9%   ***   -2.8%    ***   -2.4%     ***
 CAR   [-5, 5]     -2.3%    *     0.3%   ns   0.5%   **  0.7% **         -2.6%   **    -2.9%    ***   -3.0%     **
 CAR   [-10, 10]   -3.0%    **    0.5%   ns   1.2%   *** 1.8% ***        -3.5%   **    -4.1%    ***   -4.7%     ***


only the transaction with the largest impairment amount. We identify three types of forced
CEO turnover: (1) internal turnover (fired by the board), (2) takeover turnover, and (3)
bankruptcy turnover. Turnover events are identified using proxy statements, press releases,
and news articles in Factiva. We follow Weisbach (1995), Parrino (1997), and Lehn and
Zhao (2006) in identifying turnover events. If the CEO is reported as fired, forced from his
or her position, or departed due to unspecified policy differences, then the CEO is classified
as experiencing an internal turnover event. If the CEO is under the age of 65 and the reason
for departure is unrelated to death, poor health, or the acceptance of another position, or if
it is announced that the CEO is retiring and yet the announcement is not at least six months
before succession, then the CEO is classified as experiencing an internal turnover event. For
firms that are acquired, if we are unable to find evidence that the CEO retained a role in
the acquiring entity, then the CEO is classified as experiencing a takeover turnover event.
For firms that enter bankruptcy, if we are unable to find evidence that the CEO retained
his or her job during the bankruptcy process, then the CEO is classified as experiencing a

                                                         61
bankruptcy turnover event.
   Table A.2, Panel A, presents results for the full sample of transactions in the impairment
sample. We find that 45% of CEOs experience a turnover event between deal announcement
and four years following the impairment, indicating that close to half of the impairment sam-
ple CEOs are disciplined by the labor market. To provide a relative comparison, Jenter and
Lewellen (2020) show that, unconditional on acquisition activity, on average, 12% of CEOs
experience turnover in a given year. For acquiring firms (that may or may not experience
impairment), Lehn and Zhao (2006) find a 47% CEO turnover propensity within five years
of the deal announcement date.
   However, our main interest is the timing of the turnover, to assess whether the CEO
departure results from the market's assessment of value destruction at deal announcement
or results from the subsequent impairment event itself. If value destruction is anticipated,
CEOs should be more likely to be fired immediately following the acquisition announcement
rather than the impairment. We find that 13% of impaired firm CEOs are terminated in the
year of or year following the deal effective year, whereas 41% are fired in the year of or year
following the impairment year.
   To summarize, the results in Table A.2, Panel A, indicate that the majority of turnover
events in the impairment sample do not result from anticipated value destruction at the deal
announcement, but rather because of deal failure as intimated by goodwill impairment. To
be specific, CEO turnover events are three times more likely to occur immediately following
the impairment as opposed to the deal announcement. This implies that the labor market
considers impairment to be a proxy for deal failure.


A.2.3    Acquirers Distressed Delisting

   Table A.2, Panel B shows univariate statistics on the number of acquirer firms that
exit the public markets within 10 years of the deal effective date. Public market exit data
are obtained using the CRSP delisting code. Acquirers are categorized as "Merged/Went


                                              62
Table A.2. Post-Deal Performance for Firms with Goodwill Impairment
Panel A reports univariate statistics for CEO turnover for the sample of firms experiencing a goodwill
impairment. We track CEO turnover events between deal announcement and four years subsequent to
the first impairment event. Panel B shows univariate statistics on the number of acquirer firms that exit
the public markets within 10 years of the deal effective date. Panel C reports median industry-adjusted
accounting performance in the third year subsequent to deal announcement. Tests for differences between
samples are based on the t -test. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively.
        Panel A: Post-Deal CEO Turnover for the Goodwill Impairment Sample
           Impairment sample                                                                  #    %
        % Turnover between deal announcement year and impairment year + 4                   142    45%
         Firms subject to internal turnover                                                 118    38%
         Firms subject to takeovers                                                          19    6%
         Firms subject to bankruptcy                                                          5    2%

        % Turnover year of or year after deal effective year (% of total sample)             19    13%
        % Turnover year of or year after impairment year (% of total sample)                 58    41%

        Panel B: Post-Deal Public Market Exits
        Sample:                      Impairment                  Nonimpairment
                                #           %              #                     %         Difference
        Merged/went private     95        29%              533                37%        -8.6%     ***
        Delisted                31         9%               42                 3%         6.5%     ***
        Bankrupt/liquidated     10        3%                5                  0%         2.7%     ***

        Panel C: Industry-Adjusted Accounting Performance During 3 Years After Deal
                                Impairment sample          Nonimpairment sample            Difference
        Sales growth                         -4.4%                          1.0%         -5.4%     ***
        COGS/Sales                            1.8%                         -2.1%          3.9%     ***
        SGA/Assets                            0.0%                         -2.9%          2.9%     ***
        PPE Growth                           -4.5%                          0.9%         -5.4%     ***
        FCF/Assets                           -2.1%                          1.4%         -3.6%     ***
        ROA                                  -0.9%                          1.8%         -2.7%     ***
        ROE                                  -6.3%                          1.9%         -8.1%     ***
        Tobin's Q                           -22.0%                          1.0%        -23.0%     ***
        Earnings/Price                       -2.6%                          0.6%         -3.2%     ***


Private" for delisting codes 200­390 and code 573. Acquirers are classified as "Delisted" for
delisting codes between 500 and 600 (excluding 573 and 574) and as "Bankrupt/Liquidated"
for delisting codes 400­490 and code 574. We retain only one observation when an acquirer
in the impairment or nonimpairment sample announces multiple transactions in the same
year.



                                                      63
   We notice from Table A.2, Panel B, that firms in the impairment sample are significantly
more likely to be delisted and to go through a bankruptcy or liquidation process than firms in
the nonimpairment sample. In contrast, firms in the nonimpairment sample are substantially
more likely to merge or go private. These findings imply that impairment is a good proxy
for deal failure.


A.2.4    Acquirers' Long-Term Performance

   We examine industry-adjusted accounting and stock performance for the three years
after the deal announcement. We retain only one observation when an acquirer in the
impairment or nonimpairment sample announces multiple transactions in the same year. We
report the following median performance measures, adjusted by the median Fama-French 48
industry value: sales growth; cost of goods sold (COGS) scaled by sales; selling, general,
and administrative expenses (SG&A) scaled by sales; property, plant, and equipment (PPE)
growth; free cash flow (FCF) scaled by assets; return on assets (ROA); return on equity
(ROE); Tobin's Q, and the earnings-to-price ratio.
   Table A.2, Panel C, reports median industry-adjusted statistics and tests of statistical
differences between the nonimpairment and impairment samples. We observe statistically
superior performance for the nonimpairment sample relative to the impairment sample for
the three years following the acquisition announcement for all nine performance measures.
   Figure A.2, Panels (a)­(f), show the operating performance from one year before to three
years following the acquisition. Across panels, we generally observe that industry-adjusted
performance measures begin to materially diverge in the years following the deal announce-
ment for the impairment sample (shown in red line) and the nonimpairment sample (shown in
blue lines), indicating that impairment firms encounter significant firm-level adverse shocks
in the years following the acquisition. For many of the measures, the divergence begins in
the year following the acquisition but widens further two years following the acquisition.
   Figure A.3, Panels (a)­(d), show the financial performance from two years before to three


                                             64
Figure A.2. Operating Performance and Goodwill Impairment
The figure shows the industry-adjusted operating performance of acquirers that impaired goodwill relative to
acquirers that did not impair goodwill. The period begins two years before the merger and ends three years
after the merger. Panel (a) shows sales growth. Panel (b) shows the cost of goods sold /sales. Panel (c) shows
sales, general, & administrative expenses /assets. Panel (d) shows plant, property, & equipment growth.
Panel (e) shows free cash flow/assets. Panel (f) shows the return of assets.

                          (a) Sales growth                                (b) Cost of goods sold/Sales

                                                            0.02

      0.05
                                                               0

        0
                                                           -0.02
                  Non-Impairment
    -0.05         Impairment
             -2      -1       0     1        2   3                   -2      -1       0     1        2   3

        (c) Sales, general, & admin expenses/Assets                (d) Plant, property, & equipment growth

        0
                                                             0.1

    -0.01
                                                            0.05
    -0.02
                                                               0
    -0.03
                                                           -0.05
             -2      -1       0     1        2   3                   -2      -1       0     1        2   3

                   (e) Free cash flow/Assets                                  (f) Return on assets

      0.02
                                                            0.02

        0

                                                               0
    -0.02

             -2      -1       0     1        2   3                   -2      -1       0     1        2   3
                          Transaction year                                        Transaction year


years subsequent to the acquisition. Note here that the gap between the blue and red lines
increases not so much at but after the deal announcement. Figure A.3, Panel (d), shows that
the returns to the realized impairment sample remain relatively flat at the announcement
but begin to decline dramatically thereafter. Returns to the realized nonimpairment sample
continue their steady growth, and so the gap between the two subsamples widens.

                                                      65
Figure A.3. Financial Performance and Goodwill Impairment
The figure shows the industry-adjusted financial performance of acquirers that impaired goodwill relative to
acquirers that did not impair goodwill. The period begins two years before the merger and ends three years
after the merger. Panel (a) shows the return on equity. Panel (b) shows Tobin's Q. Panel (c) shows the
earnings-to-price ratio. Panel (d) shows industry-adjusted buy-and-hold cumulative returns.

                      (a) Return on equity                                    (b) Tobin's Q



         0                                                    0



     -0.05        Non-Impairment                          -0.2
                  Impairment
             -2      -1       0     1        2   3                -2    -1       0     1        2   3

                   (c) Earnings-to-price ratio                    (d) Industry-adj cumulative returns
                                                            0.4


         0                                                  0.2


     -0.02                                                    0


     -0.04                                                -0.2
             -2      -1       0     1        2   3                -2    -1       0     1        2   3
                          Transaction year                                   Transaction year


    To conclude, all three panels of Table A.2, as well as Figures A.2 and A.3, provide strong
evidence that firms in the impairment sample experience all symptoms of deal failure--
forced CEO turnover, delistings, bankruptcies, poor accounting, and stock performances--
supporting our conclusion that goodwill impairment is a good proxy for deal failure.




                                                     66
Appendix B              Sample Construction and Key Variables

B.1     Goodwill Impairments

   We start with 2,981 deals. Appendix Table B.1, Panel A, describes the next set of screens.
We exclude 258 transactions associated with acquirers that do not report target-level good-
will in Compustat for the full period between the year prior to and 10 years subsequent to the
transaction. This requirement reduces the sample to 2,723. The Compustat goodwill and
impairment data are based on aggregate firm-level data, and so it is not directly possible to
identify transaction-specific measures. To identify the amount of goodwill recorded for each
transaction in our sample, we read through the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
in the first 10-K filing following the deal effective date. Following an acquisition, the notes
include an "Acquisitions" section, which presents the preliminary allocations of the aggre-
gate purchase price based on the assets and liabilities estimated at fair values to line items
such as net tangible assets, identifiable intangible assets, and goodwill. We eliminate 646
transactions that are not structured using purchase accounting and transactions for which
we are unable to identify the deal-level goodwill allocation amount, resulting in a sample of
2,077 transactions with initial goodwill data. Of these, 110 lack the CRSP or Compustat
data required to compute key variables. That brings the sample size down to 1,967.
   To identify goodwill impairments in the data, we follow Bens et al. (2011). We initially
screen for potential goodwill impairments by flagging instances in which the Compustat
variable "Impairments of Goodwill Pretax" (item 368) is at least 5% of previous-year total
acquirer assets in any year between the year of the acquisition and 10 years following the
acquisition. This requirement ensures that the impairment event has detectable valuation
effects. Of the 1,967 transactions in the sample, 600 deals are associated with a firm-level
impairment within 10 years of the deal effective date. Because Compustat item 368 is
aggregate firm-level impairment, we use the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in
the impairment year to determine whether and how much of the impairment is due to the


                                              67
Table B.1. Sample Construction for Goodwill Impairments
The table shows the sample construction. Panel A includes transactions from SDC that were announced from
January 2003 and completed by December 2013. Sample screens are described in the main text. Panel B
describes the classification of the "potentially impaired" transactions. For this sample, we read through the
10-K Notes and Factiva to identify the target(s) that triggered the impairment. * indicates that the exact
impairment amount is unknown; the total amount allocated to the deal is based on target goodwill relative
to total segment goodwill. ** indicates that the exact impairment amount is unknown; the total amount
allocated to the deal is based on target goodwill relative to total firm goodwill. Panel C shows the final
sample composition.
 Panel A: Sample Construction
 # Deals                                                                                              2,981
 Less: Transactions without firm-level goodwill in Compustat                                            258
 Less: Transactions by firms that do not report deal-level goodwill data in the 10-K
  or not structured under Purchase Accounting                                                           646
 Less: Transactions lacking CRSP and Compustat data to compute key variables                            110
 Total                                                                                                1,967

 # Transactions without acquiring firm-level impairment within 5 years of deal effective date         1,367
 # Transactions "potentially impaired" with acquiring firm-level impairment within 5 years              600

 Panel B: Classification of "Potentially Impaired" Transactions
 Deals classified in goodwill impairment sample
  Impairment linked directly to target and exact impairment amount can be identified                    297
  Impairment linked directly to target, other targets in segment also linked*                            11
  Impairment linked directly to target, other targets in firm also linked**                              34
  Target is in impaired segment, target goodwill < 20% of segment goodwill*                              13
   Total (% of deals potentially impaired)                                                       355 (59%)

 Deals classified in no goodwill impairment sample
  Impairment is not in target's segment or 10-K specifies other target as source of impairment          131
   Total (% of deals potentially impaired)                                                       131 (22%)

 Deals excluded from sample: cannot classify as impaired or not impaired
  Target is in impaired segment, but target goodwill is < 20% of segment goodwill                        39
  Impairment cannot be directly linked to a target(s) or segment                                         57
   Total (% of deals potentially impaired)                                                        96 (16%)

 Deals excluded from sample: immaterial impairments
  Impairment linked to target, but impairment < 25% of original goodwill                                 18
   Total (% of deals potentially impaired)                                                         18 (3%)

 Panel C: Final Goodwill Impairment Sample Summary
  Impairment sample                                                                                     355
  Nonimpairment sample                                                                                1,498




                                                     68
specific transaction in our sample. We also read through news articles and press releases in
Factiva if more information is required.
   In many instances, the source and the amount of the impairment assigned to each target is
straightforward. In the most uncomplicated scenarios, the targets with goodwill impairment
and the amount of target-level impairment are directly listed in the Notes section of the
10-K, or the firm writes off the entirety of its goodwill balance. In other scenarios, the Notes
lists the reporting unit(s) that suffered the loss. We search the 10-K, the Notes, and Factiva
in the year of the goodwill allocation to determine the reporting unit(s) to which the target's
goodwill is allocated. If target goodwill is 100% of the impaired reporting unit goodwill, the
amount of impairment attributable to the target is straightforward. For 297 transactions in
the potentially impaired sample of 600, we are able to link the impairment directly to the
target and can determine the exact impairment amount.
   In 45 other instances, the target is listed as impaired in the Notes, but the impairment
amount is unknown due to other targets also triggering the impairment. If the impairment
is at the reporting-unit level, we set target impairment equal to unit impairment × (target
goodwill / unit goodwill). If the impairment is reported at the consolidated firm level, we set
target impairment equal to total impairment × (target goodwill / total goodwill). Note that
we are interested in not only the magnitude but also the probability of impairment events,
and the latter will be unaffected by errors in the estimated size of the impairment.
   For some transactions, we are uncertain as to the source and amount of the impairment. If
the target is in the impaired segment and target goodwill is at least 20% of segment goodwill,
we conclude that it is reasonably likely that the target has been impaired and include these
13 transactions in the impairment sample. We estimate the size of the impairment using
the relative size of target goodwill as described above. Therefore, of the 600 "potentially
impaired" deals, we can classify 297 + 45 + 13 = 355 as "impaired deals."
   For 131 transactions flagged as potentially impaired, we determine that the impairment
is not in the target's segment or that other targets have been listed as the source of the


                                              69
impairment. These transactions are included in the nonimpairment sample. For 96 transac-
tions, we cannot link the impairment to a specific reporting unit or target goodwill is less
than 20% of segment goodwill, and as such, we cannot reasonably classify the transactions as
impaired or not impaired. We exclude these transactions from the sample. Finally, because
we are interested in extreme value destruction, we focus only on material goodwill impair-
ment events and exclude 18 transactions with identified goodwill impairments that are less
than 25% of the original goodwill.
   Appendix Table B.1, Panel B, shows that we have were able to successfully link impair-
ment events to specific transactions: Of 600 transactions flagged as potentially impaired, we
can credibly classify 59% as large-impaired, 22% as not impaired, and 3% as small-impaired
(and so are excluded), and we are unable to classify only 16% of transactions. Moreover, for
84% (297/355) transactions classified as impaired, we know unambiguously the source and
the amount of the impairment. To our knowledge, we are the first to construct a compre-
hensive data set that includes transaction-specific goodwill balances and transaction-specific
impairment outcomes in the post-SFAS 142 period. Hayn and Hughes (2006) also trace
initial goodwill balances and subsequent impairments at the transaction level, but they ex-
clude 55% of transactions due to insufficient information. Overall, they focus largely on the
pre-SFAS 142 period, a time when the disclosure of initial goodwill and the source of the
impairment were generally less comprehensive. Appendix Table B.1, Panel C, summarizes
the final sample of 355 transactions in the impairment sample and 1,498 transactions in the
nonimpairment sample.


B.2     Divestitures

   To construct the divestiture sample, we begin by pulling all transactions in SDC between
January 2003 and August 2019 that were completed and were classified as divestitures,
equity carve-outs, one- or two-step spinoffs. We then match our sample of 1,870 completed
transactions (described in Table 1) to the divestiture sample if (1) the SDC target name


                                             70
of the divested firm matches the SDC target name of the firm in the original sample, or
(2) the target state and target SIC code (as identied by SDC) are the same for both the
divested firm and the firm in the original sample. These two matching requirements yield 305
"potential" matches. We then manually check each transaction to ensure that the divestiture
is related to the original transaction and manually collect the divestiture amount if it is not
reported in SDC. This step yields 116 verified matches. Of the 116 verified matches, we
then retain transactions that were divested within five years of the deal effective date (58)
and that are not already flagged with goodwill impairment (43). Finally, we require that
the divestiture transaction value be reported and that the divestiture price be less than the
original transaction price (implying that the target was divested at a loss). This yields 17
divested transactions. Appendix Table B.2 shows the details.

Table B.2. Sample Construction for Divestitures-at-a-Loss
To construct the divestiture sample, we begin by pulling all transactions in SDC between 2003 and August
2019 that were completed and had acquisition techniques of divestiture, equity carve-out, spinoff, or two-step
spinoff. We then match our sample of 1,870 completed transactions (described in Table 1) to the divestiture
sample if (a) the SDC target name of the divested firm matches the SDC target name of the firm in the
original sample, or (b) the target state and target SIC code (as identified by SDC) are the same for both the
divested firm and the firm in the original sample. These two matching requirements yield 305 "potential"
matches. We then manually check each transaction to ensure that the divestiture is related to the original
transaction and manually collect the divestiture amount if it is not reported in SDC. This step yields 116
verified matches. Of these matches, we then retain transactions that were divested within five years of the
deal effective date (58) and that are not already flagged with goodwill impairment (43). Finally, we require
that the divestiture transaction value be reported and that the divestiture price be less than the original
transaction price (implying that the target was divested at a loss). This yields 17 divested transactions that
occurred at a loss.
All deals in SDC between 2003 and August 2019 that were completed and had acquisition techniques 43,355
of "divestiture, equity carve-out, spinoff, two-step spinoff"
Match 1: Retain if SDC target name in original sample matches SDC target name in divestiture        305
sample
Match 2: Retain if target state and target primary SIC code in original sample matches SDC target   381
state and target primary SIC code in divestiture sample
  Total "potential" matches                                                                              686
Verified matches after manual data check                                                                 116
Retain if divestiture occurred within 5 years of deal effective date                                      58
Retain if transaction was not already impaired                                                            43
Retain if divestiture price is reported                                                                   17
Retain if divestiture price is less than the original transaction price (i.e., a loss)                    17




                                                       71
B.3      Time Trend of Acquisition Failures

    Appendix Table B.3 shows the frequency of goodwill impairments and divestitures-at-a-
loss by deal effective year cohort. The sample is based on goodwill impairment or divestiture
between the deal effective year and five years subsequent to the deal effective year. The
sample includes 372 unique acquisitions that experience impairment or divestiture events
and 1,498 acquisitions that do not experience a goodwill impairment or divestiture event.
Deal failures are more common for deals completed in the early sample period, between
2003 and 2008. Looking at the frequency of deal failures by announcement year (columns),
not surprisingly, these events cluster in the financial crisis period, with the most occurring
in 2008. We see a weak upward trend in the number of deal failures through time, with
an average of 16 each year between 2003 and 2007 and 27 each year between 2009 and
2017. Transactions may have multiple goodwill write-downs. There are 456 impairments
or divestitures associated with the 372 unique transactions with goodwill write-downs or
divestiture loss.

Table B.3.        Goodwill Impairment/divestiture-at-a-loss, By Year
This table shows the number of goodwill impairments and divestitures-at-a-loss by year for each deal effective
year cohort. This table includes only completed transactions. The sample is based on goodwill impairment
or divestiture between the deal effective year and five years subsequent to the deal effective year. The sample
includes 372 unique acquisitions that experience impairment or divestiture-at-a-loss events. There are 1,498
acquisitions that are completed that do not experience a goodwill impairment or divestiture event.

                  # of Goodwill Impairments/Divestitures                  Impair/Divest       Unique deals
Year `03 `04 `05 `06 `07 `08 `09 `10 `11 `12 `13 `14 `15 `16 `17           #       %        # %Year's deals
2003    1   3    5   7    3   14    0 0    0   0    0    0   0   0   0     33     7%        31       22%
2004    0   4   10   9   10   30   11 0    0   0    0    0   0   0   0     74    16%        57       30%
2005    0   0    2   6    9   28   10 3    0   0    0    0   0   0   0     58    13%        50       29%
2006    0   0    0   1    8   37   16 4    7   0    0    0   0   0   0     73    16%        60       26%
2007    0   0    0   0    3   34   24 10   5   5    0    0   0   0   0     81    18%        63       28%
2008    0   0    0   0    0   14    6 3    4   6    3    0   0   0   0     36     8%        31       22%
2009    0   0    0   0    0    0   2 3     5   2    1    0   0   0   0     13     3%        9        10%
2010    0   0    0   0    0    0   0 1     4   4    3    2   4   0   0     18     4%        16       10%
2011    0   0    0   0    0    0   0 0     1   8    8    6   5   4   0     32     6%        24       16%
2012    0   0    0   0    0    0   0 0     0   0    2    2   8   2   3     17     3%        13        7%
2013    0   0    0   0    0    0   0 0     0   0    1    7   7   3   3     21     3%        18       10%
Total 1     7   17 23 33 157 69 24 26 25 18 17 24                9   6    456              372




                                                        72
Appendix C                 Additional Summary Statistics

   Appendix C provides additional summary statistics. Appendix Table C.1 reports deal and
acquiring firm characteristics for firms with and without transaction-level failure (Panel A),
for firms in various quantiles of abnormal ROA (Panel B) and DGTW-adjusted BHAR
(Panel C). Appendix Table C.2 reports correlations between our key measures of ex-ante
performance (CAR) and realized ex-post performance (failure, abnormal ROA, and BHAR).

Table C.1. Summary Statistics by Sample Splits
   Panel A: Transaction-Level Failure Statistics
                                           Full sample   Failure   No failure   p -value (Fail vs no fail)
   $ Goodwill ($m)                           336.5       315.4      341.7                0.722
   Goodwill/net purchase price               51.3%       53.0%      50.9%                0.131
   Goodwill/total assets                     10.4%       13.7%       9.6%               < 0.001
   Acquirer market cap ($m)                  3,187       1,457      3,617               < 0.001
   Debt/Assets (y - 1)                       18.9%       16.1%      19.6%                0.000
   Free cash flow/Assets (y - 1)              5.0%        2.7%       5.6%                0.010
   Tobin's Q (y - 1)                          1.88        1.89       1.88                0.936
   Past return (mkt-adj; q - 1)               3.5%        5.4%       3.0%                0.063
   Short interest (mean-adj; m - 1)           1.2%        1.4%       1.1%                0.385
   Deal value ($m)                             710         645        726                0.629
   Relative size (deal value/market cap)     32.2%       43.6%      29.4%               < 0.001
   Stock-only dummy                           4.1%        6.5%       3.5%                0.033
   Mixed-payment dummy                       44.4%       52.4%      42.5%                0.001
   Diversifying dummy                        36.7%       40.1%      35.9%                0.144
   Competed dummy                             0.7%        0.8%       0.7%                0.889
   Hostile dummy                              1.0%        1.9%       0.8%                0.146
   Public target dummy                       19.2%       18.8%      19.3%                0.834

   Panel B: Firm-Level Outcome ROA Statistics
                                            Q1 (low)     Q2­Q4     Q5 (high)      p -value (Q1 vs Q5)
   Acquirer market cap ($m)                  1,777       3,359      4,550                 0.003
   Debt/Assets (y - 1)                       14.8%       20.1%      18.6%                 0.007
   Free cash flow/Assets (y - 1)              0.7%        6.9%       3.7%                 0.059
   Tobin's Q (y - 1)                          1.86        1.78       2.22                 0.000
   Past return (mkt-adj; q - 1)               1.8%        3.2%       6.7%                 0.005
   Short interest (mean-adj; m - 1)           1.2%        0.9%       1.6%                 0.310
   Deal value ($m)                             499         752        808                 0.209
   Relative size (deal value/market cap)     33.8%       33.1%      26.1%                 0.007
   Stock-only dummy                           6.5%        2.8%       5.6%                 0.638
   Mixed-payment dummy                       48.6%       44.0%      41.5%                 0.059
   Diversifying dummy                        39.8%       37.7%      33.6%                 0.087
   Competed dummy                             0.8%        0.5%       1.4%                 0.478
   Hostile dummy                              0.8%        0.8%       1.7%                 0.315
   Public target dummy                       18.4%       20.2%      18.1%                 0.923


                                                   73
Table C.1. Summary Statistics by Sample Splits (Cont.)
      Panel C: Firm-Level Outcome BHAR Statistics
                                              Q1 (low)     Q2­Q4     Q5 (high)   p -value (Q1 vs Q5)
      Acquirer market cap ($m)                  1,629      3,651        3,353            0.013
      Debt/Assets (y - 1)                       18.6%      18.9%        19.3%            0.605
      Free cash flow/Assets (y - 1)              1.3%       6.0%         5.9%            0.001
      Tobin's Q (y - 1)                          1.85       1.87         1.96            0.230
      Past return (mkt-adj; q - 1)              2.7%        3.8%         3.1%            0.792
      Short interest (mean-adj; m - 1)          1.3%       1.1%          1.3%            0.980
      Deal value ($m)                             407        849          597            0.189
      Relative size (deal value/market cap)     43.5%      29.4%        29.4%            0.000
      Stock-only dummy                           6.7%       3.2%         4.3%            0.149
      Mixed-payment dummy                       50.3%      43.9%        40.4%            0.007
      Diversifying dummy                        44.4%      36.5%        29.9%          < 0.001
      Competed dummy                             1.1%       0.8%         0.3%            0.179
      Hostile dummy                              1.1%       0.8%         1.6%            0.525
      Public target dummy                       15.8%      20.0%        20.3%            0.106




Table C.2. Correlation Table
This table reports the correlation of CAR, measured across three windows around the transaction announce-
ment date, and the three performance measures: a transaction failure dummy, abnormal ROA, and 3-year
DGTW-adjusted BHAR. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, re-
spectively.

                                                CAR
                              [-1, 1]         [-5, 5]     [Ann - 2, Cls + 2]     Failure     ROA     BHAR
CAR [-1, 1]                    1.000
CAR [-5, 5]                    0.735***        1.000
CAR [Ann - 2, Cls + 2]         0.490***        0.539***         1.000
Failure dummy                 -0.035          -0.002           -0.033             1.000
Abnormal ROA                   0.051**         0.011            0.030            -0.216***   1.000
3-year DGTW-adj BHAR          -0.031          -0.041*           0.002            -0.309***   0.310     1.000




                                                    74
Appendix D              Characteristics-Based Model

   Appendix Table D.1 presents a characteristics-based model for predicting transaction-
level failure, measured by whether the acquisition's goodwill was impaired within five years
of the transaction or whether the target was sold at a loss within that time frame. This table
reports OLS regressions with goodwill impairment or divestiture outcomes as the dependent
variable and deal and acquirer characteristics as the key independent variables of interest.
In Columns (1)­(4), the dependent variable is a dummy for impairment or divestiture. In
Columns (5) and (6), the dependent variable is scaled-dollar impairment/divestiture loss.
This variable is scaled by initial goodwill. In Column (4), we include CAR, and in Column (8)
we include scaled acquirer dollar loss imputed from CAR. Appendix Table D.2 is similar
except the dependent variables are abnormal ROA (Columns (1)­(4)) and DGTW-adjusted
BHAR (Columns (5)­(8)).




                                             75
Table D.1. Characteristics-Based Model: Transaction Failure
This table reports OLS regressions with goodwill impairment or divestiture outcomes as the dependent vari-
able and deal and acquirer characteristics as the key independent variables of interest. In Columns (1)­(4),
the dependent variable is a dummy for impairment or divestiture. In Columns (5) and (6), the dependent
variable is scaled-dollar impairment/divestiture loss. This variable is scaled by initial goodwill. In Col-
umn (4), we include CAR, and in Column (8) we include scaled acquirer dollar loss imputed from CAR.
Standard errors are reported in parentheses under coefficients. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance
at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. All regressions include constants, the coefficients of which are
not reported.

 Dependent variable:                                     Failure                          Scaled $ Failure
                                     (1)          (2)               (3)     (4)           (5)          (6)
 Log acquirer market cap ($b) -0.034*** -0.027*** -0.030*** -0.031*** -0.029*** -0.029***
                                (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.006)   (0.006)
 Debt/Assets (y - 1)          -16.070*** -17.916*** -21.271*** -20.862*** -17.671*** -17.673***
                                (4.705)    (4.654)    (4.771)    (4.781)    (4.300)   (4.298)
 FCF/Assets (y - 1)             -0.112    -0.139** -0.161** -0.157**       -0.126** -0.122**
                                (0.073)    (0.068)    (0.068)    (0.068)    (0.060)   (0.060)
 Tobin's Q (y - 1)                0.001    -0.012     -0.008     -0.008     -0.010    -0.010
                                (0.009)    (0.009)    (0.009)    (0.009)    (0.008)   (0.008)
 Past return (adj; q - 1)         0.080     0.095*     0.093*     0.093*     0.079      0.077
                                (0.054)    (0.053)    (0.053)    (0.053)    (0.049)   (0.049)
 Short interest (adj; m - 1)     0.328*     0.342*    0.399**    0.401**    0.332*     0.325*
                                (0.197)    (0.193)    (0.192)    (0.192)    (0.174)   (0.175)
 Relative size                 0.090***   0.093***   0.088***   0.093***    0.044*    0.046**
                                (0.029)    (0.030)    (0.029)    (0.029)    (0.022)   (0.023)
 Stock-only dummy               0.123**    0.117**    0.119**    0.110*     0.086*     0.084*
                                (0.061)    (0.057)    (0.058)    (0.058)    (0.050)   (0.050)
 Mixed-payment dummy            0.039**    0.039**     0.031*      0.030    0.034**   0.034**
                                (0.019)    (0.019)    (0.019)    (0.019)    (0.017)   (0.017)
 Diversifying dummy              0.035*    0.039**     0.034*    0.033*      0.020      0.020
                                (0.019)    (0.019)    (0.019)    (0.019)    (0.017)   (0.017)
 Competed dummy                  0.038      0.031      0.039      0.042      0.067     0.069
                                (0.111)    (0.103)    (0.107)    (0.106)    (0.103)   (0.103)
 Hostile                         0.154      0.135      0.135      0.139      0.135     0.137
                                (0.113)    (0.109)    (0.108)    (0.107)    (0.099)   (0.099)
 Public target                    0.018     0.009      0.014      0.009      0.005      0.005
                                (0.025)    (0.025)    (0.025)    (0.025)    (0.021)   (0.022)
 CAR / Scaled $ loss                                             -0.214                0.024
 (imputed from CAR)                                              (0.132)              (0.025)

 Year controls                       No           Yes               Yes     Yes           Yes          Yes
 Industry controls                   No           No                Yes     Yes           Yes          Yes
 Observations                       1,805        1,805             1,805   1,805         1,805        1,805
 Adjusted R2                        0.050        0.086             0.092   0.093         0.087        0.087




                                                         76
Table D.2. Characteristics-Based Model: Firm-Level Outcomes
This table reports OLS regressions with abnormal ROA and DGTW-adjusted buy-and-hold returns (BHAR)
as the dependent variables and deal and acquirer characteristics as the key independent variables of interest.
In Columns (1)­(4), the dependent variable is abnormal ROA. In Columns (5)­(8), the dependent variable
is DGTW-adjusted BHAR. Standard errors are reported in parentheses under coefficients. ***, **, and *
indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. All regressions include constants,
the coefficients of which are not reported.

Dependent variable:                        Abnormal ROA                           DGTW-adjusted BHAR
                                  (1)        (2)       (3)      (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)         (8)
Log acquirer market cap ($b) 0.007*** 0.006*** 0.007*** 0.007*** 0.020** 0.019** 0.024*** 0.023**
                              (0.002) (0.002) (0.002) (0.002)    (0.009) (0.009)  (0.009)  (0.009)
Debt/Assets (y - 1)          3.466*** 3.511*** 3.390*** 3.300***  7.165   7.585  15.005** 15.177**
                              (1.036) (1.028) (1.099) (1.094)    (7.019) (7.057)  (7.526)  (7.549)
FCF/Assets (y - 1)            -0.021 -0.022 -0.018 -0.020 0.213*** 0.195** 0.240*** 0.242***
                              (0.018) (0.018) (0.018) (0.019)    (0.077) (0.078)  (0.078)  (0.079)
Tobin's Q (y - 1)              0.003    0.004    0.003    0.002   0.008   0.008    0.000    0.000
                              (0.003) (0.003) (0.003) (0.003)    (0.012) (0.012)  (0.012)  (0.012)
Past return (adj; q - 1)      0.024* 0.026** 0.027** 0.027**      0.062   0.066    0.066    0.066
                              (0.013) (0.012) (0.012) (0.012)    (0.067) (0.068)  (0.068)  (0.068)
Short interest (adj; m - 1)    0.008    0.013    0.006    0.006  -0.141  -0.149   -0.249   -0.248
                              (0.047) (0.047) (0.046) (0.047)    (0.279) (0.277)  (0.276)  (0.276)
Relative size                 -0.003 -0.003 -0.003 -0.005 -0.095*** -0.097*** -0.085*** -0.083***
                              (0.006) (0.006) (0.005) (0.005)    (0.029) (0.029)  (0.029)  (0.030)
Stock-only dummy              -0.005 -0.004 -0.005 -0.002        -0.068  -0.063   -0.061   -0.065
                              (0.013) (0.013) (0.013) (0.013)    (0.079) (0.079)  (0.080)  (0.081)
Mixed-payment dummy          -0.009** -0.009** -0.007* -0.006* -0.043* -0.043*    -0.030   -0.030
                              (0.004) (0.004) (0.004) (0.004)    (0.025) (0.025)  (0.025)  (0.025)
Diversifying dummy           -0.007* -0.007* -0.005 -0.005 -0.084*** -0.087*** -0.080*** -0.080***
                              (0.004) (0.004) (0.004) (0.004)    (0.025) (0.025)  (0.025)  (0.025)
Competed dummy                 0.012    0.014    0.014    0.012  -0.187* -0.187* -0.199* -0.198*
                              (0.018) (0.018) (0.019) (0.020)    (0.107) (0.106)  (0.105)  (0.105)
Hostile                        0.016    0.018    0.017    0.016   0.009   0.007    0.027    0.028
                              (0.019) (0.019) (0.020) (0.020)    (0.119) (0.122)  (0.116)  (0.117)
Public target                 -0.004 -0.003 -0.003 -0.002         0.024   0.029    0.015    0.013
                              (0.005) (0.005) (0.004) (0.004)    (0.032) (0.032)  (0.032)  (0.032)
CAR [-1, 1]                                             0.064**                            -0.091
                                                         (0.030)                           (0.182)

Year controls                     No         Yes       Yes      Yes        No          Yes        Yes         Yes
Industry controls                 No         No        Yes      Yes        No          No         Yes         Yes
Observations                     1,707      1,707     1,707    1,707      1,805       1,805      1,805       1,805
Adjusted R2                      0.035      0.040     0.064    0.067      0.023       0.021      0.029       0.028




                                                      77
Appendix E               Subsamples by Characteristic

   Table E.1 presents regressions of outcome variables on CAR [-1, 1]. The samples are split
by deal (Panel A) and acquirer (Panel B) characteristics. For example, the first regression in
Panel A reports results for regressions of failure, abnormal ROA, and BHAR on CAR [-1, 1]
for the sample of stock-only and the sample of cash-only deals. In the remainder of Panel A,
we repeat these regressions for the public and private target, diversifying and nondiversifying,
below- and above-median relative size (transaction size relative to acquirer size), and below-
and above-median deal size subsamples. In Panel B, we consider sample splits based on
acquirer size, leverage, free cash flows, Tobin's Q, and pre-deal stock returns. The anticipated
coefficient is negative for the regressions of the failure dummy and positive for the regressions
with ROA and DGTW-adjusted BHAR.
   Figure E.1 reproduces Figure 4 for two subperiods, by completion date: 2003­2007
(Panel (a)) and 2008­2013 (Panel (b)).




                                               78
Table E.1. CAR Performance by Subsamples Based on Characteristics
This table reports results for OLS regressions of outcome variables on CAR [-1, 1]. Panels A and B present
results of regressions using subsamples split by deal and acquirer characteristics, respectively. Standard errors
are reported in parentheses under coefficients. The outcome variables are failure dummy (goodwill impair-
ment or divestiture-at-a-loss within five years), abnormal return on assets (ROA), and DGTW-adjusted
buy-and-hold returns (BHAR). ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively. All regressions include constants, the coefficients of which are not reported.
  Panel A: Sample Splits by Deal Characteristics
  Dependent variable:        Failure          ROA            BHAR       Failure          ROA             BHAR
  Sample:                                 Stock only                                   Cash only
  Acquirer CAR [-1, 1]       -1.079*         -0.044          1.576*     -0.248           0.039           -0.485
                             (0.582)         (0.136)         (0.857)    (0.179)         (0.044)          (0.324)

  Observations                  70             66              70         934             883             934
  Adjusted R2                 0.025           0.000          0.031       0.001           0.000           0.003
  Sample:                               Public target                                Private target
  Acquirer CAR [-1, 1]      -0.859***        -0.011           0.127     -0.008          0.077**          -0.262
                             (0.285)         (0.054)         (0.322)    (0.147)         (0.037)          (0.210)

  Observations                 343             330            343        1,462           1,377           1,462
  Adjusted R2                 0.029           0.000          0.000       0.000           0.004           0.001
  Sample:                              Diversifying deal                          Nondiversifying deal
  Acquirer CAR [-1, 1]       -0.070          0.126**          0.326     -0.258           0.006        -0.493**
                             (0.215)         (0.053)         (0.283)    (0.168)         (0.036)        (0.222)

  Obs                          662             635            662        1,143           1,072           1,143
  Adjusted R2                 0.000           0.015          0.001       0.002           0.000           0.004
  Sample:                        Below-median relative size                 Above-median relative size
  Acquirer CAR [-1, 1]       -0.104           0.041          -0.366     -0.294*         0.057*           -0.062
                             (0.206)         (0.076)         (0.392)    (0.166)         (0.030)          (0.193)

  Observations                 902             855            902         903             852             903
  Adjusted R2                 0.000           0.000          0.001       0.003           0.004           0.000
  Sample:                         Below-median deal size                      Above-median deal size
  Acquirer CAR [-1, 1]        0.017           0.057          -0.087    -0.386**          0.053           -0.264
                             (0.194)         (0.053)         (0.284)    (0.185)         (0.034)          (0.225)

  Observations                 902             845            902         903             862             903
  Adjusted R2                 0.000           0.001          0.000       0.006           0.004           0.001




                                                        79
Table E.1. CAR Performance by Subsamples Based on Characteristics (Cont.)
 Panel B: Sample Splits by Acquirer Characteristics
 Dependent variable:     Failure         ROA           BHAR     Failure         ROA          BHAR
 Sample:                   Below-median acquirer size              Above-median acquirer size
 Acquirer CAR [-1, 1]    -0.003          0.060       -0.008    -0.627***        0.064        -0.409
                         (0.180)        (0.041)      (0.239)    (0.175)        (0.044)       (0.257)

 Observations              903            839           903       902            868          902
 Adjusted R2              0.000          0.002         0.000     0.014          0.004        0.003
 Sample:                     Below-median leverage                   Above-median leverage
 Acquirer CAR [-1, 1]     0.141          0.066       -0.218    -0.552***        0.026        -0.160
                         (0.176)        (0.044)      (0.268)    (0.191)        (0.041)       (0.227)

 Observations              903            855           903       902            852          902
 Adjusted R2              0.000          0.003         0.000     0.010          0.000        0.000
 Sample:                          Below-median FCF                        Above-median FCF
 Acquirer CAR [-1, 1]   -0.303*          0.021       -0.051     -0.060         0.086*        -0.363
                        (0.181)         (0.041)      (0.232)    (0.191)        (0.047)       (0.270)

 Observations              902            859           902       903            848          903
 Adjusted R2              0.002          0.000         0.000     0.000          0.007        0.002
 Sample:                     Below-median Tobin Q                    Above-median Tobin Q
 Acquirer CAR [-1, 1]   -0.561***       0.074**       0.345      0.079          0.041    -0.605**
                         (0.205)        (0.029)      (0.237)    (0.169)        (0.050)    (0.253)

 Observations              903            859           903       902            848          902
 Adjusted R2              0.009          0.006         0.001     0.000          0.000        0.007
 Sample:                  Below-median previous return            Above-median previous return
 Acquirer CAR [-1, 1]    -0.157          0.028       -0.335     -0.232         0.074**       -0.039
                         (0.195)        (0.049)      (0.241)    (0.178)        (0.037)       (0.261)

 Observations              903            847           903       902            860          902
 Adjusted R2              0.000          0.000         0.001     0.001          0.005        0.000




                                                  80
Figure E.1. CAR and Ex-Post Performance, by Characteristic, by Period
The bar chart shows the standardized coefficient for regressions for which the dependent variable is CAR,
failure, abnormal ROA, or DGTW-adjusted buy-and-hold returns (BHAR) on various deal and firm charac-
teristics. Each characteristic enters each regression individually (univariate regressions). We switch the sign
on the failure regressions so that they are comparable to the other measures of performance and to CAR.
The red bar indicates the standardized coefficient from regressions in which CAR is the dependent variable,
and the three lighter bars indicate regressions for which failure, abnormal ROA, and DGTW-adjusted BHAR
are the dependent variables. The patterned portion of the bars indicates a coefficient that is larger than
1.96 standard errors of the standardized coefficient, i.e., statistically significant at least at the 5% level.
All acquirer characteristics are computed prior to the announcement; leverage, free cash flows, assets, and
Tobin's Q are computed in the year prior to the announcement, and past returns and short interest are
computed in the quarter and month prior to the announcement, respectively.

                                      (a) Transaction period: 2003­2007
                     Public target
                        Stock only
                     Acquirer size
                          Deal size
                         Tobin's Q
                      Diversifying
                       Past return
                    Short interest
                      Competitive
                   Mixed payment
                           Hostile
                      FCF/Assets
                     Debt/Assets
                     Relative size
                                        -0.1    -0.05        0   0.05     0.1      0.15
                                 Standardized coefficient of CAR or ex-post performance

                                      (b) Transaction period: 2008­2013
                     Public target
                       Stock only
                     Acquirer size
                         Deal size
                        Tobin's Q
                      Diversifying
                      Past return
                    Short interest
                       Competed
                   Mixed payment                                                CAR
                           Hostile                                              Failure
                      FCF/Assets                                                ROA
                                                                                BHAR
                     Debt/Assets
                     Relative size
                                        -0.1    -0.05        0   0.05     0.1      0.15
                                 Standardized coefficient of CAR or ex-post performance



                                                        81
Appendix F              Withdrawn Deals

   In this section, we consider the importance of selection due to withdrawn deals. We
implement a correction through inverse probability weighting (Wooldridge, 2007). This
method has two stages. In the first stage, the likelihood of completion (= 1 - Withdrawal)
is estimated as in Table 9 using the full sample. Specifically, we estimate a logit regression
of the probability of completion on acquirer CAR and deal and firm characteristics. In
the second stage, we rerun the main analysis (as in Table 3 and Table 4) but here the
observations are weighted with the inverse probability of completion. This method provides
greater weight to observations that are more likely to have been withdrawn. In Panel A,
the dependent variable is a dummy for impairment or divestiture-at-a-loss. In Panel B, the
dependent variable is abnormal ROA. In Panel C, the dependent variable is DGTW-adjusted
buy-and-hold returns.




                                             82
Table F.1. Accounting for Withdrawn Deals: Inverse Probability Weighting
This table reports regressions of transaction failure measures and acquirer performance on acquirer cu-
mulative abnormal returns (CAR). In Panel A, the dependent variable is a dummy for impairment or
divestiture-at-a-loss. In Panel B, the dependent variable is abnormal ROA. In Panel C, the dependent
variable is DGTW-adjusted buy-and-hold returns. In all panels, Column (1) includes only year, industry,
and characteristics as independent variables. Columns (2)­(4) include only CAR as the independent vari-
able, and Columns (5)­(7) include both CAR and controls as independent variables. The characteristics
are the log of market capitalization, leverage and cash flows scaled by previous-year assets, Tobin's Q,
previous-quarter market-adjusted stock returns, previous-month short interest, relative size, and indicators
for stock-only, mixed-payment, diversifying, competed, hostile, and public target deals. Observations are
inversely weighted by the probability of the completion of the deal, which is estimated in a logit regression
of deal completion on the characteristics described above. Standard errors are reported in parentheses under
coefficients. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. All
regressions include constants, the coefficients of which are not reported.
Panel A: Probability of Failure
Dependent variable:                                           Failure Dummy
CAR window:                n.a.       [-1, 1]   [-5, 5] [Ann - 2, Cls + 2]                   [-1, 1]
                           (1)          (2)       (3)              (4)           (5)       (6)           (7)
Acquirer CAR             Controls     -0.311* -0.077             -0.100        -0.259* -0.226          -0.291**
                          only        (0.159) (0.120)            (0.080)       (0.157) (0.147)          (0.142)

Controls              Year, Ind, Char   ­          ­                ­           Year Year, Ind Year, Ind, Char
Observations               1,805      1,805      1,805            1,804         1,805  1,805        1,805
Adjusted R2                0.107      0.003      0.000            0.002         0.042  0.052        0.109


Panel B: Abnormal ROA
Dependent variable:                                               ROA
CAR window:                n.a.       [-1, 1]   [-5, 5]       [Ann-2, Cls+2]                 [-1, 1]
                           (1)          (2)       (3)              (4)           (5)       (6)           (7)
Acquirer CAR             Controls      0.035    -0.007            0.002         0.037     0.037         0.052
                          only        (0.033)   (0.024)          (0.015)       (0.032)   (0.033)       (0.032)

Controls              Year, Ind, Char   ­          ­                ­           Year Year, Ind Year, Ind, Char
Observations               1,707      1,707      1,707            1,707         1,707  1,707        1,707
Adjusted R2                0.060      0.001      0.000            0.000         0.010  0.033        0.062


Panel C: DGTW-Adjusted Buy-and-Hold Return
Dependent variable:                                          DGTW-adj BHAR
CAR window:                n.a.       [-1, 1]   [-5, 5] [Ann - 2, Cls + 2]                   [-1, 1]
                           (1)          (2)       (3)              (4)           (5)       (6)           (7)
Acquirer CAR             Controls     -0.113 -0.245**            -0.046        -0.120    -0.066         0.019
                          only        (0.189) (0.122)            (0.092)       (0.186)   (0.184)       (0.187)

Controls              Year, Ind, Char   ­          ­                ­           Year Year, Ind Year, Ind, Char
Observations               1,805      1,805      1,805            1,804         1,805  1,805        1,805
Adjusted R2                0.037      0.000      0.002            0.000         0.000  0.011        0.036

                                                        83
Appendix G                 Robustness Tests

   We next consider whether our main results reported in Table 3 are robust to samples
that exclude impairments or divestiture losses during the financial crisis, to replacing acquirer
CAR with combined target and acquirer CAR, and to using longer event windows to reflect
anticipation or leakage.
   In Table G.1, we report OLS regressions with goodwill impairment or divestiture out-
comes as the dependent variable. Column (2) restricts the sample to transactions announced
in the post-crisis period between 2010 and 2013, and Column (1) restricts the sample to trans-
actions announced in the pre-crisis period between 2003 and 2007. The independent variable
for Columns (1) and (2) is CAR [-1, 1]. We next focus on the sample of transactions with
public targets. In Column (3), the independent variable is combined CAR, which is the
sum of acquirer dollar return and target dollar return scaled by the sum of acquirer and
target market capitalization 50 days prior to announcement. Dollar return is computed by
multiplying CAR [-1, 1] by the market capitalization 50 days prior to the announcement.
To account for the possibility of anticipation, in Column (4), the independent variable is
acquirer CAR, computed over a long [-41, 1] event window.




                                               84
Table G.1. Robustness Tests
This table reports the results of OLS regressions with goodwill impairment or divestiture outcomes as the
dependent variable. Column (2) restricts the sample to transactions announced in the post-crisis period
between 2010 and 2013, and Column (1) restricts the sample to transactions announced in the pre-crisis
period between 2003 and 2007. The independent variable for Columns (1) and (2) is CAR [-1, 1]. In
Column (3), the independent variable is combined CAR, which is the sum of acquirer dollar return and
target dollar return scaled by the sum of acquirer and target market capitalization 50 days prior to the
announcement. Dollar return is computed by multiplying CAR [-1, 1] by the market capitalization 50 days
prior to the announcement. To account for the possibility of anticipation, in Column (4), the independent
variable is acquirer CAR, computed over a long [-41, 1] event window. Standard errors are reported in
parentheses under coefficients. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively. All regressions include constants, the coefficients of which are not reported.
         Panel A: Transaction-Level Failure
         Dependent variable:                                         Failure Dummy
         CAR window:                            [-1, 1]                    Acq + Tgt [-1, 1]   [-41, 1]
         Sample:                    2003­2007         2010­2013              Public targets      All
                                        (1)                    (2)                   (3)         (4)
         Acquirer CAR                 -0.138              -0.044                -0.466         -0.088
                                      (0.194)             (0.199)               (0.283)        (0.063)

         Observations                   923                 647                   325           1,805
         Adjusted R2 /Pseudo R2        0.000               0.000                 0.006          0.001


         Panel B: Abnormal ROA
         Dependent variable:                                         Abnormal ROA
         CAR window:                            [-1, 1]                    Acq + Tgt [-1, 1]   [-41, 1]
         Sample:                    2003­2007         2010­2013              Public targets      All
                                        (1)                    (2)                   (3)         (4)
         Acquirer CAR                  0.059               0.043                -0.063          0.019
                                      (0.045)             (0.046)               (0.057)        (0.015)

         Observations                   866                 616                   314           1,707
         Adjusted R2                   0.002               0.001                 0.002          0.001


         Panel C: DGTW-Adjusted Buy-and-Hold Return
         Dependent variable:                     DGTW-Adjusted Buy-and-Hold Return
         CAR window:                            [-1, 1]                    Acq + Tgt [-1, 1]   [-41, 1]
         Sample:                    2003­2007         2010­2013              Public targets      All
                                        (1)                    (2)                   (3)         (4)
         Acquirer CAR                -0.470*               0.110                 0.214          0.076
                                     (0.272)              (0.244)               (0.309)        (0.082)

         Observations                   923                 647                   325           1,805
         Adjusted R2                   0.003               0.000                 0.000          0.000


                                                          85
