VALUING RARE PEDIATRIC DRUGS:
  AN ECONOMICS PERSPECTIVE
         Rena M. Conti
        Jonathan Gruber
       Daniel A. Ollendorf
        Peter J. Neumann
     WORKING PAPER 27978
                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          VALUING RARE PEDIATRIC DRUGS:
                            AN ECONOMICS PERSPECTIVE

                                      Rena M. Conti
                                     Jonathan Gruber
                                    Daniel A. Ollendorf
                                     Peter J. Neumann

                                    Working Paper 27978
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w27978


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2020




The origin of this study is a workshop on this topic sponsored by Sarepta Therapeutics. This
study was motivated by, and summarizes many of the lessons from, this workshop. We are
grateful to all participants in that workshop. Gruber, Neumann and Ollendorf acknowledge
financial support from Sarepta Therapeutics. Conti did not receive financial support from
Sarepta Therapeutics. This study and publication was not contingent on Sarepta's approval
or censorship of the manuscript. The authors thank Kao-Ping Chua for excellent comments
on a previous draft. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Rena M. Conti, Jonathan Gruber, Daniel A. Ollendorf, and Peter J. Neumann. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Valuing Rare Pediatric Drugs: An Economics Perspective
Rena M. Conti, Jonathan Gruber, Daniel A. Ollendorf, and Peter J. Neumann
NBER Working Paper No. 27978
October 2020
JEL No. I18

                                           ABSTRACT

There is a coming wave of novel genetic therapies aiming to treat rare pediatric disease. A large
literature investigates the valuation of new treatments, but the valuation of treatments for rare
pediatric illness raises a host of unique issues. In this paper, we review the challenges of applying
both the standard economic model and standard approaches to estimating cost-effectiveness using
the quality-adjusted life year (QALY) to this case. We argue that there are a large number of
special issues that have only been partially addressed by past work and we conclude that more
data and the development of new methods are vital as innovators, health technology assessment
practitioners and policymakers confront the launch of these new drugs.


Rena M. Conti                                               Daniel A. Ollendorf
Boston University                                           Center for the Evaluation of
Questrom School of Business                                 Value and Risk in Health
Department of Markets, Public Policy and Law                Tufts Medical Center
595 Commonwealth Ave                                        800 Washington Street, Box 63
Boston, MA 02215                                            Boston, MA 02111
rconti@bu.edu                                               dollendorf@tuftsmedicalcenter.org

Jonathan Gruber                                             Peter J. Neumann
Department of Economics, E52-434                            Center for the Evaulation for
MIT                                                         Value and Risk in Health
50 Memorial Drive                                           Tufts Medical Center
Cambridge, MA 02142                                         800 Washington St, Box 063
and NBER                                                    Boston, MA 02111
gruberj@mit.edu                                             pneumann@tuftsmedicalcenter.org
         One of the most significant developments in biology over the past 50 years is the understanding of the

genetic basis for disease. We now understand that a wide variety of illness has its basis in genetic mutations. And

the sequencing of the human genome in the early 2000s has led to a wave of related discoveries for the genetic basis

of disease. This discovery has led to the possibility of a new type of treatment for diseases long considered

untreatable through genetic therapies.

         The idea of modifying DNA to treat disease is representative of a major breakthrough in medicine. Rather

than treating symptoms, gene therapy aims to modify the underlying genetic etiology of a disease. The first

commercially available genetic therapies, chimeric antigen receptor-T cell (CAR-T) therapies and voretigene

neparvovec (Luxturna®, Spark Therapeutics), were approved by the FDA in 2017. At this point, there are less than

five available genetic therapies, but there are hundreds more in development. i

         Gene therapy treatments, however, don't come for free. A combination of forces may lead to enormous

prices per unit sold of gene-based therapies.

         The process of drug development is costly, risky and highly uncertain due to the trial-and-error nature of

research. Every scientific discovery that becomes a new drug is the result of dozens of steps, from identifying the

"target" biological entity (e.g., gene or protein), to finding the right "hit molecule" that interacts with the target and

is the building block for a drug that could combat the disease, to three stages of clinical trials with the possibility of

failure at each stage. To give a sense of the work involved, once a target has been identified, anywhere from two

hundred thousand to more than one million compounds must be screened to identify hits, and only 9.6 percent of the

drugs that enter human trials in stage one end up being approved. ii

         Added on top of this is the much higher manufacturing costs for cellular and genetic therapies.

Manufacturing cell and gene therapies is much more involved than for other pharmaceuticals. The fixed costs of

setting up manufacturing capacity and the incremental costs of making each dose are both high. This is different

than the costs associated with small molecule tablets and pills where the incremental costs of production are

virtually zero. Moreover, whereas a single manufacturing process or platform could be deployed to produce a wide

variety of traditional small molecule pharmaceuticals to treat different diseases, cell and gene therapy manufacturing

is highly specialized. Not all manufacturing facilities can support the full range of manufacturing processes used,

and in general, manufacturing plants for traditional drugs cannot be easily converted into plants that produce cell

and gene therapy products. iii The cost of setting up a large-scale cell or gene therapy manufacturing facility can be




                                                             2
upwards of $200 million, compared with less than $1 million for a similar-scale small-molecule manufacturing

facility. iv The quality control involved in cell and gene therapy manufacturing ­ making sure each and every dose

provides that same safety, efficacy and effectiveness - is very intense, involves highly specialized labor and capital,

and differs substantially from that entailed in traditional small molecules. Furthermore, a single facility may not be

enough. Cell and gene therapy treatments are highly unstable and have extremely short shelf lives (for example, the

drug Sipuleucel-T (Dendreon) has a shelf life of eighteen hours), so decentralized manufacturing at multiple smaller

and geographically separate nodes (rather than a single centralized hub) becomes a necessity to preserve treatment

availability and assure fidelity to high quality standards. v

         This is all made much more complicated by the targeted nature of many of these therapies, which can be

focused on very small populations facing deadly diseases. "Orphan drug" innovators must spread the costs, risks

and uncertainty of their development and manufacturing across very small populations to yield sufficient financial

return to motivate investment.

         A final complication is that there is no natural market-based solution for the pricing new genetic therapies.

To date, each therapy is unique and typically faces little competition. Consumers purchasing these therapies are

often desperate and face imperfect information in assessing the underlying value of the treatment. In contrast to the

U.S.'s highly successful small molecule prescription drug market, we do not expect brand-brand or brand-biosimilar

competition to bring down the prices of these products.

         Combined, these features may motivate manufacturers to charge very high prices. Nevertheless, pricing

leverage by the innovators of these products is not unlimited. Rather, a natural benchmark for pricing is the value of

the new therapy. Loosely speaking, the value of a new drug is the benefits to society of having this drug relative to

the next best treatment. In theory, this is a readily measureable concept. The value of a drug is the incremental

improvement (i.e., over the next best alternative) it delivers to the quantity and quality of life for potential patients

and the associated benefits to others.

         In practice, the measurement of value of a new therapy faces a number of difficult challenges. Some of

these are technical, such as assessing the probabilities of various health improvements over different time frames

from the treatment. Some of these involve difficult measurement concepts, such as how to properly account for the

value to others in society from improving the health of an individual. And some of these involve difficult social




                                                                3
judgments, such as how to value a drug that creates a small life improvement for many individuals versus one that

creates a large life improvement for a small number of individuals.

         This paper considers how to measure value as an input to setting prices for rare pediatric disease. While

most of the issues laid out here apply equally to rare diseases at any age, rare pediatric diseases raise a host of

particular issues such as: do innovations for pediatric populations deserve special consideration because children

represent a "vulnerable" group unable to fully speak for themselves (a rationale typically used by health assessment

bodies to make exceptions for valuing pediatric drugs)? Do we take the perspective of the child or their parents?

How do we deal with the fact that we could be delivering decades of extra life? How do we measure the extra

caregiver burden relative to normal parenting demands? Thus, the purpose of this paper is to lay out these issues

applied to the specific case of new therapies to treat rare pediatric disease and to draw some conclusions regarding

how the fields of health economics and decision science may move forward in addressing them.

         Part I lays out the reasons that the competitive market is unable to provide a proper signal as to the

underlying value of rare pediatric drugs. In Part II, the valuation framework that is typically used as an alternative is

discussed, along with common concerns and criticisms. In this section, we focus on the particular issues that arise in

treating pediatric diseases. Part III then turns to the critical question of whether a higher threshold should be applied

for rare diseases. Part IV applies a particular example, valuing treatments for Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA) that

highlights the difficulties that such exercises face. In Part V, we articulate a research agenda that should be pursued

in the face of the coming wave of treatments for rare disease.



Part I: Failures in the Market for Treatments for Rare Pediatric Illness

         The starting point for economic modeling is the perfectly competitive market with rational, optimizing

consumers. Consumers maximize a well-defined utility function that allows them to rationally trade off the costs

and benefits of different baskets of goods to make themselves as well off as possible given their financial

constraints. Firms maximize their profits subject to the limits of market competition, whereby perfect entry and exit

serve to minimize the ability to charge prices much above the cost of producing goods.

         In such a market setting, goods are purchased by consumers so long as their price is below the value of

consuming the next unit of the good, and they are sold by producers so long as the price is above the cost of

producing the next unit of the good. In equilibrium, the price that meets both of these conditions is the price that is




                                                            4
equal to the value of that next unit. The beauty of the market is that this price satisfies both consumers and

producers, and as a result, the good is allocated to those individuals who value it above its price. Thus, the price

paid for a good represents its value to society.

         In such a framework, uncertainty does not pose a fundamental challenge. Once uncertainty is introduced,

consumers will maximize expected utility, which weights the possible well-being of each outcome by the probability

of that outcome. Firms likewise will evaluate their production choices given the probabilities of each production

outcome.

         It is well recognized in economics, however, that the market mechanism fails as a tool of pricing and

allocation when there are market failures, or deviations from the extreme set of assumptions laid out above. As laid

out by Kenneth Arrow in his classic 1963 article, the health care sector is rife with such market failures. Here we

point out that the problems Arrow identified are amplified in the context of rare pediatric drugs.

Imperfect Information and the Agency Problem

         The most fundamental problem facing all health care markets is imperfect information. The classic

economics model assumes that consumers are fully informed about the attributes of a product and, based on that

information, can form a proper internal valuation of the good. This is clearly not true in general in health care. The

decisions facing individuals are very complicated and the tradeoffs between different treatment options are difficult

to understand. Neither the efficacy of different treatments, their side effects, nor their financial burdens are readily

apparent to the consumer of health care in many contexts; even if they were, the urgency often associated with

health care decision-making may preclude obtaining additional information.

         As a result, individuals typically rely on medical experts to make many of their health care decisions. But

this reliance raises a new difficulty, the agency problem. The experts making these decisions consider both the

patient's interest and their own interest in making recommendations. The provider interest could be influenced both

by financial incentives (e.g. if different treatments lead to different levels of provider compensation) and by other

professional considerations (e.g. risk of malpractice lawsuits). These agency problems are mitigated for genetic

diseases given that the appropriateness of treatment is in most cases confirmed by a genetic test.

         There is also another unique agency problem facing decisions over rare pediatric diseases: the decision

maker (the parent) is not the party that derives most of the benefits from health improvement (the child). Parents

generally consider their children's utility in making their decisions, but they may weight their own well-being too




                                                            5
highly ­ or not highly enough. A number of studies reviewed in Gruber (2016) show that parents do not appear to

maximize a "family utility function" which would lead to equal weight on the well-being of themselves and their

children. This can be a major consideration when there are significant caregiver burdens that are offset by

treatment of rare pediatric disease. These issues get even more complicated in situations where there are multiple

parent decision makers who may not have the same preferences, perhaps due to an unequal distribution of caregiver

burden.

Optimization Failures

          Even with perfect information, the standard model assumes that a rational forward looking consumer

optimizes their consumption given the uncertainty facing different consumption opportunities. But the past few

decades have seen the rise of a field of behavioral economics which questions those assumptions along a number of

dimensions. This field has identified a host of "choice inconsistencies" which suggests that individuals do not make

decisions as predicted by the standard economics model (Kahneman, 2011). A number of these are highly relevant

to the case of rare pediatric drugs.

          For example, in the standard model, individuals are assumed to make proper tradeoffs between present and

future costs and benefits. If an action has a large current benefit, but an even larger future cost (when properly

discounted), then it will not be undertaken. But decades of laboratory research and a growing body of economic

studies demonstrate that individuals are "present biased" and do not properly weight decisions with consequences in

different time periods (e.g. O'Donoghue and Rabin, 1999). Such a problem is dramatically heightened in the case of

pediatric rare illness. It is difficult not to be exceptionally biased towards immediate outcomes when a child's

health or life is at stake - and as a result there will be a tendency to deprioritize any long run consequences for health

or financial well-being.

          As another example, individuals have problems assessing frequent versus rare risks. Individuals tend to

make decisions as if they think rare risks are much more likely than they are, relative to common risks (e.g. Rabin,

2000). In the context of rare pediatric diseases, that means that individuals may overvalue "home run"

consequences relative to more certain but less dramatic improvements in health.

Imperfect Competition

          On the supply side of the equation we have another important market failure: imperfect competition. Firms

producing consumer products in a competitive market are forced to set prices at or near their costs of production,




                                                            6
because if they do not some other firm will undercut their price. But when firms are developing unique products ­

where there is very limited threat of competition - there is no such downward competitive force on the price.

         This problem is particularly acute for curative treatments for rare diseases. The market power value of a

patent depends on how close are the substitute treatments. Even with a patent, a treatment that has close substitutes

cannot set its price much higher than its costs of production. But with truly unique genetic therapies there are

limited comparable substitutes in practice, as well as inertia for firms to invest in creating a competitor given the

small market size. The treatment of rare diseases has all of the features of a "natural monopoly" whereby markets

naturally settle into a situation of one provider with little or no alternatives.

Liquidity Constraints and Equity Concerns

         Finally, we have the problem of financing purchases. Individuals face imperfect capital markets from

which they are unable to borrow the total cost of treatment. Even if they value the treatments at above their price,

they can't come up with the money to pay for the treatments. As a result, most individuals are insured against risks

such as the cost of treating rare diseases. But the distribution of insurance coverage is unequal. Almost 30 million

Americans are uninsured and cannot finance expensive treatments, including more than four million children. Other

Americans face widely varying insurance coverage rules that can make the costs of treatments, even if insured, quite

large relative to income; details on coverage rules for specialty drugs are covered in Chambers et al. (2018).

Millions more are insured by state Medicaid programs that are financed out of inflexible state budgets, leading to

rationing of care.

         This relates to concerns over equity. As a result of differences in insurance coverage, there will be

enormous disparities across economic groups in their ability to finance expensive treatments for rare diseases. This

is particularly concerning in the case of pediatric illness, since the child whose life is impacted by the treatment is

receiving or not receiving treatment based on financial decisions made by their parents and the vagaries of coverage

decisions by insurers.



Part II: A Valuation Framework for New Treatments


         Given the multiple failures that make it difficult to rely on the private market mechanism to deliver proper

pricing for rare pediatric diseases, we need to turn to a different mechanism. In the economics of public finance, the

mechanism that is used when the market does not deliver the proper pricing signal is cost-benefit analysis or CBA



                                                              7
(Gruber, 2016). CBA is commonly applied to public sector decision making around the world. Broadly speaking, it

involves measuring the benefits of an intervention relative to its costs.

          When public sector decision makers are weighing alternative approaches to addressing the same unmet

need, for example different alternatives for building a bridge across a span of water or providing public safety to a

group of individuals, a sub-type of CBA called cost-effectiveness analysis (CEA) is used. The underlying analytics

of cost-benefit and cost-effectiveness analyses are the same ­ both involve comparing benefits to costs. The

difference is simply whether the end goal is to pursue all activities with a positive net benefit (benefits ­ costs)

measured in dollar terms (cost benefit analysis), or whether the end goal is to evaluate a host of alternatives to

accomplish a similar goal measured in the same units of non-dollar benefits (e.g. longevity, morbidity, quality of

life, environmental impacts, etc.), and then pick the one with the largest positive net benefit (cost effectiveness

analysis).

          The use of cost-effectiveness in health and medicine is reviewed at length in Neumann et al. (2017). Here

we will highlight the key issues it raises and the key controversies over CEA as they relate to rare pediatric illness.

          The starting point for CEA, and the most difficult aspect of the exercise, is to assign a numerical value to

improvements in health. This is done in two steps. The first is to assign a value to an additional year of life lived in

good health. The second is to assign a value to the health state of the individual during that year, relative to good

health.



Value of Life

          The first step relies on decades of literature of measuring the value of a statistical life (VSL). There are a

variety of approaches to estimating this value.

          One approach is to use a "revealed preference" approach of examining the tradeoff between job risk and

wages, or between the odds of a good saving lives versus the price paid for that good. It can also be measured from

surveys that ask individuals to value reductions in the risk of death. To fix ideas, the U.S. Department of Health and

Human Services, which is responsible for evaluating health-related policies in the U.S., recommended the use of a

VSL of $9.3 million in 2014. vi To consider policies which extend life, this is converted to a life year by dividing by

the typical remaining life of a typical worker, since the central estimates used to inform VSL come from job risk




                                                            8
tradeoff studies. So if a typical worker will live for 40 more years, this suggest a value of an additional year of life

of roughly $230,000.

         A huge literature on notes a wide variety of problems with measuring VSL; see Viscusi and Aldy (2003) or

Gruber (2016). Most notable is the fact that the use of revealed preference approaches assumes a level of rationality

in making these tradeoffs that is at odds with the literature on consumer decision making problems reviewed above.

Moreover, the job-risk tradeoff estimates apply not to the typical worker, but to the worker who is deciding on

whether or not to take a risky job; such workers may have tastes very different from the typical person.

         Other approaches use a theoretical basis to derive the value of additional life. For example, the classic

analysis of Garber and Phelps (1997) suggest a value of life-year of 1-2 times annual income, while a recent update

from Phelps (2019) suggests as well 2 times annual income. Mean annual income per capita in the U.S. in 2017 was

$48,150, vii suggesting a value of life year just below $100,000.

         A major issue in applying VSL or other estimates to children, of course, is that the estimates all come from

decisions made by adults, typically workers. Applying them to an additional year of life in childhood may be

problematic ­ especially as those extra years come at younger and younger ages. It is unclear how a trade-off

between job risk and wages for a 40 year-old is relevant to the value of an extra year of life at 1 year old. In

particular, valuing life for small children requires directly tackling the thorny issue of considering self-reported

value of life versus that reported by others (such as parents).




Quality Adjusted Life-Year

         Medical interventions typically do not typically operate simply to bring someone from a 'dead' health state

to good health. Rather, they often improve health among those who would have been alive but in diminished health,

and they may not bring those individuals all the way to optimal health. As such, valuing the health improvements

due to medical interventions requires adjusting the value of a life-year for the quality improvement during that life

year. The goal of a quality adjusted life-year (QALY) framework is to bring a comparable numerical value to

different states of health. The extreme benchmarks are a value of zero for dead (although some might argue that

there are states of well being below being dead), and a value of one for good health. The challenge that is addressed

by the QALY framework is assessing the valuation of disability and other health states that are valued less than




                                                            9
perfect health. Having defined the value of various health states, the analyst can compute the total QALYs gained

from an intervention as a measure of the benefit to the individual.

         As emphasized by Nord et al. (2009), QALYs are meant to express the personal utility of health outcomes

as judged "on average" by the general public from behind a veil of ignorance about future health (so-called

"decision utility"). Standard QALYs thus typically express value in terms of ex ante self-interest.

         In practice, QALY measurement typically proceeds by using survey data to measure the relative value of

health states, as summarized by Drummond et al. (2015) and Feeney et al. (Neumann et al, 2017, Chapter 7). A

variety of survey measurement tools and techniques are used to value QALYs, ranging from reported rating of well-

being in different states to "standard gamble" techniques where individuals are asked how much they would pay for

probabilities of avoiding certain outcomes.

         Implementing the QALY framework involves a very difficult set of issues that have been addressed in an

extensive literature. For example, one key difficulty with the QALY approach is that alternative survey tools, and

alternative ways of framing the valuation, can yield varying results for the value attached to different health states

(Lipscomb, 2009); this may not be a significant issue when comparing treatments if the same survey tool is used for

both, but it still can matter if the different treatments operate along different parts of the health distribution. This set

of issues is covered in depth, and recommendations made, in Neumann et al. (2017) which brings together a host of

experts in the area to critically review the issues.

         Another difficult issue arises in using patient preferences (from directly surveying patients and their

families) versus using community preferences (from surveys of the community on the value of health states) (Feeny

et al., Neumann et al. 2017, Chapter 7). The latter has the advantage of reflecting social views on the value of

health improvement, and avoids the very small sample sizes as well that may arise when using patients with rare

diseases. On the other hand, given the uniqueness of pediatric rare illnesses, the specific views and lived

experiences of the impacted patient groups may be critical.

         Another major issue that must be addressed here is the extent to which individual stated preferences should

in fact be used as a guide to cost effectiveness analysis. As discussed in the first section of this paper, researchers

have documented a variety of "behavioral biases" in individual decision making. These biases will impact not only

market decisions but survey responses as well ­ particularly when considering very complicated tradeoffs. A critical

research issue is how to incorporate stated preferences in the context of such potential biases.




                                                            10
           The set of issues raised by QALY measurement are particularly difficult for pediatric treatments. For

example, the benefits of treatment attribute both to the child and their family ­ so whose opinions should be valued

in establishing quality of life weights? Clearly, for diseases affecting very young children, it is impossible to get a

valid self-reported measure of quality of life impacts. But just as clearly, when someone achieves a mature age, we

would want to use their own self-reported quality of life measure. How do we handle cases in-between ­ how do we

properly weight the views of children and their parents as children approach the age of majority?

           On the other hand, the good news for measuring valuation for children is that the value of extra life years

will in many cases simply dominate any changes in QALY. Many of the rare therapies being developed for children

allow them to live many more years at a high quality of life, so VSL estimates or simple gains in life expectancy

may be most of what is needed to judge cost-effectiveness.

           Indeed, there is some move towards reporting not only QALYs but separately just years of life saved. This

has the virtue of avoiding many of the difficult QALY measurement issues ­ in a sense, placing more weight on the

factor which is measured more precisely (increased duration of life, rather than increased quality of life). It has the

cost of overweighting the extension of disabled lives. But for rare pediatric treatments, which typically can cure a

disease and extend healthy life by many years, years of life saved is likely to dominate.



The Net Costs of Treatment

           Offsetting these benefits are the net costs of the intervention. On the medical side, this includes the cost of

the treatment itself, as well as any associated medical costs ­ for example the costs of a hospitalization stay to

administer the treatment. But it subtracts the savings from replacing the alternative treatment to which the

intervention is being compared. At the same time, there may be a series of non-medical costs as well associated

with treatment. For example, there is the time cost of the treatment itself.

           In principle, this is the most straightforward part of the calculation, since it requires measuring an existing

counterfactual. In practice, there are a number of difficult issues in this arena as well, particularly for pediatric rare

illness.

           The first problem is that the appropriate measure of reduced medical spending is defined relative to the next

best treatment for the illness. But there can be wide variation in the alternative treatment patterns for pediatric rare




                                                             11
illnesses. This is particularly true since a large share of the spending on such illnesses may be palliative or

accommodative, rather than curative, and thus not subject to traditional tests of medical appropriateness.

         The second problem is that the proper measure is not the price of medical services, but their opportunity

cost. For example, consider the case of services with large fixed costs and small marginal costs, like an MRI scan,

as discussed by Basu (Neumann et al., 2017, Chapter 8) ­ should the savings of the foregone MRI be valued at the

average cost of an MRI or the marginal cost of an MRI? As another example, the prices charged for medical

services deviate widely from their marginal costs. We have already discussed the role of market power in the

delivery of medical services, and recent research has documented the enormous variation in pricing for comparable

treatments both across areas and across providers within an area (Cooper et al., 2018). If a patient lives in a very

low cost area, or goes to a low cost provider, how should that be incorporated into the calculations?



Other Costs and Benefits: The Societal Perspective on Valuation

         A major distinction that is drawn in valuing new treatments is between a health care sector perspective,

described thus far, and a societal perspective (Neumann et al. 2017). Both perspectives have as their starting point

the value of the improvement in health to the individual, and the costs of the treatment and associated medical costs,

minus the savings in other medical services. The difference is that a societal perspective broadens this to consider

factors such as the impact on others besides the patient, ranging from caregivers to society as a whole, and the total

consumption costs and productivity gains of extending quality of life or years of life. Three issues illustrate the key

differences between the health care and societal perspective ­ and have important implications for CEA in rare

pediatric diseases versus other types of illness.

         The first is reduced caregiver burden. If better health for an individual reduces the need for caregiver

assistance, society benefits. One difficulty here is that this should measure the reduction in caregiver burden relative

to the next best alternative. When considering caregiving of adult patients, the default is that the caregiver would

spend little time caring for a healthy adult. But when considering care of children, the alternative is not zero care.

All children get sick occasionally or have some risk of an acute medical event such as breaking a bone. The

caregiver burden must be assessed relative to the (sizeable) burden on parents of healthy children. Moreover,

reduced caregiver burden must be measured in dollar terms for inclusion in the value calculation. There are standard

methods for valuing reduced caregiver burden in terms of time reduction. But reduced caregiver burden is not just




                                                           12
time ­ it also involves mental and physical well-being. This in principle requires its own set of QALY-like

calculations to value, and quantifying these caregiver or family "spillover" effects where feasible (as emphasized by

Neumann et al. 2017)

         The second issue is that of including "related" versus "unrelated" medical costs. The classic example here

is a life extending treatment that saves the costs of the current illness, but puts the patient at the risk of other

illnesses that would not have occurred if they had died of the first illness (a problem economists and epidemiologists

label "competing risks"). There is an extensive debate within the CEA literature on whether these "unrelated"

medical costs should be counted, and the general consensus appears that they should be included in a societal

perspective (Rappange et al., 2008). At the same time, this is a much smaller issue for children than for the elderly,

since baseline medical spending is so low for young persons relative to older individuals. Therefore, as highlighted

by Meltzer (1997), ignoring these costs will bias CEA in favor of the elderly over the young.

         But a third related issue is that that once one takes a societal perspective, it is not only unrelated medical

costs but a broader range of social costs ­ and benefits ­ that should be included. Essentially, the societal

perspective suggests that the benefits include all of the additional productive labor that the person will provide to the

market and all the additional costs of their consumption throughout their life (Meltzer, 1997; Basu, Neumann et al,

Chapter 8). These measures can be very large for a treatment for pediatric illness that adds many years to life ­ and

very difficult to measure since any productivity gains will have to be projected years into the future (offset

somewhat by the fact that these will be discounted).

         The distinction between the health care and societal perspectives, while often emphasized, is fairly

artificial. It involves, for example, drawing difficult lines between "related" and "unrelated" health care costs, and

between costs to self and to caregiver. Moreover, the health care perspective neither is the right one for any given

party (e.g. a given insurer cares only about own costs; a given individual doesn't care about medical costs for which

they don't pay), nor for society as whole. This distinction is particularly blurry in the context of pediatric drugs.

When we value benefits to children, we necessarily consider the perspective of others, notably their family

(Neumann et al. 2017).

         That said, a societal perspective can quickly get overwhelming, and the discussion of this framework by

Neumann et al. (2017) has been criticized by those such as Paulden et al. (2017). Whether a given person lives or

dies can have ripple effects that spread broadly, from themselves, to their families, to their employers, to the




                                                             13
taxpayer, and even to their own future children. As noted by Saloman et al. (Neumann et al., 2017, Chapter 6), we

must impose some "rule of reason" lest the calculations become unmanageable.

         Perhaps the key element of any rule of reason is deciding how much of the social aspects of costs and

benefits are incorporated into the QALY estimate. Basu (Neumann et al., 2017, Chapter 8) argues that the QALY

framework does not incorporate any income effects from improved quality of living, so that it implicitly ignores

both higher productivity and higher consumption. We are not aware of similar literature on the VSL. For a forward

looking individual, the VSL should include any surplus they derive from additional years of life. Whether the VSL

also includes the welfare of others is unclear; it depends on the degree of altruism of the individual and the extent to

which they reflect their connections to others in their own work and purchase decisions.

         Regardless, the VSL will clearly not include a number of externalities of additional life, those impacts on

others that are not considered by the individual. For example, by working more, the individual may pay more taxes

or collect more transfer payments from the government. The total cost of these flows are not a social cost, since

they are just a transfer from one party to another, but there are inefficiencies (dead weight losses) associated with

raising and spending revenues, and these should be included. Likewise, if a longer life means a higher odds of

engaging in criminal activities, that has external costs on society.

         One framework for addressing this set of complicated issues is Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis (MCDA).

As emphasized by Phelps and Madhavan (2017), MCDA allows the user to place specific weights on different

aspects of social valuation in order to be explicit about which elements matter in cost effectiveness evaluation. This

approach does not "solve" the problem of multi-dimensionality and proper application of the rule of reason, but it

does provide a coherent framework for making such choices transparent. An excellent example of applying MCDA

to the evaluation of vaccines is discussed in Phelps et al. (2014).



Heterogeneity

         The discussion thus far has proceeded under the assumption of (a) equal costs and benefits across

individuals who have the same health impact and (b) homogenous impacts of treatment on costs and benefits across

individuals. In this section, we discuss both of those issues and their implications for CEA.

         The former issue is one that is discussed at length in the literature on VSL (Viscusi and Aldy 2003).

Measured VSLs vary enormously by age, by gender, by income level, and by location. Applying these values




                                                           14
would suggest that the CEA for a given intervention would vary significantly depending on to whom the treatment

was applied. Similarly, the costs to caregivers would vary significantly across individuals, based on the underlying

opportunity cost of the caregivers' time. As another example, consider the societal approach to CEA and its

treatment of productivity and consumption. As laid out by Basu (Neumann et al, 2017, Chapter 8), such an

approach would count as a benefit the productivity gains of improved health, and as a cost the extra consumption

(medical and non-medical) that is made as a result of improved health. In other words, such an approach would

implicitly favor those who save more. And it is well known that savings rates rise with income in the U.S., so this

would favor those with higher incomes.

         The latter issue is more complicated and involves gathering data on treatment effect heterogeneity. This

may be virtually impossible for very small sample diseases like pediatric rare diseases. At a minimum, treatment

effect heterogeneity should only be incorporated into calculations to the extent that it is statistically meaningful.



Uncertainty

         A proper CEA analysis must reflect the uncertainty with which benefits are delivered and costs are

incurred. Sculpher et al. (Neumann et al., 2017, Chapter 11) review the incorporation of different types of

uncertainty into CEA calculations. They make the important point that with multiple sources of uncertainty around

key parameters, the proper approach is to specify the parameter space fully and then to probabilistically draw from

this distribution of possible parameter values multiple times to understand the distribution of possible outcomes of

the analysis.

         As noted above, the new treatments for rare diseases come with a significant degree of uncertainty.

Treatments for these small populations come with expedited FDA review that can yield approval when there is a

greater than usual uncertainty about ultimate efficacy of the treatment. Moreover, given the necessarily limited

nature of the trials relative to the potential gain in lifespan for pediatric rare diseases uncertainty increases as greater

extrapolations of duration of benefit are required.



Discounting

         Discounting is another critical issue in properly valuing treatments, particularly those for children for

whom the benefits may be quite long lived. In standard economic analysis, money delivered in the future is worth




                                                            15
less than money delivered today, since if that money was made available today it could be invested and yield a

higher amount tomorrow. That is accounted for by discounting future payments to recognize their relatively lower

value. The major issue here is the proper discount rate to be applied to the calculation, as reviewed in Basu and

Ganiats (Neumann et al, 2017, Chapter 10). CEA analysis typically use a 3% discount rate, but this is a point of

some contention (Pauldsen, 2017; Neumann, et al. 2018).

         Discounting in CEA has one confusing aspect. Consider two interventions:

    ·    A: treatment cost of $100,000 that saves 1 year of life immediately

    ·    B: treatment cost of $100,000 that saves 1 year of life in ten years

         An important aspect of discounting is that the cost effectiveness of treatment B is much lower than that of

treatment A. Critically, this is NOT because we value life less in the future. But rather because if we can save a

year of life for $100,000 under treatment A, we could do that same thing in ten years. So instead of doing treatment

B, we could take the $100,000 today, invest it, and have enough money in ten years to save more than 1 year of life.

         Another important issue is the fact that the younger the child treated, the more distant into the future may

go the benefits. This highlights the critical issue of discounting. In addition, there is the issue that the benefits of

treatment are measured relative to the next best alternative. Given the infrequency of some pediatric illnesses, and

the rapid technological change in medicine, the next best alternative may not be well defined.



Insurance Value

         An important aspect of the value of new technologies that is emphasized by Lakdawalla et al, (2017) is

their insurance value. As the authors point out, when a new technology is introduced, its value does not derive

solely to those who get treated ­ but also to those who now have a higher utility from knowing that, should they

have a bad health outcome, they will be cured. Insurance value considerations are standard in economic analyses of

social insurance programs (e.g. Finkelstein and McKnight, 2008; Engelhardt and Gruber, 2011), but Lakdawalla

point out that the same logic extends to new technologies as well.

         There are two components of insurance value. The first is the physical benefit from knowing that you will

be cured if becoming ill. For example, for a parent who is pregnant, knowing that a potential rare illness in their

child can be cured is incredibly valuable. This benefit applies to all patients, insured or not.




                                                           16
         There is also a second purely financial benefit: insurance is more valuable if there are expensive treatments

that are covered by that insurance. For a parent who may have an ill child, the value of insuring that child is much

larger when that insurance will cover treatment for a child's illness. Of course, this is only true to the extent that the

new treatment is more expensive than the existing treatment; if a cure will lower total net costs of caring for a

patient, then the financial benefit is actually negative. Moreover, this financial benefit will be opposite signed for an

uninsured patient: an expensive new treatment increases financial risk for someone who doesn't have insurance.

         Lakdawalla et etl. (2017) compute examples that suggest that these insurance values are large. They argue

that the physical benefit must exceed the financial cost for an uninsured patient, but this is subject to the particular

specification of their model. What is clear is that the financial insurance aspects add incremental value to insurance

­ insuring the population against rare illness raises the value of discovering cures for that illness.



Questioning QALYs

         Some question the utilitarian perspective of just adding up QALY improvements across individuals. This

will not be appropriate, for example, if there are distributional or equity considerations. This will also not be

appropriate if individuals value large changes in health improvements to one person (e.g. an extra 10 years of life)

differently than small changes in health improvements to many persons (one extra month of life for 120 persons).

         Perhaps the most powerful broad critique of the QALY framework comes from Nobel Prize winning

economist Daniel Kahneman, who rejects the ex ante nature of impersonal utility measurement in favor of the ex

post concept of "experienced" personal utility. Kahneman refers to his own research which finds extreme

"adaptability" among disabled persons. While ex ante individuals would place a huge negative value on becoming

disabled, disabled persons over time in fact report a much smaller decline in well-being. This is because they are

able to adapt over time in a way that cannot be foreseen by the outside observer from an ex ante perspective.

Kahneman argues that only by measuring the actual experienced utility of different health states can we properly

measure them.

         This perspective is much more challenging when it comes to rare pediatric diseases. First of all, relying on

experienced utility means gathering data only from those patients with the illness, and samples are small. Second,

for genetic diseases there is no available baseline of "pre-disability" to which utility can be compared. Even if there




                                                            17
are some disability free years before illness manifests, given changes in well-being over time as children age it is

impossible to make a useful comparison.



Part III: Should we Favor Treatments for Rare Diseases?


         One important issue which has been raised in this area is whether we should offer different standards for

rare diseases, such as a higher QALY threshold for cost-effectiveness. This is discussed at length in Jena and

Lakdawalla (2017), Lakdawallala et al. (2018), Ollendorf, et al. (2018) and Garrison et al. (2019). We summarize

these arguments in this section and then provide critiques of their approaches.

         As a starting point, the standard economic framework would suggest that the same standard be applied to

all diseases. The goal of this framework is simply to determine the value of per individual treated, or per quality-

adjusted life year added. When valuing treatment, the same framework should be used regardless of incidence;

otherwise you are implicitly valuing QALY improvements due to one disease more than another. This issue

becomes increasingly important as treatments become more specialized. If we favor treatments with small markets,

this will bias us towards more approval over time ­ and will bias drug development towards specialized drugs rather

than general purpose ones.

         There are four counterarguments made for such differential standards:

Affordability

         Much discussion of the QALY framework in recent years has focused on affordability concerns. A cure for

a disease that impacts a much larger population implies a much larger budgetary cost for private and public insurers.

To consider a relevant recent example, consider Hepatitis C, a chronic illness impacting about 3.5 million

Americans. Starting in 2013, a series of treatments which could cure this illness were introduced. The initial list

price of the first of these treatments, Sovaldi, was set at $84,000. This is well below typical estimates of the value of

curing Hep C. viii But the budgetary implications were enormous ­ this implied that curing Hep C nationwide would

cost almost $300 billion, or about one-third of the total amount spent on health care in this country!

         Compare this to the potential cure for a disease that impacts only 1000 Americans currently, such as rare

pediatric diseases. Even at a cost of $1 million per treatment, this would have a much smaller budgetary impact

amounting to $1 billion.

Novelty and Market Thickness



                                                          18
           A second and related argument relates to the novelty of drugs and the "thickness" of the market for drug

development. The costs of developing a new drug are largely independent of the size of the market, but the returns

to developing that drug depend on the size of the market. As a result, we may have too little development of drugs

for thin markets; indeed, this was the very motivation for the Orphan Drug Act.

           Moreover, drug development can have spillovers ­ new lessons learned for treating other disease. Suppose

that the spillovers arrive as constant random events independent of the size of the market for which the drug is being

developed. In that case, then the fact that R&D is biased against small markets will reduce the potential positive

spillovers from drug development. Indeed, the ratio of spillovers to own benefits is likely to be larger the rarer is the

illness.

The Fair Innings Argument

           The third argument is that the linearity of QALY measurement leads to an undervaluation of treating rare

disease. As Ollendorf et al. (2018) argue, "First, some have argued that the goal of a health system, or of a society

more broadly, is not simply to maximize health gains across the entire population. In this view, fairness can be

defined as ensuring that all patients get some chance at a meaningful health gain (e.g., surviving a universally fatal

child- hood disease), even if this exceeds standards for what would be considered a cost-effective use of health

resources." This "fair innings hypothesis" can essentially be interpreted as saying that there is a non-linearity when

we combine QALYs ­ this would say that taking one child from 0 to 1 QALY is worth much more than taking ten

adults from 0.8 to 0.9 QALY. Indeed, surveys of individual preferences suggest enormous value placed on the fair

innings hypothesis (Jena and Lakdawalla, 2017).

           A related point is that while a disease may be rare on a population basis, it may be much less rare within a

family due to genetic similarities. We may place extra value on curing a disease that can have such a devastating

impact on multiple children in a family.

Insurance Value

           Jena and Lakdawalla (2017) argue that one reason for social preferences for "fair innings" may be the

insurance value argument developed by Lakdawalla et al. (2017). Under standard specifications of economic

preferences, the value of insurance rises with both the rarity and the severity of the financial shock. Therefore,

individuals may value long shot cures more than QALY-equivalent common cures because the former resolves

much more physical and financial risk




                                                           19
Evaluating the Arguments

         It is useful to distinguish the first pair of these arguments from the second pair. The first two arguments are

what economists call "second best" arguments. If the goal is to preserve an efficient allocation of society's

resources, both of these concerns should be addressed with other tools of social policy, not through changing the

standards of cost-effectiveness analysis. For the affordability concern, efficiency dictates setting the budget so that

we can treat any disease that meets cost effectiveness thresholds, rather than setting disease-specific standards. And

issues such as underinvestment in novel treatments can be addressed through public R&D policy, for example for

larger public subsidies (including government investments in basic research as well as development efforts and the

use of prizes) for treating rare diseases (Gruber and Johnson, 2019). But in fact these alternatives may be not be

politically feasible. For example, budgets are limited due to political economy constraints. And if there is no way to

ensure that public R&D policy will provide proper incentives for R&D on rare diseases, then a higher cost-

effectiveness threshold may be the only way to ensure that such drugs get developed.

         The third argument is fundamentally different in that it comes to the basic notion of the QALY framework.

Once again, the best way to address this concern would be to stick with a QALY framework but to incorporate

proper weighting across disease risks. A rational way to do this would be to rely on the fourth argument ­ to build

in insurance value into QALY calculations that incorporates "fair innings" through the higher insurance value

provided by curing rare diseases. A recent paper by Lakdawalla and Phelps (2019) offers an approach to doing so

through incorporating higher order preferences towards uncertain outcomes. However, this may not be enough to

fully reflect social preferences.

         Ultimately, the question comes down to whether the QALY framework is a fully normative perspective on

how new treatments should be valued, or whether this is simply a measurement exercise for representing stated

preferences. If the latter, then the stated social preferences for valuing rare cures more highly should be

incorporated into cost effectiveness thresholds. But if the former, then these stated preferences may reflect

behavioral biases which policy makers don't want to incorporate into creating drug valuations. One natural

resolution to this dilemma would be to assess whether proper incorporation of insurance value is enough to

approximate social preferences for fair innings.




                                                          20
Part III: Problems in Practice: ICER Review of SMA

           Computing QALYs is hard. To see how these valuation difficulties play out in practice, consider the report

by the Institute for Clinical and Economic Review (ICER) on two potential treatments for Spinal Muscular Atrophy

(SMA) (ICER, 2018). ICER is a widely respected and cited source of cost effectiveness calculations for new

pharmaceutical treatments in the U.S. In many respects its work parallels that done by government-sanctioned

organizations in other nations, such as the UK National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE), but in the

U.S. ICER is a private non-profit organization. Traditionally, ICER has used a range of $50,000 to $150,000 per

value QALY gained. A recent report for the UK Centre for Health Economics offers a discussion of the range as

well. ix

           SMA is rare genetic neuromuscular disorder that can be identified by mutations in the SMN gene. There

are roughly 500 new cases per year, or one per 10,000 live births. The most severe cases impact infants and young

children, causing muscle weakness that lead to immobility, inability to ventilate, and death. The life expectancy for

the most severe type of SMA (Type I) is less than two years.

           In December, 2018 ICER released a report on two potential treatments for SMA, Spinraza and Zolgensma

(a revised report was released in March, 2019). Spinraza is an injectable treatment every four months which

mitigates the progression of the disease, and has been approved by the FDA. Zolgensma is a new genetic treatment

being developed as a one-time intravenous administration to cure SMA, and was recently approved by the FDA.

           The ICER report is state of the art. In 190 dense pages it lays out the framework for applying a valuation

approach to these treatments. There is an objective review of all of the available clinical studies and a detailed

explanation of how available evidence is incorporated into its valuation calculations. Most importantly, the report is

candid on the wide variety of limitations inherent in their exercise. There are three in particular that present

enormous challenges in terms of value considerations for rare pediatric diseases.

           The first is the limited size of the patient population studied. Studies are few, and the population size

included in these studies is small. Moreover, only a share of studies heed to the gold standard of randomized

controlled trials (RCT), whereby patients are randomly allocated to the treatment relative to a control group of

similar patients who do not get the treatment. Many studies do not allocate the treatment randomly, or do not have a

control group, or both.




                                                            21
           For example, the ICER report cites two RCTs of Spinraza for Phase I SMA, each with about 80 patients

receiving Spinraza and 40 controls. For Zolgensma, there is just one study, with a total of 15 patients enrolled so

far, and no control group.

           The second is the limited scope of existing studies. Given their small size, these studies typically do not

gather data on the host of relevant indicators that would be incorporated in the full state-contingent evaluation of the

benefits of treatment. This significantly hamstrings the ability of ICER and others to value health states. For

example, in their valuation exercise, ICER focuses on the impacts on sitting and walking, but not on head control,

rolling, crawling and standing; ICER must also assume SMA type I patients who gain the ability to walk will have a

similar prognosis to SMA type III patients who already can walk. These studies are also inherently limited in their

ability to project long term outcomes because of the short follow up duration; as a result, ICER makes (in its base

case) the assumption that patients remain in an improved health state after treatment until death. In addition,

valuing progression during the trial window is hindered by limited access to sensitive patient level data from past

studies.

           The third is the lack of complete and updated data on valuing the health improvements that result from new

treatments. For example, a key measure of the utility value of SMA Type 1 comes from a European study with 7

patients, while the utility measure used for the sitting health state comes from clinical experts, not from patients or

caregivers or general population preference surveys. Perhaps more surprising, these limitations extend as well to

data on costs. For example, the data on costs associated with ventilator dependent children living at home comes

from a 2002 study done in the United Kingdom.

           Once again, none of these comments are meant as a particular criticism of ICER. Indeed, one strength of

the report is its wide variety of sensitivity checks to assess whether its conclusions hold across a wide range of

assumptions and uncertainties. The ICER conclusions about cost effectiveness for these treatments are generally

quite robust; for example, the report finds that Zolgensma is relatively cost effective even with assumption of $2

million up front cost. Despite the limitations faced by ICER, their recommendations have a powerful effect; the

initial price of Zolgensma was set at $2.1 million, essentially the cost-effectiveness threshold set by ICER.

           These issues are not unique to SMA. Other ICER reports on genetic treatments for rare diseases face

similar issues. As another example, consider the ICER report on CAR-T treatments for B-Cell Cancers. This is

another excellent study which includes a comprehensive review and application of the available studies. But the




                                                            22
studies that they have to rely on are all single arm studies without randomized controls, and the studies do not last

long enough to assess remission patterns.



Part IV: Forward Looking Data Collection and Methods Development

         We are at the edge of giant wave of genetic treatments for rare, and not-so-rare, diseases. Health

economists and organizations like ICER are positioned to evaluate the value of these new treatments. In order to

increase these evaluations' effectiveness, it would be valuable to move forward now on a comprehensive data

collection effort that prepares us for the coming wave.

         Many of the difficult issues raised above suggest the importance of having a large volume of data to

address valuation issues. The fact that there is such variation in the medical treatment of rare pediatric diseases, for

example, shows the importance of having a large sample. The issue of transitioning from parental valuation to child

valuation requires sufficient data at various ages to consider both perspectives.

         Three important initiatives could help here. The first is to be more forward looking in our collection on the

consequences for well-being of disease and its treatment. If we were planning ahead for aggressive cures to SMA,

more data could have been collected on the quality of life implications of different disease states ­ and we wouldn't

have to rely on decades old cost data on ventilation treatment.

         In particular, institutions could be built and supported in the near term that will focus on collecting the data

that is needed, supported in no small part by the manufacturers that are developing new therapies and sponsoring the

clinical studies. This starts with a horizon-scanning exercise on a disease-by-disease basis to understand what is

known and what is not about the elements of the valuation expression. This could be followed by data collection

initiatives to fill those missing pieces.

         Each disease can come with a unique profile of disabilities that can interact in ways unique to that illness.

Therefore, existing data on valuing disabled life years may be not be sufficiently comprehensive to measure the

combinations that are needed in the case of particular rare diseases. On the other hand, given the rarity of these

illnesses, there is a tradeoff between collecting data from the small number of families that have experienced this

disease versus a larger sample who can hypothetically weigh in on the value of health improvement from new

treatments.




                                                           23
            Some of this would require new survey and data collection from patients. Population databases are not

likely to be very helpful when dealing with specific rare illnesses. Setting a goal of collecting a minimum sample

size of data (e.g. 200 patients) for each illness would avoid having much weaker data to use for evaluating treatment

of rare illnesses. These samples can be readily identified by taking advantage of registers created by patient

advocacy groups. Of course, for truly rare diseases, even sensible minimum sample sizes may exceed the target

population worldwide. In those cases, we would have to work with smaller samples. Some would involve taking

better advantage of data that already exists in the health care ecosystem ­ such as claims data on patient treatments ­

and that is now being more widely used by researchers.

            Such an effort would be expensive ­ but small relative to the scope of the issue as it will emerge in the

coming decades. Suppose that twenty years from now we will be able to treat 100 new diseases that impact on

average 1000 people per year at an average cost of $500,000 per person. That is spending of $50 billion per year. At

that price, getting valuation right will be worth a lot of money: collecting data that allows us to improve valuation by

10% would be worth $5 billion per year! Indeed, Sculpher et al. (Neumann et al., 2017, Chapter 11) provides a

framework for quantifying the expected value of additional information than can then be compared to the cost of

research.

            Given the dollars at stake, it is critical that broader data be collected. But there might be concerns with such

data collecting being funded by interested parties. Objective collection and analysis requires a funding stream that is

independent of the companies funding specific drug trials.

            One option is to follow a formulation already used by the FDA to finance its work: a user fee on drug

companies. The resources involved in providing richer data collection and analysis are fairly small relative to the

size of the U.S. pharma market, so a very large user fee would not be required. But this would be controversial

since if the government were collecting the funds, it would need to be in charge of their dissemination, and this

would start to cross the politically fraught boundary into rationing discussions.

            What may be required instead is some financing mechanism that is outside of the government purview.

Whatever the solution here, it is critical that it move forward as the wave of new treatments for rare diseases arrives.

            Second, it is also critical to invest in the science of drug evaluation. For example, as the ICER reports

emphasize, the randomized controlled trial is the gold standard for evaluating efficacy. But this is a taxing standard




                                                             24
for rare treatments - these RCTs are expensive to run, can be difficult to recruit for, have small samples, and are

often ended quite quickly for ethical reasons.

         We can potentially improve on this model through considering more adaptive evaluation of treatments.

The NEWDIGS initiative at MIT among others are working on ways of incorporating data from not just trials but

claims data and electronic health records to evaluate the efficacy of treatments after approval and launch. x In the

case of SMA, ICER compared the results from a randomized trial to the results from patients newly treated under

expanded access programs (EAP) (ICER, 2018).. They found fairly similar results in this context, allowing them to

pool the findings for much more power in the analysis.

         As we move towards more analysis of treatments for rare diseases, we should be conscious of the tradeoff

between gold standard data that is quite limited and "silver standard" data that may be much more expansive. We

can do considerable work now to understand this tradeoff and assess the optimal combinations of data to provide

evidence on treatment efficacy.

         Finally, there is the issue of information from the drug trials themselves. The ICER SMA report

highlighted the limitations that they faced on getting patient progression data from the trials due to patient

confidentiality concerns. At the same time, other data was received from manufacturers in confidence, but under

ICER's Data-in-Confidence policy has to be released at the earlier of (a) publication or public presentation; or (b) 18

months following the posting of the report. There is once again a tradeoff between making data public and getting

analysts the data that they need to make the best possible evaluation of treatment effects. More work is needed in

evaluating this tradeoff.




                                                           25
References


Arrow, Kenneth (1963). "Uncertainty and the Welfare Economics of Medical Care," American Economic Review,

53 (941-973).



Chambers, James, David Kim, Elle Pope, Jennifer Graff, Colby Wilkinson and Peter Neumann (2018). "Specialty

Drug Coverage Varies Across Commercial Health Plans in the U.S.," Health Affairs, 37, 1041-1047.



Cooper, Zack, Stuart Graig, Martin Gaynor, and John Van Reenen (2018). "The Price Ain't Right? Hospital Prices

and Health Spending on the Privately Insured," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134, 51-107.



Garrison, Louis, Tristen Jackson, Douglas Paul, and Mike Kenton (2019). "Value-Based Pricing for Emerging Gene

Therapies: The Economic Case for a Higher Cost-Effectiveness Threshold," Journal of Managed Care and Specialty

Pharmacy, published online February 19 , 2019.



Gruber, Jonathan (2016). Public Finance and Public Policy, 5th Edition. New York: Worth Publishers.



Gruber, Jonathan and Simon Johnson (2019). Jump-Starting America: How Breakthrough Science Can Revive

Economic Growth and the American Dream. New York: Public Affairs.



Institute for Clinical and Economic Review (2018). Spinraza and Zolgensma for Spinal Muscular Atrophy:

Effectiveness and Value, December 20, 2018 (updated March, 2019).



Jena, Anupam and Darius Lakdawalla (2017). "Value Frameworks for Rare Diseases: Should They Be Different?,"

Health Affairs Blog, April 12, 2017.



Kahneman, Daniel (2011). Thinking Fast and Slow. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux




                                                       26
Lakdawalla, Darius, Anup Malani and Julian Reif (2017). "The Insurance Value of Medical Innovation," Journal of

Public Economics, 145, 94-102.



Lakdawalla, Darius, Jalpa Doshi, Louis Garrison, Charles Phelps, Aniran Basu, and Patricia Danszon (2018).

"Defining Elements of Value in Health Care ­ A Health Economics Approach: An ISPOR Special Task Force

Report," Value in Health, 21, 131-139.



Meltzer, David (1997). "Accounting for Future Costs in Medical Cost-Effectiveness Analysis," Journal of Health

Economics, 16, 33-64.



Neumann, Peter, Gillian Sanders, Louise Russell, Joanna Siegel, and Theodore Galniats (2017). Cost-Effectiveness

in Health and Medicine, Second Edition. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.



Nord, Erik, Normal Daniels and Mark Kamlet (2009). "QALYs: Some Challenges," Value in Health, 12, S10-S15.



O'Donoghue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin (1999). "Doing it Now or Later," American Economic Review, 89, 103-124.



Ollendorf, Daniel, Richard Champan and Steven Pearson (2018). "Evaluating and Valuing Drugs for Rare

Conditions: No Easy Answers," Value in Health, 21, 547-552.



Paulden M, O'Mahony JF, McCabe C. (2017). "Discounting the Recommendations of the Second Panel on Cost-

Effectiveness in Health and Medicine," Pharmacoeconomics, 35(1):5-13.



Phelps, Charles and Guruprasad Madhavan (2017). "Using Multicriteria Approaches to Assess the Value of Health

Care," Value in Health, 20, 251-255.




                                                       27
Phelps, Charles, Gururprasad Madhavan, Kinpritma Sangha, Rino Rappuouli, Rita Colwell, Rose Marie Martinez,

Patrick Kelley and Lonnie King (2014). "A Priority-Setting Aid for New Vaccine Candidates," PNAS, 111(9),

3199-3200.




Quinn, Casey, Colin Young, Jonathan Thomas, Mark Trusheim, MIT NEWDIGS FoCUS Writing Group (2019).

"Estimating the Clinical Pipeline of Cell and Gene Therapies and Their Potential Impact of the U.S. Healthcare

System," Value Health, 22, 621-626.

Rabin, Matthew (2000). "Risk Aversion and Expected-Utility Theory: A Calibration Theorem," Econometrica, 68,

1281-1292.



Rappange, David, Pieter HM van Baal, N. Job A van Exel, Talitha L. Feenstra, Frans F.H. Rutten and Werner B. F.

Brouwer (2008). "Unrelated Medical Costs in Life-Years Gained: Should They be Included in Economic

Evaluations of Healthcare Interventions?," Pharmcoeconomics, 26, 815-830



Viscusi, W. Kip and Joseph Aldy (2003). "The Value of a Statistical Life: A Critical Review of Market Estimates

from Around the World," Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 27(1), 5-76.




i
    Quinn et al. (2019).
ii
 This section summarizes the excellent discussion of early-stage research in James P. Hughes, Stephen
Rees, S. Barrett Kalindjian, and Karen L. Philpott, "Principles of Early Drug Discovery," British Journal
of Pharmacology 162, no. 6 (2011), https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21091654.
iii
  "Manufacturing Challenges for Cell and Gene Therapies," Cell and Gene Therapy Catapult, February
21, 2017, https://ct.catapult.org.uk/news-media/general-news/manufacturing-challenges-cell-and-gene-
therapies.
iv
  Ralf Otto, Alberto Santagostino, and Ulf Schrader, "Rapid Growth in Biopharma: Challenges and
Opportunities," McKinsey & Company, December 2014,
https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/pharmaceuticals-and-medical-products/our-insights/rapid-growth-
in-biopharma.




                                                        28
This study reports manufacturing set up costs of $200-$500 million. These costs have been falling
recently, with Amgen's new state-of-the-art facility in Rhode Island expected to cost about $200 million:
(https://www.amgen.com/media/news-releases/2018/07/amgen-breaks-ground-on-next-generation-
biomanufacturing-plant-in-rhode-island/)
v
 Peter Olagunju, Rodney Rietze, and Dieter Hauwaerts, "Meeting the Cell Therapy Cost Challenge with
Automation," Invetech, February 21, 2017, https://www.invetechgroup.com/insights/2017/02/meeting-
the-cell-therapy-cost-challenge-with-automation/. PROVENGE (sipuleucel-T) is a prescription medicine
that is used to treat certain patients with advanced prostate cancer.
vi
  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2016. "Guidelines for Regulatory Impact Analysis."
https://aspe.hhs.gov/system/files/pdf/242926/HHS_RIAGuidance.pdf. ASPE does not recommend adjusting the
VSL for the age of the individual.
vii
       https://www.thebalance.com/income-per-capita-calculation-and-u-s-statistics-3305852
viii
      ICER report available at https://icer-review.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/CTAF_Hep_C_Apr14_final.pdf
ix
     https://www.york.ac.uk/che/research/teehta/thresholds/
x
     https://newdigs.mit.edu/programs-projects/adaptive-biomedical-innovation




                                                           29
