                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     MILTON FRIEDMAN AND EXCHANGE RATES IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

                                       Sebastian Edwards

                                      Working Paper 27975
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27975


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2020




I have benefited from conversations with Al Harberger and Rolf Luders, both of whom attended
Milton Friedman's meeting with General Augusto Pinochet in 1975, in Santiago, Chile.
Comments by Maury Obstfed, Doug Irwin, Michael Bordo, Ed Nelson, Leon Montes, Fernando
Losada, Bruce Caldwell, and George Tavlas have been extremely useful. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Sebastian Edwards. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Milton Friedman and Exchange Rates in Developing Countries
Sebastian Edwards
NBER Working Paper No. 27975
October 2020
JEL No. B17,B2,B22,B27,B3,F31,F32

                                         ABSTRACT

Milton Friedman's famous 1953 essay, "The case for flexible exchange rates," deals entirely with
advanced nations. An interesting question is what Friedman thought about exchange rate and
monetary regimes in emerging economies. In this paper I investigate how his views on the subject
evolved through time. I analyze speeches, articles, and interviews. I examine his archives for
correspondence and unpublished manuscripts. I show that for him flexible rates were a second
best solution for middle income and poor nations. I also analyze Friedman's role in Chile's failed
attempt, during the Pinochet regime, at using a fixed exchange rate to stabilize the economy and
eliminate inflation.


Sebastian Edwards
UCLA Anderson Graduate School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C508
Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
sebastian.edwards@anderson.ucla.edu
                                                         1


    1. Introduction

Milton Friedman never did research on economic development. However, he traveled to a
number of poor and middle income nations, where he gave lectures and met with academics,
government officials, reporters, students, and representatives of the private sector. During these
visits he discussed a wide range of issues that went from protectionism to price controls, from
agricultural policy to investment incentives, from fiscal imbalances to taxation. But the common
subject that dominated his lectures and one-on-one meetings was inflation, and how to keep it
under control. Friedman talked extensively about monetary regimes, the connection between
money and prices, the stability of the velocity of circulation, the long and variable lags of
monetary policy, the unfairness and inefficiency of the inflation tax, and the most appropriate
currency system for developing countries.

Exchange rates was a topic close to Milton Friedman's heart. Since the late 1940s he advocated a
market-determined currency regime, where the exchange rate responded to supply and demand
forces. 1 However, his famous "The case for flexible exchange rates," first published in 1953,
deals entirely with advanced nations, such as the U.S., the U.K., and other European countries. 2
This early analysis ignores the developing countries, except for a brief reference to the sterling
area. With time, however, Friedman developed views regarding exchange rate and monetary
regimes for middle income and poor countries. He presented them in a piecemeal fashion, in
short notes, speeches, and presentations and lectures in places such as Jerusalem, Cape Town,
New Delhi, Mumbai, Belgrade, and Santiago.

In a 1973 testimony in front of the Joint Economic Commission in Congress, Friedman said: 3

                  "[W]hile I have long been in favor of a system of floating exchange rates for the
                  major countries, I have never argued that that is necessarily also the best system
                  for the developing countries."




1
  On Friedman's views on monetary policy in the United States and other advance countries, see Nelson's (2020)
two volumes book. See, also, Nelson (2018). On Friedman and Chicago, see Irwin (2019) and the literature cited
therein. On the exchange rate debate in the 1940s see Irwin (2019). On Friedman and exchange rates, see Dellas
and Tavlas (2009, 2016, 2018) and Nelson (2020b). On monetary theory in Chicago, and on the connection
between Henry Simons and Milton Friedman's views on monetary rules, see Tavlas (2015).
2
  The memo version was never released to the public. Its introduction is very different from that of the published
version. In it Friedman refers to Keynes Monetary Tract and argues that policy makers face a trilemma: it is not
possible to simultaneously have fixed exchange rates, stable internal prices and unrestricted multilateral trade. See
Milton Friedman Archives, Hoover Institution, MFAHI, Folder 43-13.
3
  Friedman (1973c).
                                                        2


What were, then, his views on the subject? Did they evolve as a result of his travels to emerging
countries? Did he think that, in spite of poor institutions and shallow markets, some developing
nations would benefit from floating rates? And if not, what regime did he favor?

In this paper I investigate the evolution of Friedman's views on exchange rates and monetary
regimes in poor and middle income nations. In particular, I analyze under what conditions he
thought that flexible rates were the right system for developing countries, and when, as is
intimated in the above quote, he thought that it was appropriate to have alternative regimes.

Understanding Friedman's policy position on exchange rates in developing countries is of
interest for at least two reasons:

    ·   First, it provides additional light on the evolution of Friedman's thinking on monetary
        policy in open economies. Although thousands of pages have been written about
        Friedman's views on monetary policy and currencies, as far as I know there has been no
        work dealing in detail with his perspective on the developing economies. This is
        important, because many authors believed, for a long time, that countries that lacked
        well-functioning capital markets could not benefit from exchange rate flexibility; they
        would be subject to wild speculative moves in the currency value. This was, for instance,
        Harry G. Johnson's perspective. In spite of being a strong supporter of flexible rates in
        advanced nations, Johnson argued that these were not appropriate for "banana
        republics." 4 Until the late 1990s this was also the perspective of the International
        Monetary Fund. (International Monetary Fund, 1998).

    ·   Second, an analysis of Friedman's views on exchange rates in developing countries will
        help elucidate his role in the design and implementation of economic policies in Chile
        during General Augusto Pinochet's military regime. For years Friedman has been
        considered the mastermind behind Pinochet's market-oriented reforms. While some
        analysts argued that Friedman was directly involved with the Pinochet government,
        others pointed out that his influence was indirect, through the so-called "Chicago boys," a
        group of Chilean economists trained in Chicago. 5 Although he visited Chile twice, and
        met with Pinochet for about one hour, Friedman strenuously denied having had direct
        influence on Chilean politics or economic policy. He devoted a whole chapter of his
        memoirs (joint with his wife Rose) to argue that his knowledge of Chile was superficial,
        and that he had no information about human rights violations. 6 This, however, did not

4
  Johnson (1969). See Obstfeld (2020) for a modern evaluation of Johnson's views.
5
  See the discussion in Edwards and Montes (2020). See, also, Arancibia and Balart (2007) and De Castro (1992).
6
  See Friedman and Friedman (1998, chapter 24). In the rest of the paper I will refer to the memoirs as F&F.
                                                 3


       appease his critics. In September 2016, Naomi Klein wrote that "Friedman, the famed US
       economist... shared responsibility for Pinochet's crimes." An important question
       regarding Friedman and Chile is what he thought and said, either privately or publicly,
       about the fixed exchange rate strategy adopted by the Pinochet government in 1979. The
       fact that this experiment ended up, in June 1982, in a severe currency and banking crisis
       that resulted in unemployment in excess of 25%, adds significant interest to this issue.

The rest of the paper is divided into three main section: In Section II I investigate the evolution
of Friedman's views on exchange rates in poorer nations, and I analyze how these views were
connected to his perspective on monetary policy, both in the long run and during the cycle. A
key question, as noted, is under what conditions he extended his well-known position in favor of
flexible rates to the case of emerging countries. In this Section I proceed in a chronological
order. The analysis covers the period 1948 through 1974, just before he traveled to Chile for the
first time. The Section opens with a review of his early opinions regarding monetary policy and
currency regimes in the advanced nations. I then discuss his views on India and on foreign
currency auctions. I subsequently move to his thoughts on currency board arrangements á la
Hong Kong, and his observations on the crawling peg regime in vogue in many Latin American
countries during the 1960s and 1970s. I also deal with views expressed in Israel, Yugoslavia and
South Africa, as well as opinions on the currency regimes then in place in Korea and Brazil.

In Section III I concentrate on Friedman's two visits to Chile. I analyze his lectures while in the
country, I scrutinize his advice, and I discuss the eruption of Chile's currency and banking crisis
in 1982. In order to do this, I analyze the press reaction ­ both in Chile and internationally -- to
his trips and his meeting with Pinochet. I also analyze his correspondence on Chile, starting in
1975. The central question in this Section is whether Friedman was, at any point, critical of
Chile's ill-fated experiment with fixed-but-adjustable rates during 1979-1982. The issue is
whether he warned of the dangers of pegged rates ­ something he had done in a number of other
developing countries, including India, Israel, South Africa, and Yugoslavia --, or whether, for
political or other reasons, he pulled restrained himself from criticizing the Chicago boys and
Pinochet policies. In this Section I also analyze Friedman's writings on Chile (both public and in
private correspondence) after the 1982 crisis. I focus on his explanations on what went wrong,
including the role played by Chile's central bank.

In Section IV I analyze Friedman's influence on the type of monetary and currency regimes
currently in place around the globe. I point out that while he had great influence in the advanced
world, he was much less persuasive in the emerging world. According to the International
                                                 4


Monetary Fund, in 2018 the majority of the emerging nations still had a "conventional peg
regime" (IMF 2019). In Section V I provide some concluding remarks.

   2. Friedman on exchange rates in developing countries: 1948-1974

The Milton Friedman Archive at the Hoover Institution (MFAHI) contains 46 works on "flexible
exchange rates." Most of these refer to the United States and other advanced nations. A few of
them, however, focus on poor or middle income countries such as India, Israel, Yugoslavia,
Brazil, and Chile. The archive also has works that touch on currency issues, but have been filed
using a different tag. As will be seen, Friedman also dealt with exchange rate issues in emerging
countries in correspondence with other scholars, with members of the media, and with the public.

   2.1 Early writings on monetary policy and exchange rates in the advanced economies

Milton Friedman first addressed the exchange rate issue in a major writing in his 1948 American
Economic Review article "A monetary and fiscal framework for economic stability." In this
extensive piece he points out that under his proposal for monetary stability, where the central
bank follows a simple rule, it is not possible to use monetary policy to attain external balance. He
writes (1948a, p. 252; emphasis added):

               "Under the [monetary] proposal, the aggregate quantity of money is automatically
               determined by the requirements of domestic stability. It follows that changes in
               the quantity of money cannot be used ­ as they are in the fully operative gold
               standard ­ to achieve equilibrium in international trade... The international
               arrangement that seems the logical counterpart of the proposed [monetary]
               framework is flexible exchange rates, freely determined in the foreign exchange
               markets, preferably entirely by private dealings."

In a footnote (11b), Friedman develops his views further, and points out that it is possible to
present his argument in a completely different way; it is possible to start with the exchange rate
regime:

               "[F]lexible exchange rates can be defended directly. Indeed, it would be equally
               appropriate to present the proposed domestic [monetary and fiscal] framework as
               a means of implementing flexible exchange rates."

The fact that this footnote is numbered 11b, and not 12, raises an interesting question: Did
Friedman add it at a later stage? Maybe, when he revised the proofs of the article? Was the note
                                                        5


included as a result of someone's comments on the paper? At this point, any answer to this
question is pure speculation.

In April 1948, a few months before "A monetary and fiscal framework" came out in print,
Friedman participated in a policy debate on Canada's inflation and balance of payments
problems. During the discussion, which was transmitted by NBC radio and was part of a series
called the University of Chicago Roundtable, Friedman argued that Canada would benefit from
adopting a market-determined exchange rate regime. Friedman, of course, understood that there
were legal and institutional constraints, mostly related to Canada's membership to the
International Monetary Fund, an institution that required member countries to maintain a pegged
exchange rate relative to the USD. He said (he was addressing Donald Gordon, the deputy
governor of the Bank of Canada): 7

                 "Currently your official price is one American dollar for one Canadian dollar.
                 Would it not be desirable to make the Canadian dollar a little less expensive to the
                 American and the American dollar more expensive to the Canadian? If your
                 International Monetary Fund obligations prevent you from letting it go completely
                 free, as I think would really be desirable..."

In his memoirs, Friedman points out that, until that time, Bank of Canada officials had never
thought of adopting floating exchange rates, as they eventually did ­ partially prompted by
Friedman's suggestions -- in September 1950. (F&F, 1998, p. 189). In the same memoirs,
Friedman recalls that in 1950, when he was in Paris working on the merits of the Schuman Plan
(the precursor of the European Common Market), he traveled to Frankfurt, where he presented a
memorandum to the German authorities, suggesting that as part of the reconstruction effort they
would benefit from adopting flexible exchange rates. The memorandum was dated December
1950, and in it Friedman wrote, that the numerous interventions being considered and
implemented by the German authorities to deal with imbalances "would be rendered utterly
unnecessary if the simple step were taken of letting the exchange rate go free..." (MFAHI,
Manuscript # 2016c21.1209). 8




7
   "Canada and the Problems of World Trade." A Radio Discussion by Milton Friedman, Donald Gordon, and W.A.
Mackintosh. University of Chicago Round Table, Number 526, 18 April 1948, pp. 1­11. Emphasis added. For a
recent and in depth evaluation of the early Canadian experience with flexible rates, see Bordo et al (2007).
8
  In the 1950s, and after Canada had moved to floating, the United Kingdom considered, twice, adopting a flexible
exchange rate. The arguments used by supporters of flexibility mirrored closely those made by Friedman in his
1950 memorandum. The first time was the ROBOT plan of 1951-52, and the second one was in 1952, during the
negotiations for the Collective Approach. See Schenk (1991) for details.
                                                          6


In 1950 Friedman expanded his arguments in favor of market-determined exchange rates in his
essay "The case for flexible exchange rates." This paper was written in 1950 as a Memorandum
for the U.S. Economic Cooperation Administration, and subsequently published, in 1953, in
Essays in Positive Economics. A key point made in this piece is that the equilibrium real
exchange rate (RER) changes in response to supply and demand forces, or what later came to be
known as "fundamentals." 9 Under rigid exchange rates the adjustment process to new equilibria
is costly, and often involves an increase in unemployment. Friedman illustrated the limitations of
fixed exchange rates by discussing the effects of trade liberalization ­ a policy sought by many
countries in the immediate post World War II period ­ on the equilibrium RER. He pointed out
that lowering import tariffs and eliminating import licenses and quotas would result in an
equilibrium real exchange rate depreciation. Under fixed (nominal) exchange rates, this
adjustment would require domestic prices to decline relative to international prices. Domestic
disinflation, however, is costly and takes a significant period of time; flexible nominal exchange
rates, in contrast, would allow adjustment to take place much faster and efficiently. Friedman
(1953, p. 157) writes that "there is scarcely a facet of international economic policy for which...
a system of rigid exchange rates does not create serious and unnecessary difficulties..."

Friedman went on to argue that the Bretton Woods system, which was barely five years old,
often resulted in currency crises, characterized by large and abrupt devaluations. These crises
would be avoided under flexible exchange rates. In a market-based exchange rate system,
Friedman asserted, changes in currency values are gradual and distributed through time. The
following passage, which references Great Britain's experience, is telling (1953, p. 163):

                  "The recurrent foreign-exchange crises of the United Kingdom in the postwar
                  period are... [a] dramatic example of the kind of crises that would not develop
                  under a system of flexible exchange rates. In each case no significant corrective
                  action was taken until large disequilibriums had been allowed to accumulate, and
                  then action had to be drastic. The rigidities and discontinuities introduced by
                  substituting administrative action for automatic market forces have seldom been
                  demonstrated so clearly or so impressively."

One could replace "United Kingdom" for "Argentina," "Turkey," or "Lebanon," and the quote
would make complete sense in the early decades of the 21st century.



9
 Although Friedman does not use the term "real exchange rate," it is clear that he is referring to that concept. As
we will see, he clearly focuses on the nominal exchange rate, adjusted by inflation rate differentials. The term real
exchange rate became popular in the 1970s.
                                                            7


According to Friedman, changes in nominal exchange rate could, in principle and theoretically,
be mimicked by changes in domestic prices, under a fixed exchange rate regime (1953, p. 164-
165):

                  "[A] decline of 10 percent in every internal price in Germany... with an
                  unchanged dollar price of the mark would clearly have identically the same
                  effects... as a decline of 10 percent in the dollar price of the mark, with all
                  internal prices unchanged."

What is interesting about the above quote is that, for many years, the costs of adjustment through
disinflation -- a mechanism sometimes referred to as an "internal devaluation" ­ has been at the
center of policy debates in developing nations with fixed exchange rates and overvalued
currencies. Examples of these discussions include Chile, during the first half of the 1980s, and
Argentina in the early 2000s; these two cases are discussed in Sections 3 and 4 of this paper. In
the 2010's, debates about Greece's major macroeconomic imbalances were also centered around
this issue. As Friedman anticipated it in 1950, policy makers found out that it was significantly
more difficult -- and politically more costly -- to adjust internal prices downward than to allow
the nominal exchange rate to respond to market forces.

The closest Friedman got to addressing the case of the developing countries in the 1950 essay
was in Section III.D, titled "The sterling area," where he deals with currency unions and trade.
Although at the time the area included a number of poor countries in Africa and Asia,
Friedman's analysis is very Great Britain-oriented. For instance, there is no mention that the
poorer members of the area are commodity exporters and that their terms of trade tend to be
volatile. 10 The main point made in this section is that, in general and from a conceptual
perspective, Friedman has no problems with a "mixed system of fixed exchange rates within the
sterling area and freely flexible rates within sterling and other countries." He then adds the very
important proviso that there should not be any trade restrictions within the sterling area. In a
footnote Friedman notes that in an ideal monetary union, both monetary and fiscal policies
would be subject to a single political authority. In this regard, he was anticipating the discussion
in the Euro Zone following the Greek crisis of 2010.

To summarize, Friedman's early writings on exchange rates focused exclusively on the advanced
countries and provided strong arguments in defense of flexible rates; they also covered many of
the points that would become central in policy discussions in the decades that followed. In his

10
  As the discussion in the rest of this paper will show, Friedman rarely emphasized the role of terms of trade
volatility. This is particularly important after, in the early 1970s, he favored a "unified currency," or a super hard
peg.
                                                           8


early work ­ from the late 1940s and early 1950s -- he expressed no opinion regarding the
developing countries. It was unclear whether he thought that middle income and poor nations,
with primitive institutions and underdeveloped markets, could benefit from exchange rate
flexibility. However, in the years to come, and as will be seen in the rest of this Section,
Friedman developed a strong set of principles on exchange rate and monetary regimes in
developing nations.

       2.2 India: The 1955 memorandum and the 1963 visit

In 1955, Milton Friedman and Neil Jacoby, a professor at UCLA, traveled to India to advise the
Nehru government on economic issues. The trip was arranged by the Eisenhower
Administration, and was part of the U.S. program for technical assistance to poor nations. At the
time, the Indian government was preparing its Second Five-Year Plan, under the leadership of
Professor P.C. Mahalabonis. Since Friedman was highly critical of the "socialist orientation"
taken by India, the trip represented a major intellectual challenge. 11

At the time, one of the most hotly debated issues surrounding India's new development program
was how to allocate foreign exchange to the private sector. The prevailing view among Indian
economists -- and economists in most developing countries, for that matter -- was that scarce
foreign exchange had to be rationed by the government, and allocated to those strategic
industries that contributed to the process of import substitution and industrialization. In early
November 1955, Friedman presented to finance minister C.D. Deshmukh an 11-page Memo
titled "Some Initial Comments on Current Problems of Economic Development in India."
Section 6 of the document dealt with the "foreign exchange problem," and consisted of three
parts: (a) The foreign exchange gap; (b) Exchange controls; and (c) Alternatives to exchange
controls.

The Memo, which was never released officially, and only saw the light of day in 1989, was
extremely critical of India's system of exchange controls. Friedman made a number of simple
and, for that time, highly controversial points. A summary of the main arguments is as follows
(emphases added): 12

                ·   There are only two ways to deal with India's large and persistent external
                    imbalances: "[F]irst, to inflate or deflate internally in response to a putative
                    surplus or deficit in the balance of payments; second, to permit the exchange rate


11
     For details on this trip, see chapter 18 of the Friedmans' 1998 memoir (F&F).
12
     Friedman (1992). In all the quotes that follow the emphases are added.
                                                  9


               to fluctuate,... [a method] that has been adopted by Canada with such
               conspicuous success."
           ·   An alternative to straightforward floating, and one that India could prefer, was to
               "auction off whatever amount of foreign exchange it is decided to be released,
               permitting the purchasers to use it for anything they wish and in any currency area
               they wish."
           ·   The auction system has the advantage of generating some additional government
               revenue. On the negative side, foreign exchange auctions would only eliminate
               "distortion in the pattern of imports... [but would] not produce the appropriate
               adjustment of exports to imports."
           ·   In India, at the time, there were legal and institutional barriers for the
               implementation of a flexible rates system, including India's membership in the
               Sterling Area. However, "an independent move by India might have very great
               advantages precisely because India is entering into a period of rapid economic
               change and is not a major financial center."
           ·   Under a floating system, the rupee could move towards convertibility. "In a world
               of inconvertible currencies, a country that offers convertibility, albeit at a
               fluctuating rate, has a special attraction for investors and traders."
           ·   The administrative allocation of scarce foreign exchange licenses is a hotbed for
               corruption. The most efficient regime is one where foreign exchange goes to those
               who value it the most, and not to those that, for one reason or another, got it in the
               past.

Although the authorities never released the Memorandum to the public, The Statement published
a summary of Friedman's recommendations based on a leaked copy of the report. Given this
leak, in early 1957 Friedman published a brief paper in Encounter, where he summarized his
views on India, and criticized the Second Five-Year Plan, including its exchange controls
system. The authorities had good reasons to keep Friedman's report out of the public's eyes: they
had no intentions of following his advice. Indeed, the Second Five-Year Plan continued to rely
on exchange and imports' controls, and a pegged exchange rate. In 1955, the official exchange
rate was 4.77 rupees per dollar, a price that remained in place until 1966, several years after
Friedman's second visit. After the 1966 devaluation, the official value of the dollar became 7.55
rupees per USD.
                                                       10


Milton Friedman returned to India in 1963. 13 He delivered a number of public talks that dealt
with government deficits, inflation, growth, exchange controls, and the balance of payments. The
most important event was a two-parts lecture delivered in Mumbai (Bombay). This time there
was no secrecy, and the lectures were promptly published by the Council for Economic
Education. A few years later Friedman included them as chapter one of his 1968 volume
"Dollars and Deficits" (D&D).

The second of the Mumbai lectures dealt, almost exclusively, with the balance of payments,
exchange controls, and the exchange rate system. Friedman made a number of points that he
would repeat again and again, and in country after country, during the years to come. First, he
strongly criticized the Bretton Woods system of "pegged but adjustable" exchange rates. In
particular, he pointed out that in an inflationary context it was impossible for a fixed exchange
rate to be continuously near its long term equilibrium value. However, that could be achieved
under a flexible exchange rates regime. (D&D, p. 57):

                 "What is the solution [to India's balance of payments crisis]?... The appropriate
                 solution is to stop pegging the price of foreign exchange. Let anybody buy and
                 sell foreign exchange at any price mutually agreeable to buyer and seller. Remove
                 import controls, remove subsidies on export and let there be a free market in
                 foreign exchange. In this way, people who can put scarce foreign exchange to the
                 most efficient use would have the incentive to bid the highest price..."

He asserted that India could not solve its external imbalance by devaluing the rupee, and then re-
pegging it at a lower level. With India's ongoing rate of inflation, this was likely to generate,
sooner rather than later, a new situation of (real) exchange rate overvaluation and a new
devaluation crisis. (D&D, p. 58-59. Emphasis added):

                 "The temptation will be to change its [the rupee's] value from its present level...
                 And then try to hold it at the new fixed level. That would be another mistake.
                 Even if the new exchange rates are correct when established, once you pegged
                 them, there is no assurance that they will indefinitely remain correct. When they
                 become incorrect, India will again be driven to all the expedients that it has
                 adopted these past few years. A far better solution, as already noted, would be to


13
  This was part of a yearlong tournée around the world, that included a gruesome schedule of lectures,
presentations and meetings. During the trip, Friedman spent time in five countries whose economic systems he
wanted to analyze in some detail: Israel, Yugoslavia, Greece, India and Japan. In the first four he encountered
similar problems related to external imbalances and the exchange rate regime. See Chapter 20 of F&F for details
about this trip.
                                                11


               allow exchange rates to go free and find their own levels whatever they may be. If
               India then follows an appropriate monetary policy and maintains relative stable
               prices within India, the rupee will also maintain a relatively stable price on the
               foreign exchange market."

In this talk, Friedman discussed, again, the possibility of implementing an auctions system. Since
his 1955 Memo had been withheld by the authorities, for most of the Mumbai audience this was
a new and audacious proposal. He wrote (D&D, p. 58):

               "An alternative solution, which is not as good, would be to auction off import
               licenses, or, better yet, the foreign exchange that is available for sale. By
               auctioning off import licenses or foreign exchange, you would at least let market
               forces determine what items are imported. The difficulty with this solution is that
               it does not provide the appropriate incentive for exports."

In 1963, Friedman also published a short paper on exchange rates in India's pro-markets
magazine Swarajva, titled "Exchange rate policy." (Friedman 1963b). In it he delved in greater
detail into India's currency overvaluation. He wrote that "the Achilles heel of the Indian
economy at the moment is the artificial and unrealistic exchange rate. The official exchange rate
is the same today as it was in 1955. In the interim, prices within India have risen some 30 to 40
per cent; whereas prices in the US, UK, Germany have risen far less, at most by 10 per cent." He
then forecasted the future, quite accurately:

               "What is probable is that sometime within the next year or so India will devalue,
               moving to an exchange rate of something like 7 rupees to the dollar or 20 rupees
               to the pound. This will be preceded by a very sudden and rapid worsening of the
               exchange situation as people inside and outside the country come to expect
               devaluation and try to convert rupee assets into foreign exchange assets... While
               this is the probable course of events, it is not the most desirable. The new fixed
               rate of exchange may be satisfactory for a while but sooner or later similar
               difficulties are likely to arise."

The published version of the Mumbai talks includes the questions and answers sessions. Not
surprisingly, most of the questions were centered on his strong criticism of India's exchange rate
regime, and his suggestion of adopting an auction system. When asked if devaluing the rupee
was the only way of dealing with the growing external imbalances, Friedman went back to the
costs of disinflation in a pegged exchange rates regime. (D&D, p.64-65):
                                                 12


               "In principle there is another way. You could drive down prices in India by 30 or
               40%. Deflation would be an alternative. What matters is the relation between
               prices in Indian and prices in the rest of the world, account being taken of the
               exchange rate... The problem today is that a dollar converted into rupees at the
               official exchange rate will not buy as much as is necessary in order for India to
               have balance of payments equilibrium. The amount that a dollar will buy in India
               can be increased in either of two ways: by a devaluation of the exchange rate or
               by a reduction of prices and India. However, as a practical matter, I think that no
               government will in fact try to force a deflation of 30 or 40% and I think a
               government would be most unwise to try to do so."

Friedman's answer to this question becomes particularly important within the context of the
Chilean fixed exchange rate experiment of the late 1970s and early 1980s, which is discussed in
great detail in Section 3 of this paper. As will be seen, in early 1981, around the time Friedman
visited Chile for a second time, it was abundantly clear that the Chilean experiment with fixed
exchange rates (relative to the dollar) had generated massive overvaluation, and had helped
generate a current account imbalance in excess of 10% of GDP, a level that was clearly
unsustainable. At the time, some of the discussion in Chile revolved around the idea of
generating an internal disinflation process, led by a mandated cut in public sector wages.
However, as will be discussed in Section 3, when asked about the currency situation, Friedman
was reluctant to openly criticize the Chilean government, and to be as outspoken and
straightforward as he had been in India almost 20 years earlier.

   2.3 Israel and the "unified currency" regime

In 1972, Friedman traveled to Israel to deliver the Horowitz Lectures at the Bank of Israel. The
two lectures were published a year later as, "Money and Economic Development." This is
Friedman's only (major) work with the word "development' in the title. In his memoirs,
Friedman devotes only three lines to this visit to Israel (F&F, p. 463). This contrasts sharply with
his (and Rose's) extensive discussions of the 1962, 1969, 1977 and 1990 trips. In the 1962 and
1969 visits the exchange rate regime was not at the center of his discussions with Israeli
academics and policy makers. As Friedman notes in great detail in Chapter 27 of F&F (p. 463),
the 1977 trip was the "most memorable," since it involved consulting with the incoming
government led by Menachem Begin. (See Schiffman, Young and Zelekha, 2017, for details on
this consulting assignment; see, also, Bruno et al, 1988).

In the first 1972 Horowitz Lecture, delivered in Jerusalem, Friedman surveyed the empirical
evidence on monetarism, and concentrated on the connection between money creation and
                                                         13


inflation. The presentation was based on an extensive data analysis for the United States and the
United Kingdom. 14 He concluded the lecture with ten propositions that, in his view, summarized
monetarism. He pointed out that "the changed rate of growth of nominal income typically shows
up first in output and hardly at all in prices (p. 28)". In this first lecture Friedman didn't address
any challenges specific to developing or middle income countries, nor did he discuss currency
regimes. He mostly set the stage for the lecture that followed, which was fully dedicated to those
issues.

In the second Horowitz Lecture, which was delivered in Tel Aviv, Friedman dealt with the type
of monetary policy problems that, at the time, affected a large number of developing countries.
Early on in the discussion he stated that for poorer countries "the crucial problem was to achieve
sustained growth, not to smooth short term fluctuations." He then pointed out that "such
countries seldom have financial markets and banking institutions sufficiently developed and
sufficiently sophisticated... As a result, for developing countries even more that for developed
countries, it seems wise to determine monetary policy by long term considerations (pp.39-40)".

He noted that many developing countries relied on the inflation tax to finance large, and often
unproductive, government projects. He asserted that the inflation tax was "the only tax that can
be levied without explicit legislative enactment or executive announcement (p. 48)." The
inflation tax, he insisted, was usually implemented in conjunction with an array of controls and
interventionist policies that "discourage private investment, often lead to a flight of private
capital, and produce economic waste and inefficiency." (p. 44).

Halfway through the second Horowitz Lecture, Friedman developed, in great detail, what
became an important component in his views regarding currency regimes in developing countries
(p. 44-57). According to him, an alternative to implementing a floating exchange rate ­ and
almost always a preferred option -- was adopting a "unified currency", or a regime where a poor
country fixes its currency value irrevocably and permanently to that of an advanced nation. He
pointed out that such a regime had served Hong Kong very well: "[Its] currency [is] closely
linked to the British pound sterling. Through a Currency Board, printing paper currency requires
the deposit of British currency in stated ratio..." (p. 44).

Friedman, then, explained that a "unified currency" was not the same as a pegged exchange rate
regime of the type enacted after World War II. While in the former system the value of the poor
country's currency is irreversibly fixed to that of an advanced nation, in the latter there is an

14
  Friedman usually published several versions of his lectures, with minor variations. In this case, the material of
the Horowitz Lectures was also published, in 1973, in a volume in honor of Moses Abramovitz and as the lead
article in the first issue of the Liberian Economic and Management Review.
                                                        14


escape clause. Under a unified currency system, money creation can only happen through an
inflow of international reserves; in the standard pegged regime, in contrast, the monetary
authority can "use the printing press or the central bank's bookkeeper's pen." (p. 46).

Friedman then criticized, as he had done in "A case for floating exchange rates," the Bretton
Woods system with its frequent and large devaluations. Further, he pointed out that in pegged-
but-adjustable regimes, when the exchange rate became out of line with its long run equilibrium
value, most countries ­ including Israel and India ­ tended to adopt exchange controls, and,
often, a very inefficient multiple exchange rate regime. 15

An important question was whether a unified currency regime could be replicated in countries
with active central banks, as opposed to currency boards. The answer, said Friedman, was that, in
principle and in theory, it was possible. However, he opined, the evidence suggested that this
was difficult to achieve. Eventually, politicians were tempted to rely on the inflation tax to
finance inefficient government projects. At that point, good and able central bankers were either
kicked out or up from their positions, and there was a rapid surge in inflation. This, he pointed
out, had been the case in Thailand in the late 1960s.

Friedman's conclusion was simple and controversial (p. 47, emphasis added):

                 "I conclude that the only way to refrain from using inflation as a method of
                 taxation is to avoid having a central bank. Once a central bank is established, the
                 die is likely to have been cast for inflation...Perhaps the greatest advantage of a
                 unified currency is that it is the most effective way to maximize the freedom of
                 individuals to engage in whatever transactions they wish... [A] unified currency
                 assures a maximum degree of integration of the country in question with the
                 greater world."

A year later, in Congressional testimony, Friedman confirmed that, in his view, developing
countries could adopt one of two monetary and exchange rate regimes: flexible exchange rates or
a unified currency system (1973b; emphasis added):

                 "[W]hile I have long been in favor of a system of floating exchange rates for the
                 major countries, I have never argued that that is necessarily also the best system
                 for the developing countries. Indeed, in April of last year I gave a series of


15
  In some cases, "unified currency" is interpreted as not having multiple exchange rate practices. This was not the
way Friedman used the term. However, it was understood that under his proposed "hard and irrevocable" peg
regime there would o sole rate of exchange.
                                                          15


                    lectures in Israel... on the problem of monetary policies for developing countries.
                    And in these lectures I recommended as probably the optimum policy under
                    current conditions for a developing country that it [irrevocably] peg its exchange
                    rate to its major trading partner rather than have a floating system. So I believe
                    there is no conflict between wholehearted advocacy of floating rates for major
                    countries and the existence of currency blocs of smaller countries attached to the
                    major countries."

       2.4 The crawling peg

In his December 1968 radio program, Milton Friedman answered a question posed by a
subscriber on the merits of the "crawling peg," a monetary regime then in vogue in a number of
Latin American countries (Brazil, Chile, Colombia). Friedman begins by explaining that the
crawling peg regime is characterized by "small, gradual and continuous" adjustments of the price
of foreign currency; it is a sliding parity. The authorities accept that under certain conditions ­
usually a domestic rate of inflation higher than world's inflation --, it is not possible to maintain
a pegged exchange rate indefinitely, as the Bretton Woods regime mandated. That is, it was
recognized-- as Friedman had pointed out repeatedly in his commentary about countries as
diverse as the United Kingdom, India and Israel --, that the prevailing system was pregnant with
recurrent crises. Instead of setting a fixed rate, and attempting to defend it, under a crawling peg
regime the authorities change the parity by a small amount very often, some times daily. Because
of this feature the system is also known as a "mini devaluations" regime.

In the 1968 radio program, Friedman said: "Personally, I think this [the crawling peg] is a far
better system than the present fixed rate." This endorsement of the mini devaluations regime
was consistent with Friedman's enthusiastic views on indexation in general, a perspective that he
developed during the 1970's as the rate of inflation in the U.S. began to move gradually up. 16

Friedman then turned to technical issues, and discussed several possible mechanisms for
determining the value of the peg at any moment in time, and defining the rate of the crawl or
mini devaluations. He gave a specific example, where the parity would slide quarterly, and be
allowed to fluctuate by one percent above and below a predetermined central value. If the actual
rate stays at the floor of the band, the next period that floor value becomes the reference value at
the center of the band. Friedman also discussed the possibility of monitoring the evolution of the
stock of international reserves to determine the rate of (gradual) adjustment of the parity. He
then clarified that even though market participants would know ahead of time that the exchange

16
     On Friedman's views on indexation see, for example, Nelson (2018). See, also, Friedman (1974).
                                                     16


rate would change gradually and continuously, such a system would not necessarily generate
speculative flows. The reason for this, he explained, was that domestic interest rates would adjust
according to the interest parity condition: even if investors knew the rate of the crawl, they
would not benefit by this knowledge, as long as interest rates were allowed to reflect market
conditions and expectations. 17

In 1972, Friedman came back to the crawling peg issue during the Horowitz Lectures in Israel. In
the Q&A period one of the participants asked "whether a `trotting' peg as in Brazil would not be
a way to limit the harm done by... government."18 Friedman's answer (1973, p. 61-62):

                "The Brazilian system is certainly an improvement over a system in which you
                keep the exchange rate pegged for long stretches of time. But I do not believe that
                there is any incompatibility between the existence of a government and of a
                central bank on the one hand, and freely floating exchange rates on the other. You
                don't have to have the Brazilian system. The Brazilian system seems to me better
                than no attempt to change exchange rate but less good than an exchange rate that
                changes more rapidly. I have never been in Brazil but I have been in Korea for
                one day, which makes me an expert, and Korea also had a system very similar to
                Brazil's. They justified it on the grounds that their commercial and financial
                markets were so poorly developed that they couldn't expect an effective market
                rate to prevail."

The quip about Korea is a great reflection of Friedman's sense of humor. However, there were
some important differences between the Korean and Brazilian systems. While in Korea the main
objective of the policy was to maintain the degree of international competitiveness of exports, by
making sure that the won was somewhat undervalued, in Brazil it was part of a broader set of
measures aimed at adapting all economic activities to a high level (three digit) of inflation. 19

     2.5 Exchange rates in an emerging Socialist country: Yugoslavia, 1973

In early 1973, Friedman visited Yugoslavia as a guest of the Institute of Investment Analysis.
This was his second time in Yugoslavia. He had visited for the first time in 1962, when he and
Rose flew to Belgrade from Moscow. In both trips Friedman was interested in understanding the


17
    The complete radio program may be found here: https://miltonfriedman.hoover.org/objects/52393/currency-
recycling-crawling-pegs-hyperinflation-and-the-e?ctx=c2cff3d4-2ca7-42c6-a05d-7035c598d3d7&idx=1
18
   Friedman (1973, p. 61).
19
   For a comparison between Brazil and Korea, see chapter 9 in Williamson (1981). See Obstfeld (2014) for an
analysis of modern debates on exchange rate regimes.
                                                 17


functioning of the system of worker ownership and self-management of companies. (F&F, p.
425).

On March 20, 1973, Friedman gave a talk titled "Contemporary monetary problems" at the
National Bank of Yugoslavia. During the first part of the presentation he discussed the principles
of monetarism and emphasized the fact that interest rates were a poor indicator of the stance of
monetary policy. The point, he stressed, was simple: in order to assess if policy was expansive or
tight, all central bankers had to do was focus on the quantity of money. Relying on interest rates
as indicators was misleading, as inflationary expectations were incorporated into those rates.
Most of the talk, however, was devoted to analyzing the functioning of an open economy.
Friedman moved slowly and very pedagogically. He first pointed out that in a "unified currency"
regime money is endogenous. He said: "The inability of any part of a unified currency area to
have an independent monetary policy has its counterpart the absence of balance of payments
problems." (Friedman 1973b, p. 9). If, however, Yugoslavia (or any other country) "wanted to
have a completely independent monetary currency... [then] the price of dinars in terms of marks,
the exchange rate, would be the mechanism that would adjust the balance of payments." (p. 10).

Next, Friedman discussed developments in the international monetary system since the United
Sates closed the "gold window" on August 15, 1971. He pointed out that an unstable system of
"dirty" fixed rates was being replaced by one characterized by "dirty" flexible rates. He then
argued that, although the situation was far from the ideal fully flexible system, it was much better
than the just abandoned Bretton Woods regime. He further pointed out that, in his view, the
degree of flexibility was to increase significantly in the years to come.

The last part of the lecture dealt with the issue that interested Yugoslavians the most: What type
of exchange rate regime should an emerging Socialist country, that did not belong to the Warsaw
Pact, have? Friedman began this part in a familiar way, by stating that Yugoslavia had two
alternatives. He then described the "unified currency" regime and argued that if Yugoslavia
decided to adopt it, the currency of reference should be the German mark. He then said that in
countries with a high degree of political centralization it would be politically difficult to give up
monetary policy (p. 15). Friedman next discussed a "less satisfactory, but still a good idea... a
freely floating exchange rate." After providing details on how flexible rates functioned, he
pointed out that, unfortunately, at the moment this was not a good option for Yugoslavia. He
added: "Yugoslavia has first to develop, as I hope it will, a market in foreign exchange, so that
                                                          18


there exists a market evaluation of its domestic currency in terms of foreign currencies." He
ended up by discussing the prospect for exchange rate regimes around the world (p. 16):20

                  "Whatever policies Yugoslavia and other developing countries choose to follow, I
                  believe that they will benefit a great deal from the new [international monetary]
                  arrangements. The new system of floating exchange rates will be consistent with a
                  rapid growth in world trade and with the gradual elimination of tariffs and other
                  barriers to international trade."

     2.6 A hierarchy of regimes: The unified currency trumps flexible rates

By the mid-1970s, then, Friedman had developed clear views regarding monetary and exchange
rate regimes in the emerging countries. As was documented extensively in the preceding
Sections, he was extremely critical of the Bretton Woods regime, with its combination of
pegged-but-adjustable exchange rates, discretionary monetary policy, and unconstrained
government expenditures. Although he didn't address directly the role of capital mobility­ at the
time most LDC's had some form of capital restrictions --, he did make the point, during his
discussions in Israel, that it was not possible to have simultaneously active monetary policy,
fixed exchange rates, and freedom of capital movement (this principle is sometimes called "the
impossibility of the Holy Trinity"). He thought that in countries with an active central bank ­
countries that often relied on the inflation tax ­ the exchange rate had to move frequently to
reflect market conditions. Under these circumstances he pointed to two regimes that, in his view,
were a great improvement over the official Bretton Woods system: a crawling peg and foreign
exchange auctions. However, he repeatedly declared that in spite of their superiority relative to
the prevailing regime, these were clearly second best options.

Friedman's had two preferred monetary and exchange rate arrangements for the poorer countries:
flexible exchange rates, where market forces determined the value of the currency at every
moment in time, and a unified currency regime, where the exchange rate is irrevocably fixed and
the central bank is abolished.

An interesting question ­ and one that has important practical and policy consequences ­ is the
hierarchy of the two favored regimes. Friedman addressed this question in the Q&A session after
the second Horowitz Lecture in Israel. The Chairman of the session asked whether there was an
optimal sequencing in the adoption of a monetary/exchange rate regime in a developing country

20
  Three years later Friedman traveled to South Africa, where he, again, criticized the pegged-but-adjustable
regime and argued that "the wise policy for a country like South Africa is to allow a free float." This time, he didn't
mention the "unified currency" regime. Friedman (1976b, p. 4).
                                                      19


such as Israel. He said that he understood that Friedman thought that "a unified currency... was a
first step and a flexible rate a second step." (p. 64, emphasis added). He stated that, in his view,
the order should be the opposite, with the flexible rate preceding the eventual adoption of a
unified currency.

Friedman's response was long and all encompassing. He argued that the answer had to consider
the overall reality of each developing country, including political pressures and the institutional
structure. And when the big picture was taken into account, he affirmed, the unified currency
regime was his preferred monetary arrangement for most poorer countries. He said (p. 64-66,
emphasis added):

                 [T]he less power the government has to tax the better. Government taxation tends
                 to slow down development because it goes into the wrong kinds of programs...
                 The great advantage of a unified currency is that it limits the possibility of
                 government intervention. The reason why I regard a floating rate as a second best
                 for such a [developing] country is because it leaves a much larger scope for
                 government intervention."

This hierarchy of regimes, with the unified currency on top, and the pegged-but-adjustable
system at the very bottom will play an important role in the discussion of Friedman's role in
Chile's failed experiment with fixed rates during 1979-1982.

     3. Friedman and Chile's fixed exchange rate fiasco, 1979-1982

On October 14, 1976, the Swedish Academy announced that Milton Friedman had been awarded
the Nobel Prize in economics. As soon as the news was released, a number of scholars form
around the world argued that it was improper to honor someone who had worked with the
Pinochet regime in Chile. Those who protested the award included past Nobel laureates David
Baltimore, S. E. Luria, George Wald and Linus Pauling. 21 The controversy did not die after
Friedman received the Prized from King Carl XVI Gustaf in December 1976. During the decades
that followed critics of "neoliberalism" continued to argue that Friedman was an accomplice of
Pinochet. The fact that Chile had returned to democracy in 1990 did not matter, as it did not
matter that the country had grown faster than any other in Latin America, that the incidence of
poverty had been reduced from 56% to 6%, and that Chile had become the undisputable




21
  The controversy surrounding the trip started in mid-1975, more than a year before the Nobel Prize was awarded.
Edwards and Montes (2020), cover some aspects of these events. See, also, Montes (2016).
                                                        20


economic leader in the region. The staying power of these controversies is perhaps best
illustrated by a 2010 article published by Naomi Klein in the Guardian: 22

                 "Friedman-prescribed policies had caused... a tenfold increase in unemployment
                 and an explosion of distinctly unstable shantytowns. They also led to a crisis of
                 corruption and debt so severe that, in 1982, Pinochet was forced to fire his key
                 Chicago Boy advisers and nationalise several of the large deregulated financial
                 institutions."

Through the years, Paul Krugman and Joe Stiglitz have argued that Chile's economic success
happened in spite of Friedman. They claimed that Chile's deep currency and banking crisis of
1982, was the result of policy mistakes inspired by Friedman's views on stabilization policies. In
the documentary "The commanding heights" Stiglitz said: "[When the military] followed
Friedman's prescription, Chile had a crisis; the free banking experiment that was done under the
intellectual leadership of that free market hypothesis... [resulted in] the kind of bank boom and
pause that we've seen around the world." 23

     3.1 The "Chicago boys" and Friedman's 1975 meeting with Pinochet

Milton Friedman visited Chile twice during the Pinochet regime. 24 The first visit, in March
1975, was the result of an invitation by Rolf Luders, a banking executive and one of the most
prominent Chicago boys. At the time, the main economic challenge in Chile was inflation, which
lingered around 400 percent per year. The second trip took place in mid-November 1981, after
Chile had embarked on a fixed exchange rate strategy to reduce inflation from around 50% a
year to a single digit. 25 Although the main purpose of this visit was to attended the regional
meetings of the Mont Pelerin Society, Friedman found time to give press interviews, to deliver a
talk on monetary policy, and to meet with local analysts and academics. 26




22
   Klein (2010).
23
   Krugman (2010), Stiglitz (2002). A complete transcript of Stiglitz interview may be found at:
http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/commandingheights/shared/minitext/int_josephstiglitz.html.
24
   Pinochet took power on September 11, 1973, when he led a coup d'état that deposed Socialist President
Salvador Allende. Pinochet stayed in office until March 1990, when the country returned to democratic rule. See
Edwards (2010, 2019) for analyses of the macroeconomic performance during the government of Socialist
President Salvador Allende.
25
   Friedman was not the only Nobel Prize who visited Chile during the Pinochet regime. F.A. Hayek visited in 1977
and 1981. For details see Caldwell and Montes (2015).
26
   Friedman was again invited to attend the 2000 Meeting of his Mont Pelerin Society in Santiago. However, he
declined due to his age at the time (88). See letter to Carlos F. Caceres, a former member of the Pinochet cabinet,
dated September 22, 2000. MFAHI, Folder 200-4.
                                                         21


On March 21, 1975, Milton Friedman met with general Augusto Pinochet for 45 minutes. Since
the presidential palace (La Moneda) was still being repaired for the major damaged suffered
during the coup, the meeting took place in the government's temporary quarters in downtown
Santiago. In addition to Pinochet and Friedman, the meeting was attended by Friedman's
colleague Arnold Harberger, Rolf Ludres, a military assistant to Pinochet, and a translator.

Harberger's recollections are that Pinochet did most of the talking. 27 He explained to his visitors
the military's economic program and argued that the economy had been virtually destroyed
during the Socialist government. Friedman told the General that, in his view, the fundamental
first step towards recovery was to reduce inflation drastically, to the one-digit level. If this was
not done, it was very difficult to envisage a takeoff of the economy. He pointed out that the most
effective way of reducing inflation was to implement very drastic cuts in public sector
expenditures. If the deficit was eliminated, there would be no need to print money and inflation
would disappear rapidly. He mentioned the experiences of Germany and Japan after World War
II as evidence that drastic programs worked.28

A month after returning to Chicago, Friedman sent Pinochet a letter summarizing his policy
recommendations, including his suggestion for a fiscal "shock treatment." (F&F, p. 591-594).
These two words ­ "shock treatment" ­ came back to haunt him, and through the years were
repeated by critics that claimed that, as a result of his advice, Chilean people (and especially the
poor) suffered long spells of unemployment and went hungry. 29

One of Friedman's 1975 lectures has been preserved as it was delivered. It was published that
same year, in Spanish, as a short pamphlet; see Figure 1. In the lecture the term "exchange rate"
does not appear even once. Friedman talked about monetary policy, the fiscal deficit, the
inflation tax, the merits of a "social market" economy, shock adjustment, and the experiences of
Germany and Japan after World War II. But during his speech he didn't say one word about
currencies or exchange rates. 30

The exchange rate, however, was brought up three times during the questions and answers
period. In his reply to a question on the optimal degree of openness of the economy, Friedman
made a point that he had made many times before: a fixed exchange rate was not sustainable in a
country with a (very) high rate of inflation. He then added that in his view the crawling peg
regime in place at the time in Chile was adequate. 31 The exchange rate was again brought up in a

27
   Interview with A.C. Harberger, August 23, 2020. Los Angeles, California. See, also, Harberger (2016).
28
   El Mercurio, Saturday, March 22, 1975. F&F, 1998, p. 399.
29
   Edwards and Montes (2020).
30
   "Milton Friedman en Chile," Fundación de Estudios BHC: Santiago, May, 1975.
31
   The transcript of the conference is in Spanish. This is Question No. 9.
                                                       22


question regarding indexation. 32 Friedman insisted that the source of Chile's very rapid inflation
was massive money printing to finance a fiscal deficit that amounted to 10% of GDP. Inflation,
he stated, was unrelated to indexation. The third exchange rate-related question dealt with the
effects of the "mini devaluations" on costs and profits. Friedman answered as follows: 33

                 "[M]ini devaluations... don't result in higher real costs. They are simply a
                 response to price increases... If prices in Chile increase by 10% each month, then
                 it is necessary to devalue in 10% in order to maintain a stable real value of
                 foreign currency... And you already know the story: if you try to maintain a low
                 price for foreign exchange [overvaluation of the peso], there would simply be a
                 need to ration it. What happens then? Everyone would want to buy it [foreign
                 exchange]. How would you decide who is allowed to buy [dollars]?"

The Milton Friedman Archives at the Hoover Institution (MFAHI) includes several boxes with
Friedman's correspondence on Chile. Much of it is related to the criticisms and attacks he
received after meeting Pinochet. His counterparts are scholars, reporters, members of the public,
and public intellectuals, including William F. Buckley Jr., William Bowen, Peter Bauer, and
E.O. Wilson. 34 These exchanges began in mid-1975, as soon as several newspapers wrote about
the first trip and Friedman's meeting with the General. Many of the writers expressed their
dismay for the anti-Friedman campaign, and asked if there was any way in which they could
help. There is also abundant material by critics and foes. For example, there is profuse
correspondence on a "Commission of Inquiry on Friedman/Harberger" set up by a group of
students at the University of Chicago. (MFAHI, Folder 188-10). In a handwritten note, dated
August 11, 1976, Gerald Ellis, from London, wrote: "With your friendship for General Pinochet
you must be the only Jewish monster alive." (MFAHI, 188-11). There is also an extensive and
heated exchange with Austrian econometrician Gerhard Tinter, a vocal opponent of the Pinochet
dictatorship. In a June 16, 1975, letter Tinter wrote: "No doubt, you have hanging over your desk
a hand signed photo of General Pinochet, the nice anticommunist savior of Chile, a gangster in
uniform, like so many South and North American military." (MFAHI, Folder 189-01).

In the archives there is also correspondence on the appropriate policies in Chile, including the
desirability of a "shock treatment" and the exchange rate. In a note dated November 11, 1975, to
Howard Borjet, a faculty member at the Pratt Institute in Brooklyn, Friedman points out that
while gradualism was the correct approach in the United States, it was not appropriate in Chile in
the mid-1970s, given "how far it [Chile] was from ultimately desired path." (MFAHI, Folder


32
   Question No. 12.
33
   Question No. 56..
34
   Most of these items are in boxes 188, 189 and 200 in the MFAHI.
                                                       23


188-10). In a lengthy letter to Professor Robert J. Alexander, a Latin American expert at Rutgers,
dated September 30 1975 ­ that is, six months after his first trip to Chile --, Friedman points out
that a key requirement for a successful recovery is maintaining a combination of "free trade plus
realistic exchange rates," where by realistic he means not overvalued and, thus, close to its long
run equilibrium value. (MFAHI. Folder 188-10, emphasis added).

In spite of the many attacks, both in the press and in private correspondence, Friedman never
regretted having traveled to Santiago, or meeting with Pinochet. In a letter to Rolf Luders, dated
May 19, 1977, he wrote: "Let me make clear that I have no personal regrets about having gone to
Chile. On the contrary, both the visit there and what happened subsequently have been highly
educational and instructive." (MFAHI, Folder 188-12). The absence of regrets was such, that
Friedman decided to travel again to Chile in 1981. What transpired during that second visit, is
the subject on next Section of this paper.

     3.2 Chile and its fixed exchange rate experiment: Why wasn't Friedman openly critical of the
         plan?

In early 1978, with inflation at 57% per annum, Chile adopted an exchange rate-based
stabilization program. Initially, the Central Bank pre-announced the daily rate of devaluation of
the peso relative to the USD. The rate of mini-devaluations was deliberately set below the
ongoing rate of inflation. The economic authorities believed that this mechanism would guide
expectations and generate a quick convergence of domestic to international inflation. This
exchange rate scheme, known as "the tablita" (meaning that the rate of exchange was displayed
in a table published daily) was supported by monetary and fiscal policies. Eighteen months later,
in June 1979, when inflation still stood at 35% per year, the government decided to put an end to
the preannounced rate of the devaluation, and fixed the exchange rate at 39 pesos per dollar. (See
Chapter 2 of Edwards and Edwards 1991, for details).

Why did the "Chicago boys" opt for a fixed exchange rate anti-inflation strategy? Surely, they
knew that Friedman was very critical of the fixed-but-adjustable regime. The explanation is that
the Chilean authorities were influenced by Robert Mundell, who for a long time had advocated
fixed exchange rates in every country in the world. This influence, however, was indirect, since
Chilean students typically did not take Mundell's course, nor did they work with him on research
or dissertation projects. 35 Mundell's influence came through Larry Sjaastad, a member of the
faculty at Chicago who was very close to Latin American students, and who after the 1973 coup
became an adviser to the Chilean military government. Sjaastad believed that the purchasing
power parity condition held in the short run, and that a credible fixed exchange rate regime

35
  Interview with Arnold Harberger. August 23, 2020. Los Angeles, California. Mundell was a member of the faculty
at Chicago from 1965 to 1972.
                                                        24


would provide almost instantaneous discipline and allow for rapid and low-cost stabilization. 36
He explained the exchange rate-based program as follows (Sjaastad, 1983, p. 12. Emphasis
added):

                 "The rationale... was that once economic agents understood, or inferred, that the
                 equilibrium between the prices of tradables and nontraded (home) good is neither
                 random nor arbitrary, a change in the price of tradable goods will cause a revision
                 of expectations concerning the equilibrium price of home goods. Under such
                 circumstances, excess supply would not be required to drive down inflation; the
                 change can occur spontaneously, as it were."

Harry G. Johnson, who in the 1970s championed the "monetary approach to the balance of
payments", also influenced policy makers. Johnson was close to a number of Chilean
economists, including to Sergio de la Cuadra, who was Governor of the Central Bank during the
latter part of the Pinochet government. Although, as noted, Johnson favored floating rates for
advanced nations, he thought that they would not work in poor and "narrowly specialized"
countries. In these cases, Johnson argued, the "advantages of rigid convertibility... outweigh the
relatively small advantages that may be derived from exchange rate flexibility."37 (Johnson 1969,
p. 16. Emphasis added). In a 1972 article, Johnson (1972, p. 1560) wrote that the new monetary
models assume that under fixed rates "a [small] country's price level is pegged to the world price
level and must move rigidly in line with it." And, in 1977, just before Chile embarked on its
exchange-rate based stabilization program, Johnson wrote (1977, p. 266, emphasis added):

                 "[Under] a fixed exchange rate system inflation is a world monetary phenomenon,
                 which cannot be prevented by national monetary policy... or national `wage-price
                 policy'... [Inflation is] `world' or `externally caused' to the extent that countries'
                 exchange rate policies aim at maintaining some conventional value or range of
                 values of their currency in term of foreign currencies..."

Johnson, as Sjaastad, believed that, in most small countries, the relative version of the purchasing
power parity condition held in the short run. This belief was based on empirical research
undertaken, during the first half of the 1970s, at the University of Chicago, the London School of
Economics, the Institute on Graduate Institute of International Studies in Geneva, and the
University of Manchester (Frenkel and Johnson, 1976; Johnson 1972, 1977). If the fiscal deficit



36
   Just before the stabilization program was put in place, Sjaastad and Cortes Douglas (1978) argued that after a
two-month lag, the rate of devaluation of the peso would be fully reflected on inflation. If the peso/USD rate was
fixed, inflation in Chile would converge to U.S. inflation within two to three months.
37
   Johnson (1969, p. 16). Emphasis added.
                                                            25


was under control, and the exchange rate was credibly fixed, domestic inflation would rapidly ­
or "spontaneously," to use Sjaastad's terminology ­ converge towards world inflation. 38

In Chile, however, things worked differently. After the peso was fixed to the dollar, inflation
declined very slowly. Every month between June 1979 and June 1982 Chile's domestic inflation
exceeded international inflation significantly. This was largely the result of expectations, and of
an ingrained backward-looking indexation system that affected all sort of contracts, including
wages. (Edwards and Edwards 1991, Chapter 6). Additionally, the strengthening of the USD in
the global market place meant that the peso was appreciating relative to the relevant basket of
trade partners' currencies.

In Figure 2 I present monthly data on the peso/US dollar exchange rate the 1975-1982 period.
The dates of Friedman's two visits are denoted by vertical lines (April 1975 and November
1981). Four phases of exchange policy in Chile during these years may be detected in the figure.
The first phase goes from January 1975 to February 1978. During this period Chile followed a
backward-looking, crawling peg regime, where the nominal exchange rate was devalued
frequently at a rate similar to the lagged differential between Chilean and U.S. inflation. 39 From
February 1978 to June 1979 the "tablita" or preannounced crawling peg was in place. As may be
seen, the slope of the peso/dollar curve becomes flatter, reflecting the deliberately slowing down
of the rate of devaluation, below the ongoing rate of inflation. The third phase is the fixed
peso/dollar rate, from June 1979 to June 1982, and the fourth phase is the devaluation crisis and
adjustable and managed peg, after June 1982.

When Friedman visited Chile for the second time, the pegged exchange rate experiment was
entering its third year. At the time, the country was running an increasingly large current account
deficit. It was almost 6% of GDP in 1980, it climbed to 8% in 1981, and was almost 14% of
GDP in 1982, the year the peg was given up. These deficits were mostly finance with short-term
syndicated bank loans and other short term capital. Between the first quarter of 1978, and the
second quarter of 1982, the trade-weighted real exchange rate, measured relative to a basket of
10 currencies, appreciated by almost 40%. (Edwards and Edwards, 1991, Table 3.9, page 71).

On November 17, 1981, reporters were waiting for Milton Friedman at Santiago's Arturo Merino
Benítez airport. Friedman immediately said that he was in the country to attend an academic


38
   Credibility was, of course, a key aspect of this view. Starting in the late 1990s, and to a large extent as a result of
the Southern Cone and Israeli experiences, a vast literature on nominal anchors and credibility developed. See, for
example, Bruno et al (1988), Calvo and Vegh (1994), Fischer (2001).
39
   On two occasions there were sharp, one time, nominal appreciations of the peso. The purpose of these surprise
adjustments was to break inertial expectations. However, after these abrupt strengthening of the peso, the
crawling peg was resumed.
                                                      26


meeting, and not "to give advice, neither to analyze Chile's policies." 40 The next day he was a bit
more forthcoming with the press, but restricted his remarks to generalities. He said: "I believe
this country has been notably successful during the last years without my advice and I believe it
will continue to be successful." (El Mercurio, November 19, 1981).

Friedman's paper for the Mont Pèlerin Society Meeting was titled "Monetary system for a Free
Society," and focused on the post Bretton Woods international monetary system. The last
Section dealt with alternative currency regimes for developing countries, and discussed the case
of Chile. 41 After summarizing his views on the subject, Friedman wrote (1995, p. 7, emphasis
added):

                 "[O]nly Chile has in recent years effectively unified its currency with that of a
                 major developed country... Experience since I gave the lecture in Israel [where he
                 suggested a "unified currency" for the first time] has not led me to alter my views
                 on the economics of the issue [the superiority of the unified currency], though it
                 has led me to become far more modest about judging political feasibility (in the
                 sense of likelihood of adoption). Perhaps the example of Chile, if its policy
                 continues to be as successful as it has been so far, will lead other developing
                 countries to follow suit."

Two aspects of this paragraph are worth discussing. First, Friedman states that Chile had
effectively implemented a unified currency. This, however, was not the case. What Chile had
done was adopt a fixed-but-adjustable rate in the tradition of Bretton Woods, with an additional
(verbal) commitment to maintaining the parity. However, there was no institutional or legal
constraint to that effect. At any time, the authorities could undertake active monetary policy and
erode the credibility of the peg, or they could decide to give it up and devalue the peso.
Certainly, Chile had not eliminated the central bank and replace it by a currency board, as
Friedman had suggested almost ten years earlier, in the second Horowitz Lecture. Friedman was
aware of this, as the governor of the central bank was Sergio de la Cuadra, a prominent "Chicago
boy." 42 Moreover, it was very unlikely that Chile's highly nationalistic military would have
agreed to give up the peso and adopt a foreign currency as legal tender. It was equally unlikely
that they would have favored a completely passive monetary board as in Hong Kong. In addition,
the existence of backward-looking wage indexation meant that a key adjustment mechanism--
disinflation and the reduction of wages to achieve relative price realignment ­ was absent.
Second, the paragraph implies that Chile's pegged rate experiment had been successful. The


40
   La Tercera, November 18, 1981.
41
   The paper was published in 1995, with an addendum written after the currency crisis of 1982.
42
   The previous two governors of the central bank were also Chicago boys: Alvaro Bardón and Pablo Barahona.
                                                         27


persistence of inflation ­ it was still 10% per year ­, the large current account deficits financed
by short run speculative capital, and real exchange rate appreciation, called that statement into
question. As will be seen, in his unscripted remarks delivered at the conference, Friedman
acknowledged that things were looking rather gloomy and that there were major challenges
ahead.

During his presentation at the Mont Pelerin meeting, Friedman departed from his prepared
remarks (and form the paper) in two ways. First, he talked about the relation between economic
and political freedom, a subject close to his heart. Friedman stated that economic freedom was
not enough to achieve a free society, and that it was important for Chile to move towards
democratic rule. However, and not surprisingly given that the military's severe censorship, the
media did not report his remarks on the subject. 43 Friedman became frustrated by this fact and
talked about it extensively in an interview he gave in Peru, immediately after his trip to Chile.
(Letter to journalist José Rodríguez Elizondo dated 12/18/81, MFAHI, Folder 188-13).

 Second, in his improvised comments ­ which were summarized in the newspaper La Segunda,
on November 20, 1981, p. 2 -- he expressed concerns regarding the exchange rate policy,
something he hadn't done in "Monetary system for a free society." He said that in the written
version of the paper his remarks about Chile had been too brief and somewhat elliptic. He ended
his unprepared remarks talking about the nature of the challenges ahead: 44

                  "At this moment, international institutions don't have a guarantee that Chile will
                  stick to its policy. Chile not only faces the appreciation of the dollar and the
                  decline in the price of copper, but also, and this is something I suspect, since I
                  don't have all the information, a speculative attack against its currency, triggered
                  by the expectation that Chile may devalue its currency, departing from its original
                  goal. If Chile reaffirms the credibility of its current policy and allows its monetary
                  aggregates to reflect changes in the balance of payments, then in the next crisis
                  speculative forces will help to stabilize the system."

The article ends with Friedman noting that at the time the Chilean peso seemed to be
overvalued. 45 However, he didn't delve into the mechanisms through which overvaluation was


43
   Edwards and Montes (2020) discuss Friedman's discussions on the two aspects of freedom (political and
economic) in the context of Chile.
44
   In retranslating this quote from Spanish back to English I have tried to maintain the punctuation as it appeared in
the La Segunda article.
45
   Apparently the reporter got a tape with Friedman's improvised remarks. Some of the terms appear in quotation
marks and are supposed to be in English. However, they are either misspelled, or the reporter didn't quite what
Friedman had said. Instead of "pegged" exchange rate, it says "packed" rate; instead of "unified" currency, it says
"unifright" (sic) currency.
                                                 28


corrected under a fixed rate. More specifically, he didn't mention that under a unified currency
the only way of addressing major overvaluation was by generating a massive disinflation,
including a reduction in nominal wages. He had made this point as early as in 1950 when he said
that "decline of 10 percent in every internal price in Germany" was equivalent to a 10%
devaluation of the mark relative to the dollar, and had repeated it in almost every poor country he
had visited during the previous 20 years. (Friedman 1950, p. 164-165).

It is difficult to know to what extent Friedman's remarks affected market expectations of an
imminent crisis and, thus, contributed to the decline of capital flows in the following months.
What is known, however, is that the probability of devaluation, as measured by interest rate
differentials, almost tripled in the fourth quarter of 1981, relative to the previous quarter.
(Edwards and Edwards 1991, p. 68). At the time, Chile had severe capital controls.
Consequently, even in light of negative comments and prognosis, there would not be a sudden
spike in outflows. Changes in expectations were reflected by a significant slowdown of capital
inflows, and/or by large increase in domestic interest rates.

Seven months after Friedman's second visit, Chile could not defend the peg any longer, and on
June 14, 1982, the peso was devalued; see Figure 2. The crisis that followed was one of the
deepest ever faced by a Latin American nation: real GDP collapsed by almost 15%, and open
unemployment surpassed the 20% mark. This was the crisis that many of the Chicago boys'
critics would mention time and again in the years to come; many of them held Friedman
responsible for what had happened. (Klein 2010, Stiglitz 2002). It took Chile several years to
recover, and once it did, policymakers made sure not to peg the exchange rate again.

   3.3 The morning after: Friedman's reflections on Chile after the 1982 crisis

On July 8, 1982, three weeks after the devaluation, Friedman wrote to Peter D. Whitney, the
Economic Counselor at the U.S. Embassy in Santiago regarding recent developments. He said: "I
was surprised at the change [the stepwise large devaluation] since it seems to me the appropriate
alternative to the policy that Chile was following, if an alternative were to be adopted, was a
fully floating exchange rate, not a prescheduled series of devaluations" (MFAHI, Folder 189-02).

In 1994, Friedman published an article titled, "Chile and Israel: identical policies, opposite
outcomes." As the title indicates, the purpose of the piece was to analyze why very similar
policies ­ although, not "identical" ­ had led to very different results. Friedman begins his
analysis by pointing out that there was an element of luck: Immediately after Chile fixed the
exchange rate with respect to the USD, external conditions soured. The dollar strengthened
relative to other convertible currencies, and the terms of trade turned viciously against Chile. In
contrast, when, in 1985, Israel fixed the value of the shekel, external shocks were favorable (a
                                                       29


drop in the price of oil and a weakening of the dollar). Second, Israel devalued the shekel by
20% before fixing it relative to the dollar. By doing this, it built a "cushion" for real appreciation
to take place without generating overvaluation. Chile, instead, fixed the exchange rate rigidly at a
time (1979) when the peso was already overvalued. Third, while Israel instituted incomes
policies that included a temporary wages and prices freeze, Chile put in place a backward
looking wage indexation system that, with declining inflation, resulted in automatic increases in
real wages. And fourth, Israel pegged the exchange rate to the USD as a temporary measure
aimed at guiding expectations in the short run. After a few months the shekel was devalued "at
irregular intervals to offset the difference between the roughly 20% inflation in Israel and the
lower inflation in its trading partners." (Friedman 1994, p. 241). Chile, instead announced that
the fixed rate would remain indefinitely, even in light of obvious overvaluation. 46

Towards the end of this article Friedman criticized Chile's central bank for not helping generate
a disinflation ­ or "internal devaluation" -- during the 1981-82 period. He wrote (Friedman 1994,
p. 244).:

                 "The central bank of Chile was, understandably, unwilling or unable to undertake
                 the drastic deflationary measures that would have been necessary to maintain the
                 pegged rate of the peso in 1982."

In a letter to journalist José Rodriguez Elizondo, written four months after the devaluation
(10/15/1982), Friedman commented on the policies that Chile's new economic team, led by his
former student Rolf Luders, was likely to undertake: "He [Luders] may be, because of type
situation and because of a lack of previous commitments, more flexible... Whether he can
succeed in face of the tactics of the military is something else again on which I am not a
competent judge." [MFAHI, Folder 188-13].

In his 1998 memoirs, Friedman is very direct, and writes that it is doubtful "that there is very a
good time for a country like Chile that has a central bank to peg its currency. I have consistently
taken the position that a county like Chile with a central bank should let its currency float. The
alternative is to abolish the central bank and unify its currency with that of its major trading
partner." (F&F, p. 405. Emphasis added). However, as the discussion in the preceding Sections
shows, this was not the message that Friedman transmitted during his two visits to Chile. To be
sure, he argued that the Bretton Woods regime was unstable, but he never said that Chile faced
the option of either abolishing the central bank or floating.




46
  See Bruno et. al. (1988) for comparisons between Israel and the Latin American stabilization programs of the
1970s and first half of the 1980s.
                                                        30


Friedman addressed Chile once again in 2001, during a debate with Robert Mundell, one of the
staunchest supporters of fixed exchange rates (Friedman and Mundell, 2001). Friedman argued
that Chile's 1979 "hard peg" policy was "disastrous" as a consequence of the strengthening of
the US dollar in 1980-81. He also made this point in an addendum to the paper presented to the
Chile 1981 meeting of the Monte Pelerin society, where he wrote: "The preceding three
paragraphs, correct when written in 1981, no longer are. Chile ended the pegging of its rate to the
dollar in 1982, after the sharp appreciation of the US dollar plunged Chile into a disastrous
recession. (Friedman 1994, p. 7).

On August 5, 1997, Friedman wrote a long letter to Robert J. Alexander, the Rutgers professor
with whom he had had a number of exchanges regarding Chile. The purpose of the letter was to
comment on the recently published book by Juan Gabriel Valdés "Pinochet´s Economists: The
Chicago Boys in Chile." Friedman takes issue with Valdés narrative about the 1982 currency
crisis. It is worthwhile quoting Friedman extensively (MFAHI, Folder 188-10; emphases added):

                 "Valdes has no understanding of what produced the 1982 depression. What
                 produced it was the departure from the basic Chicago School economic principles
                 that Valdes oversimplifies. [Minister Sergio] DeCasto's mistake in pegging the
                 Chilean currency to the U.S. dollar produced the disaster. My view has always
                 been that a country like Chile, if it has a central bank and a separate monetary
                 unit, should allow the exchange rate to float. That was the policy that was
                 followed until 1979 when DeCastro made the major mistake of pegging the
                 Chilean currency to the U.S. dollar in the hope that that would impose the
                 discipline necessary to eliminate inflation. In my opinion that was a bad decision
                 under any circumstances, but it turned out to be a disastrously bad decision
                 because of... the drastic appreciation of the U.S. dollar after Reagan became
                 president."

     4. Friedman's long term influence on exchange rate regimes

Friedman's views on exchange rate and monetary regimes were, eventually, extremely
influential in the advanced nations. According to the IMF, in 2018 all but two advanced
countries had a floating regime. 47 In fact, Stigler (2003, p. 161) argues that the floatation of the
dollar in 1973 by Richard Nixon, was the direct consequence of Friedman having persuaded




47
   According to the IMF Croatia and Bosnia Herzegovina do not float; all members of the Euro Zone are classified as
floaters.
                                                         31


George Schultz, who was a colleague at Chicago and in 1973 was Secretary of the Treasury, of
the merits of flexible exchange rate regime for the United States.

In contrast, Friedman's ideas have been much less influential among developing countries. In
2018, only 24 developing nations ­ most of them tiny islands with less than 250 thousand
inhabitants -- had what Friedman called a "unified currency regime." Eleven had "no separate
legal tender," or were dollarized, and thirteen had a "currency board". Only six out of the 24
have a population over three million people: Ecuador, El Salvador, Panama, Hong Kong SAR,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Bulgaria. Moreover, according to the IMF, the most popular
regime among emerging countries, in 2018, continued to be a "conventional peg." 48

There are a number of possible explanations for the lack of "unified currency" regimes among
mid-size and large developing nations. Perhaps, the most important one is the absence of modern
successful experiences that serve as examples of best practices.

The failure of Argentina's experiment with a currency board, between 1991 and 2001 generated
great skepticism regarding the merits of super fixed regimes; see Bluestein (2006) for a blow by
blow account of this episode. Many of the causes behind the collapse of the Argentine
experiment were related to issues raised by Milton Friedman throughout the years. For example,
the central bank was not abolished and, starting in 1995, it began to relax its operational rules,
and credit was created with lower backing of hard currency. Fiscal policy was pro-cyclical, and
imbalances, mostly driven by provincial profligacy, grew significantly over time. This situation
became particularly serious after 1995 when, as a result of contagion coming from Mexico's
Zapatistas crisis, there was a sudden stop of capital flows into Argentina and other emerging
economies. In addition, as in Chile twenty years earlier, wages were not flexible enough as to
allow for relative price adjustments (or internal devaluation) when it was needed. 49 There were
also elements of bad luck. The peso was fixed to the USD at a time when the dollar strengthened
significantly in the global markets, world interest rates increased substantially, a succession of
crises in emerging markets (Russia, Turkey, Brazil) resulted in an across the board reduction in
capital flows, and the terms of trade turned seriously against Argentina. After ten years of a fixed
exchange rate at one person per USD, the parity was abandoned in early 2002. By 2003,




48
   The IMF (2019, p. 8) considers three main regimes (each with several subcategories): Hard pegs, soft pegs, and
floating. Within the soft pegs it includes conventional pegs, stabilized arrangements, crawling pegs, crawl-like
arrangements, and pegged with horizontal bands.
49
   The IMF was also held (partially) responsible for the debacle. Its own evaluation suggested that it didn't raise
important issues with the authorities in a timely fashion. IMF (2004). See, also, Chapter 7 of Edwards (2010), and
the literature cited therein.
                                                         32


Argentina was in shambles and the reputation of monetary regimes based on "unified currencies"
and currency boards suffered a severe blow. 50

     5. Concluding Remarks

In this paper I have tracked the evolution of Milton Friedman's thinking on monetary and
currency regimes in developing countries. In order to do this, I combed his archives at the
Hoover Institution, and analyzed his writings, speeches, commentary, congressional testimonies,
and correspondence on the subject. A key question was whether he extended his support for
flexible exchange rates to the case of poor and middle income countries. I also analyzed what
Friedman told different audiences in countries such as India, Israel, South Africa and
Yugoslavia. I placed particular emphasis on his relationship with Chile and the "Chicago boys,"
the group of economists that advised General Pinochet after the military deposed democratically
elected President Salvador Allende in September 1973.

The discussion in this paper has shown that, from early on, Friedman was very critical of the
Bretton Woods regime. He thought that the fixed-but-adjustable nature of the system introduced
a high degree of instability. On this he never changed, or wavered. However, his views on the
most desirable regime for the emerging countries did evolve through time. Initially ­during his
two early trips to India ­ he favored a fully flexible rate. As a second best he settled for a system
where foreign exchange was auctioned to the public. Sometime later, he was also partial, as
second best, to "crawling peg" regimes, as they adjusted the exchange rate frequently, avoiding
the overvaluation pressure created by the Bretton Woods system.

In the 1970s, however, his views changed, and he argued that a "unified currency" regime, where
the poor country abolished the central bank and linked its currency to that of a major trading
partner, was preferable. This, he asserted, was the best way for achieving stability and avoiding
the use (and abuse) of the inflation tax as a means of financing the government.

In Section 3, I analyzed Friedman's role in Chile's ill-fated attempt at using a fixed exchange
rate to eliminate inflation. After analyzing his writings and press conferences during his two
visits to Chile, and after interviewing people that were present during his 45 minutes meeting
with Pinochet, I conclude that it is incorrect to ascribe Friedman an active role in Chile's
currency crisis of 1982. Having said that, I do show that in Chile he was less forceful in
criticizing the fixed-but-adjustable regime than he had been in other countries. During his 1981
visit ­ eight months before the crisis ­ he didn't point out that at the time Chile didn't satisfy two

50
   In 2000 Ecuador gave up its currency and adopted the US dollar as legal currency. As a result, inflation has stayed
in check. The absence of a central bank, however, didn't constraint a populist government to run up debt very
significantly in the 2007-2017 period. See Edwards (2019) for details.
                                                33


of the main conditions he had laid down as requirements for successful unified currency. It is not
possible to know what his motives were. It is likely that they were a combination of factors,
including avoiding a speculative attack, and a sense of loyalty towards his former students, the
Chicago boys.
                                     34




Figure 1: Pamphlet published in Chile with Milton Friedman's Talk in Santiago,
                         Delivered on March 26, 1975
                                                                                                     10.00
                                                                                                             20.00
                                                                                                                     30.00
                                                                                                                             40.00
                                                                                                                                     50.00
                                                                                                                                             60.00
                                                                                                                                                                   80.00




                                                                                              0.00
                                                                                   Jan.1975




                                                                                                                                                visit
                                                                                                                                                     70.00 First
                                                                                   May.1975
                                                                                   Sep.1975
                                                                                   Jan.1976
                                                                                   May.1976




data. Pesos per dollar)
                                                                                   Sep.1976
                                                                                   Jan.1977
                                                                                   May.1977
                                                                                   Sep.1977
                                                                                   Jan.1978
                                                                                   May.1978
                                                                                   Sep.1978
                                                                                   Jan.1979
                                                                                                                                                                           35




                                                                                   May.1979
                                                                                   Sep.1979
                                                                                   Jan.1980
                                                                                   May.1980
                                                                                   Sep.1980
                                                                                   Jan.1981
                                                                                   May.1981
                                                                                   Sep.1981
                                                                                                                                               visit




                                                                                   Jan.1982
                                                                                                                                               Second




                                                                                   May.1982
                                                                                   Sep.1982
Figure 2: Nominal exchange rate between Chilean peso and USD: 1975-1982 (Monthly
                                                36


                                           References

   A. Archives
Milton Friedman Archives at the Hoover Institution (MFAHI)

New York Times

El Mercurio

La Tercera

La Segunda

Ercilla

Qué Pasa

   B. Interviews
Sergio De Castro, Former Minister of Finance under Pinochet. Early "Chicago boy."

Arnold C. Harberger, University of Chicago and UCLA Professor, adviser to Chilean
government.

Rolf Luders, Former Minister of Finance under Pinochet. Prominent "Chicago boy."

   C. Books, articles, memoranda
Aghion, P., Bacchetta, P., Ranciere, R. and Rogoff, K., 2009. Exchange rate volatility and
productivity growth: The role of financial development. Journal of monetary economics, 56(4),
pp.494-513.

Arancibia, Patricia and Francisco Balart. 2007. Sergio de Castro. El arquitecto del modelo
económico chileno. Santiago de Chile: Editorial Biblioteca Americana.

Blustein, P., 2006. And the Money Kept Rolling In (and Out) Wall Street, the IMF, and the
Bankrupting of Argentina. Public Affairs.

Bordo, M.D., Dib, A. and Schembri, L., 2007. Canada's pioneering experience with a flexible
exchange rate in the 1950s:(Hard) lessons learned for monetary policy in a small open
economy (No. w13605). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bruno, M., Di Tella, G., Dornbusch, R. and Fischer, S. eds., 1988. Inflation Stabilization: The
Experience of Israel, Argentina, Brazil, Bolivia, and Mexico. MIT Press.
                                               37


Caldwell, Bruce and Montes, Leonidas (2015) "Friedrich Hayek and His Visits to Chile." Review
of Austrian Economics, volume 28, number 3, pp. 261-309

Calvo, G.A. and Végh, C.A., 1994. Inflation stabilization and nominal anchors. Contemporary
Economic Policy, 12(2), pp.35-45.

Dellas, H. and Tavlas, G.S., 2009. An optimum-currency-area odyssey. Journal of International
Money and Finance, 28(7), pp.1117-1137.

Dellas, H., & Tavlas, G. 2016. Friedman, Chicago, and monetary rules. Milton Friedman:
Contributions to Economics and Public Policy, 198.

Dellas, H., & Tavlas, G. S. 2018. Milton Friedman and the case for flexible exchange rates and
monetary rules. Cato J., 38, 361.

Edwards, Sebastian. 2010. Left Behind. Chicago: University of Chicago Press

Edwards, Sebastian., 2019. On Latin American populism, and its echoes around the
world. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 33(4), pp.76-99.

Edwards, Sebastian and Alejandra Cox. [1987] 1991. Monetarism and Liberalization. The
Chilean Experiment. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Edwards, S., & Montes, L. 2020. Milton Friedman in Chile: Shock Therapy, Economic Freedom,
and Exchange Rates. Journal of the History of Economic Thought, 42(1), 105-132.

Fischer, S., 2001. Exchange rate regimes: is the bipolar view correct?. Journal of economic
perspectives, 15(2), pp.3-24.

Frenkel, J.A. and Johnson, H.G., 1976. The monetary approach to the balance of payments,
Allen Unwin

Friedman, Milton. 1948a. "A monetary and fiscal framework for economic stability."
In American Economic Review XXXVIII (June 1948).

Friedman, Milton. 1948b. "Canada and the Problems of World Trade." A Radio Discussion by
Milton Friedman, Donald Gordon, and W.A. Mackintosh. University of Chicago Round Table,
Number 526, 18 April 1948, pp. 1­11.

Friedman, Milton 1953. "The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates." In M. Friedman (eds.), Essays
in Positive Economics, pp. 157-203. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
                                              38


Friedman, Milton. 1955. [1992]. "The India Memorandum." In Roy, S., & James, W. E. (Eds.).
(1992). Foundations of India's Political Economy: Towards an Agenda for the 1990s. Sage
Publications.

Friedman, Milton. 1957. "The Indian Alternative." Encounter, January, 71­73

Friedman, Milton. 1962. Capitalism and Freedom. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

Friedman, Milton. 1963a. [1968] "Inflation: Causes and Consequences" in The Council for
Economic Education, Asia, Bombay. Reprinted in Friedman, M. (1968). Dollars and deficits:
inflation, monetary policy and the balance of payments (Prentice-Hall).

Friedman, Milton. 1963b. "Exchange rate Policy," Swarajva

Friedman, Milton. 1968. "Currency Recycling, Crawling Pegs, Hyperinflation, and the Economic
Policy of the Nixon Administration and the Federal Reserve Board." Economic Cassette Series
held at the Hoover Institution Friedman Archives.

Friedman, Milton. 1973a. Money and Economic Development: The Horowitz Lectures of 1972.
New York: Praeger Publishers.

Friedman, Milton., 1973b. "Contemporary Monetary Problems." Monte dei Paschi di Siena.

Friedman, Milton. 1973c. "Statement and Testimony." In U.S. Congress, Joint Economic
Committee, Hearings before Subcommittee on International Economics, How Well are
Fluctuating Exchange Rates Working?, pp. 114-120. 93rd Congress, 1st Session, 20-27 June
1973

Friedman, M., 1974. Monetary correction: a proposal for escalator clauses to reduce the costs of
ending inflation (No. 41). Transatlantic Arts.

Friedman, Milton. 1975. Milton Friedman en Chile: bases para un desarrollo económico.
Santiago: Fundación de Estudios Económicos BHC.

Friedman, Milton. 1976. "The Milton Friedman view." In Milton Friedman in South Africa,
edited by Meyer Feldberg, Kate Jowell and Stephen Mulholland, pp. 42-52. Cape Town and
Johannesburg: Graduate School of Business of the University of Cape Town and The Sunday
Times, 1976.
                                               39


Friedman, Milton. 1992. "Chile and Israel: Identical policies ­ Opposite outcomes." In Milton
Friedman, ed., Money Mischief: Episodes in Monetary History. New York: Harcourt Brace
Jovnovich, pp. 234-48.

Friedman, Milton. 1995. "Monetary System for a Free Society." in Monetarism and the
Methodology of Economics: Essays in Honour of Thomas Mayer, edited by Kevin D. Hoover and
Steven M. Sheffrin, pp. 167-177. Aldershot, England: Edward Elgar Publishing, 1995.

Friedman, Milton and Rose D. Friedman. 1998. Two Lucky People. Memoirs. Chicago: The
University of Chicago Press.

Friedman, Milton, and Robert Mundell. 2001. "One World, One Money?." Policy Options-
Montreal 22(4): 10-19.

Harberger, Arnold. 2016. "Sense and Economics: An Oral History with Arnold Harberger."
Interviews conducted by Paul Burnett in 2015 and 2016, Copyright © 2016 by The Regents of
the University of California.

International Monetary Fund. 1998. "Exit Strategies: Policy Options for Countries Seeking
Exchange Rate Flexibility." Occasional Paper 168

International Monetary Fund. 2004. The IMF and Argentina, 1991-2001. International Monetary
Fund. Washington D.C.

International Monetary Fund. 2019. Annual report on exchange arrangements and exchange
restrictions 2018, Washington D.C.

Irwin, Douglas A. 2018. The midway and beyond: recent work on economics at Chicago. History
of Political Economy, 50(4), 735-775.

Irwin, Douglas A. 2019. "The Missing Bretton Woods Debate over Flexible Exchange Rates." In
Naomi Lamoureaux and Ian Shapiro, eds., The Bretton Woods Agreements. New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press, 2019.

Johnson, H.G., 1969. The case for flexible exchange rates, 1969. Federal Reserve Bank of St.
Louis Review, (June 1969).

Johnson, H.G., 1972. The monetary approach to balance-of-payments theory. Journal of
financial and quantitative analysis, pp.1555-1572.
                                               40


Johnson, H. G. 1977. The monetary approach to the balance of payments: A nontechnical
guide. Journal of international economics, 7(3), 251-268.

Klein, Naomi. 2010. "Milton Friedman did not save Chile," The Guardian March 10, 2010:
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cifamerica/2010/mar/03/chile-earthquake

Krugman, Paul. 2010. "Fantasies of the Chicago boys." New York Times Blog.
https://krugman.blogs.nytimes.com/2010/03/03/fantasies-of-the-chicago-boys/

Montes, Leonidas. 2016. "Milton Friedman y sus visitas a Chile", Revista de Estudios Públicos,
141, pp. 121-171.

Nelson, Edward., 2018. Milton Friedman and the Debate on Indexation. Available at SSRN
3229236.

Nelson, Edward. 2018. Seven Fallacies Concerning Milton Friedman´s "The Role of Monetary
Policy". Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-013. Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System (U.S.).

Nelson, Edward. 2020a. Milton Friedman and Economic Debate in the United States, 1932­
1972, Two Volumes. University of Chicago Press.

Nelson, E., 2020b. "The continuing validity of monetary policy autonomy under floating
exchange rates." International Journal of Central Banking

Obstfeld, M., 2014. Never say never: Commentary on a policymaker's reflections. IMF
Economic Review, 62(4), pp.656-693.

Obstfeld, M., 2020. Harry Johnson's "Case for Flexible Exchange Rates"­50 Years Later (No.
w26874). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Schenk, C.R., 1991. "British Management of the Sterling Area, 1950-1958" Ph.D. Dissertation,
London School of Economics.

Schiffman, D., Young, W. and Zelekha, Y., 2017. Economic Advisers and Israel's Economic
Policy: Some Interim Conclusions. In The Role of Economic Advisers in Israel's Economic
Policy (pp. 163-165). Springer, Cham.

Sjaastad, L. and Douglas, H.C., 1978. El enfoque monetario de la balanza de pagos y las tasas de
interés real en Chile. Estudios de Economía, 5(1).
                                              41


Sjaastad, Larry A. 1983. "Failure of economic liberalism in the cone of Latin America" World
economy 6.1: 5-26.

Stigler, G.J., 2003. Memoirs of an unregulated economist. University of Chicago Press.

Stiglitz, Joseph. 2002. "The Commanding Heights, Interview."
http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/commandingheights/shared/minitext/int_josephstiglitz.html.

Tavlas, G. S. 2015. In old Chicago: Simons, Friedman, and the development of monetarypolicy
rules. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 47(1), 99-121.

Valdés, Juan Gabriel. 1995. Pinochet´s Economists: The Chicago Boys in Chile. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Williamson, J., 1981. Exchange rate rules: the theory, performance and prospects of the
crawling peg. Springer.
