                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         THE DYNAMIC IMPACT OF EXPORTING ON FIRM R&D INVESTMENT

                                        Florin G. Maican
                                          Matilda Orth
                                        Mark J. Roberts
                                        Van Anh Vuong

                                      Working Paper 27986
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27986


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2020




We are grateful for helpful comments and discussions to Pere Arque-Castells, Jan DeLocker,
Alessandro Gavazza, Bronwyn Hall, Jordi Jaumandreu, Panle Jia Barwick, Jacques Mairesse,
Marc Melitz, Andreas Moxnes, Stephen Redding, Carlos Santos, Fabiano Schivardi, Philipp
Schmidt-Dengler, Otto Toivanen, Jo Van Biesebroeck, and Frank Verboven. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Florin G. Maican, Matilda Orth, Mark J. Roberts, and Van Anh Vuong. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Dynamic Impact of Exporting on Firm R&D Investment
Florin G. Maican, Matilda Orth, Mark J. Roberts, and Van Anh Vuong
NBER Working Paper No. 27986
October 2020
JEL No. F14,L2,O32

                                          ABSTRACT

This article estimates a dynamic structural model of firm R&D investment in twelve Swedish
manufacturing industries and uses it to measure rates of return to R&D and to simulate the impact
of trade restrictions on the investment incentives. R&D spending is found to have a larger impact
on firm productivity in the export market than in the domestic market. Export market profits are a
substantial source of the expected return to R&D. Counterfactual simulations show that trade
restrictions lower both the expected return to R&D and R&D investment level, thus reducing an
important source of the dynamic gains from trade. A 20 percent tariff on Swedish exports reduces
the expected benefits of R&D by an average of 32.2 percent and lowers the amount of R&D
spending by 13.9 percent in the high-tech industries. The corresponding reductions in the low-
tech industries are 30.4 and 8.9 percent, respectively. R&D adjustments in response to export
tariffs mainly occur on the intensive, rather than the extensive, margin.


Florin G. Maican                                      Mark J. Roberts
Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
University of Gothenburg                              513 Kern Graduate Building
Box 640, 40530                                        Pennsylvania State University
Gothenburg                                            University Park, PA 16802
Sweden                                                and NBER
and Institutet för Näringslivsforskning               mroberts@psu.edu
florin.maican@economics.gu.se
                                                      Van Anh Vuong
Matilda Orth                                          Maastricht University
Research Institute of Industrial Economics IFN        School of Business and Economics
Box 55665                                             Tongersestraat 53
Grevgatan 34                                          Office A2.15
SE-102 15 Stockholm                                   6211 LM Maastricht
Sweden                                                The Netherlands
matilda.orth@ifn.se                                   v.vuong@maastrichtuniversity.nl
 The Dynamic Impact of Exporting on Firm R&D Investment
                                      Florin G. Maican
                        University of Gothenburg, IFN, and CEPR
                                        Matilda Orth
                Research Institute of Industrial Economics (IFN), Stockholm
                                       Mark J. Roberts
                       The Pennsylvania State University and NBER
                                       Van Anh Vuong
                                    Maastricht University

                                            October 2020



                                               Abstract
         This article estimates a dynamic structural model of ...rm R&D investment in twelve
      Swedish manufacturing industries and uses it to measure rates of return to R&D and to
      simulate the impact of trade restrictions on the investment incentives. R&D spending is
      found to have a larger impact on ...rm productivity in the export market than in the domestic
      market. Export market pro...ts are a substantial source of the expected return to R&D.
      Counterfactual simulations show that trade restrictions lower both the expected return to
      R&D and R&D investment level, thus reducing an important source of the dynamic gains
      from trade. A 20 percent tari¤ on Swedish exports reduces the expected bene...ts of R&D
      by an average of 32.2 percent and lowers the amount of R&D spending by 13.9 percent in
      the high-tech industries. The corresponding reductions in the low-tech industries are 30.4
      and 8.9 percent, respectively. R&D adjustments in response to export tari¤s mainly occur
      on the intensive, rather than the extensive, margin.


1    Introduction
The theoretical literature on growth and trade, as developed by Grossman and Helpman (1993,
1995), is built on a framework of endogenous innovation where a ...rm'  s incentives to undertake
costly innovation expenditures are impacted by their exposure to international markets. For
exporting ...rms, the expected return on investments in innovation can be larger than for pure
domestic ...rms. This can be due to the larger market size, an ability to learn from knowledge
spillovers in the foreign country, or because of competitive pressure from exporting ...rms based
    We are grateful for helpful comments and discussions to Pere Arque-Castells, Jan DeLocker, Alessandro
Gavazza, Bronwyn Hall, Jordi Jaumandreu, Panle Jia Barwick, Jacques Mairesse, Marc Melitz, Andreas Moxnes,
Stephen Redding, Carlos Santos, Fabiano Schivardi, Philipp Schmidt-Dengler, Otto Toivanen, Jo Van Biese-
broeck, and Frank Verboven.



                                                    1
in other countries. Regardless of the source, this higher expected return should motivate
exporting ...rms to invest more in innovation activities such as R&D which help them realize
higher productivity and pro...t gains relative to their non-exporting counterparts.
     While it has been well-established that exporting ...rms are more likely to innovate than
others, the underlying causal mechanism linking export market conditions, such as the size of
the export market or the cost of exporting, and ...rm innovation is less well studied. Yet, when
assessing the dynamic impacts of trade policy, it is important to understand how opening to
trade, or, as more applicable in the present policy environment, imposition of tari¤s, impacts
...rm investment in innovation.
     Two empirical approaches have been used to quantify the impact of trade exposure on
innovation. The ...rst uses exogenous export market shocks to identify an impact of exporting
on ...rm innovation. The second approach estimates a dynamic structural model of the ...rm'       s
export and R&D investment decisions. The advantage of the structural model is that, by
quantifying the pathways linking R&D investment and long-run pro...ts, it can measure the
expected return to R&D for both exporting and non-exporting ...rms. This framework provides
a natural measure of the return to R&D: the change in long-run ...rm value resulting from R&D
investment. Also, by estimating the dynamic decision rule for R&D, the model can analyze
counterfactuals including the response of ...rm R&D investment to changes in export market
pro...ts or to R&D subsidies.
     In this article we use Swedish ...rm-level data to estimate a dynamic, structural model
of a ...rm' s R&D investment while allowing the investment to interact with the ...rm'     s export
participation. We generalize the discrete choice models of Aw, Roberts, and Xu (2011) and
Peters, Roberts, and Vuong (2018) by treating R&D investment as a continuous decision and
analyze both the intensive and extensive margin of the investment process. In our framework,
the ...rm' s optimal choice of R&D is based on comparing the expected long-run payo¤ with
the incurred cost of innovation. For an exporting ...rm, the payo¤ to R&D investment comes
from its impact on the path of future productivity, sales, and pro...ts separately in the domestic
and export markets. In addition to these sales and pro...t impacts, R&D-induced productivity
improvements can raise the likelihood a non-exporting ...rm enters the foreign market. In our
model, the return to R&D can di¤er in the export and domestic market, not just because
one market is larger than the other, but because the R&D investment di¤erentially impacts
productivity in the two markets. We estimate the innovation cost function which consists of
both variable and ...xed cost components. The variable cost depends on the ...rm'    s actual R&D
expenditure and allows for adjustment costs or diminishing returns to R&D spending. The
...xed cost can vary with the ...rm's R&D history to re   ect di¤erences in the cost of starting or
maintaining an R&D program.
     Both trade policy and innovation policy can alter the amount of innovation in a country
by altering the incentives of ...rms to invest in R&D. The structural model we estimate allows
us to quantify the e¤ects of policy changes on R&D investment and long-run ...rm value. We
simulate how ...rm R&D investments, including the proportion of ...rms investing and the level
of expenditure, respond to several counterfactual policy environments including tari¤ changes
and R&D subsidies. Changes in tari¤s a¤ect the size and pro...tability of the export market,
and impact the ...rm' s R&D decisions on the intensive and extensive margins. The magnitude
of these e¤ects depends on the ...rm'  s productivity and size. By simulating the e¤ect of export

                                                2
market tari¤s, we measure one source of dynamic losses from trade restrictions. R&D subsidies
are often used to promote innovation and these can be granted proportionately to the ...rm'       s
actual R&D spending or as lump-sum payments directed at R&D startups. Changes in subsidies
alter the ...rm's cost of innovation and can have direct e¤ects on both investment margins.
      With a relatively small domestic market, Swedish ...rms rely heavily on sales in foreign
markets. In manufacturing, export sales account for more than 47 percent of the sector'           s
total sales. Many Swedish ...rms produce high-tech products and are signi...cant investors in
R&D. Overall R&D spending equals 3.7 percent of GDP. This combination of reliance on high-
tech products and export markets makes the linkage between exporting and R&D investment
particularly important for the future success of these ...rms. Our data also show clear patterns in
the relationship between exporting and R&D investment within industry. Both the probability
a ...rm invests in R&D (extensive margin) and the R&D-sales ratio (intensive margin) rise with
the ...rm's export share. These patterns are consistent with an increase in the incentive to invest
in R&D as export participation increases.
      The empirical results show that a ...rm's R&D investment raises its future productivity in
both the domestic and export market with a larger impact in the export market. Productivities
in both markets are highly persistent, implying that R&D expenditures will have a long-lasting
impact on ...rm pro...tability. The expected long-run payo¤ to R&D, measured as the increase
in ...rm value per krona spent on R&D, is substantially higher for exporting ...rms than non-
exporters in each industry and higher in the high-tech industries when compared with the
low-tech industries. For the median ...rm in each high-tech industry, this payo¤ varies from
0.526 to 3.867 for the non-exporting ...rms but 10.174 to 56.595 for the exporting ...rms. The
return to R&D can also be measured as the proportional increase in ...rm value resulting from
the total R&D investment. For the median ...rm in the high-tech industries, this increase varies
from a low of 3.4 percent in the metals industry to 82.7 percent in chemicals, with virtually
all of the impact coming from exporting ...rms. In the low-tech industries the returns are much
lower. The impact at the median ...rm varies from 0.6 percent to 1.3 percent, with a larger
impact for exporting ...rms.
      Counterfactual simulations show that a 20 percent tari¤ on Swedish exports reduces the
expected net bene...ts of R&D by an average of 32.2 percent in high-tech industries and 30.4
percent in low-tech industries. Consequently, it reduces the amount of R&D spending by
13.9 percent and 8.9 percent in the high-tech and low-tech industries, respectively. Most of
the adjustment occurs on the intensive margin with ...rms continuing to invest in R&D, but
reducing their R&D spending in response to the reduction in export market pro...ts that results
from the tari¤. Additionally, we simulate the joint e¤ect of the output tari¤ and a retaliatory 20
percent tari¤ on inputs. The decline in the expected net bene...ts of R&D is at least three times
larger than from the output tari¤ alone. The addition of the input tari¤ has a particularly large
negative impact on the ...rms with low foreign-market productivity. These are ...rms that are
heavily committed to the domestic market. The impact of direct innovation policy is analyzed in
a counterfactual that simulates a 20 percent R&D subsidy. This reduces the cost of innovation
and raises both the expected net bene...ts to R&D, by 3.8 percent, and the amount of R&D
spending, by 11.2 percent, for the high-tech industries. The corresponding numbers in the low-
tech industries are 4.2 and 6.0 percent. Overall, the counterfactual simulations show that not
only innovation policy but also trade policy can have signi...cant e¤ects on the R&D investment

                                                3
by Swedish manufacturing ...rms.
    The ...ndings are important for policy discussions because they show that restrictions on
free trade will undermine e¤orts to use innovation policies to increase R&D and innovation
activity. For countries such as Sweden, that are both export-oriented and innovative, trade and
innovation policies cannot be implemented or analyzed in isolation from each other.
    The next section brie   y reviews the literature that focuses on the causal linkage between
exporting and innovation. The third section summarizes some empirical patterns between
exporting and R&D investment in the Swedish manufacturing industries. The fourth and ...fth
sections develop the theoretical and empirical model of ...rm'   s R&D investment and export
participation. Sections six and seven discuss the empirical results and counterfactual exercises.


2    The Impact of Trade on Investment in Innovation
A large theoretical literature, much of it based on the framework developed by Melitz (2003),
has shown how ...rms that di¤er in their productivity will face di¤erent payo¤s to selling in
export markets, importing material inputs, or making foreign direct investments of production
facilities. This leads to the self-selection of more productive ...rms into these activities. Shu
and Steinwender (2018) review a large number of empirical studies that document productiv-
ity di¤erences between exporting and domestic ...rms as well as ...rms that source their inputs
domestically or import them. These studies generally support the theoretical predictions that
more productive ...rms are more likely to be engaged in international trade. While these het-
erogenous productivity models do not incorporate endogenous ...rm-level productivity dynamics,
they have been used to explain dynamic changes in the composition of trading ...rms in response
to trade liberalizations, and cost or demand shocks in foreign markets.1
    A second line of research focuses on the source of these ...rm-level productivity di¤erences.
The theoretical literature on growth and trade is built on models of endogenous investment in
innovation activities where the incentives to invest are a¤ected by whether the ...rm is engaged in
trade. Theoretical models in this literature include Grossman and Helpman (1993, 1995), Con-
stantini and Melitz (2008), Atkeson and Burstein (2010), Van Long, Ra¤, and Stähler (2011),
Burstein and Melitz (2013) and Akcigit, Ates, and Impullitti (2018). These models emphasize
the role of ...rm investment in innovation activities such as R&D, patenting, new product in-
troduction, process innovations, quality improvements, or adoption of new technologies as the
source of ...rm dynamics. The interesting issue is to what extent participation in international
markets, through either exporting output or importing inputs, leads ...rms to increase their in-
novation e¤orts and thus generates dynamic gains that are not fully captured by static models
of trade. Of particular relevance to this article, Burstein and Melitz (2013) analyze models in
which ...rms make decisions about entry/exit, exporting, and investment in innovation. One
implication is that trade liberalizations lead to di¤erential response of innovation investments
between exporting and non-exporting ...rms which then ampli...es the productivity di¤erences
between the two groups.
   1
     Syverson (2011, Section 4.2.2) reviews the literature linking changes in trade competition to within-...rm
changes in productivity and changes in the composition of ...rms in an industry because of selection e¤ects.




                                                      4
     Many empirical studies have shown that exporting ...rms are more likely to invest in inno-
vation, but the direction of causation is generally not clear.2 The questions we address in this
article are related to the small empirical literature that focuses on the causal impact of changes
in export market conditions on the ...rm' s investment in innovation. The ...rst group of studies in
this literature uses exogenous export market shocks, often from a trade liberalization episode,
to identify a causal e¤ect of exporting on ...rm innovation.3 Bustos (2010) documents a positive
e¤ect of a tari¤ reduction facing Argentine ...rms on their expenditure on technology upgrading.
Lileeva and Tre    er (2010) ...nd that Canadian ...rms that were induced to expand exporting
in response to U.S tari¤ reductions, also increased product innovation and had higher rates
of technology adoption. Coelli, Moxnes, and Ultveit-Moe (2015) use data from 60 countries
and ...nd a positive e¤ect of the trade liberalization in the 1990s on ...rm patenting. Aghion,
Bergeaud, Lequien, and Melitz (2018) ...nd that high-productivity French ...rms increase their
patenting activity in response to positive export market shocks while low productivity ...rms
decrease their patenting. They explain this with a combination of an expansion of the export
market, which di¤erentially bene...ts high-productivity ...rms, and an increase in competition in
the destination markets, which disadvantages low-productivity ...rms.
      Alternatively, dynamic structural models of the ...rm'   s export and R&D decisions have
been used to measure the impact of exporting on the return to R&D investment. Aw, Roberts,
and Xu (2011) model R&D investment as a discrete decision that increases ...rm productivity
and study the extensive margin of ...rm R&D investment. The authors analyze ...rm data for
Taiwanese electronics producers and ...nd that, conditional on current productivity, exporting
...rms have larger productivity gains than non-exporters and that an expansion of the export
market substantially increases the probability of investing in R&D. This mechanism contributes
to the productivity gap between exporting and domestic ...rms.4 Peters, Roberts, and Vuong
(2018) also treat R&D as a discrete decision but allow a more          exible relationship between
R&D and the impact on export and domestic productivity. They estimate the investment
model using data on German high-tech manufacturing ...rms and ...nd that an increase in ...rm
R&D raises the probability that the ...rm realizes new product or process innovations and these
innovations raise future productivity. Both e¤ects are larger for export market productivity, so
that exporting ...rms will have substantially higher expected returns to R&D and thus a higher
probability of investing. Simulating contractions in the foreign markets due to tari¤s, they ...nd
   2
      The empirical literature showing that exporting is positively correlated with measures of innovation includes
Bernard and Jensen (1997), Aw, Roberts, and Winston (2007), Van Beveren and Vandenbussche (2010), Al-
tomonte, Aquilante, Bekes, and Ottaviano (2013), Becker and Egger (2013), and Damijan, Kostevc, and Rojec
(2017).
    3
      A related literature has studied how exogenous import market shocks, often from China'       s expansion into
new markets after it joined the WTO, a¤ected innovation. Bloom, Draca, and Van Reenen(2016) ...nd a positive
e¤ect on ...rm patents, IT spending, and R&D spending for 12 European countries. In contrast, Autor, Dorn,
Hanson, Pisano, and Shu (2017) ...nd a negative e¤ect on patenting and R&D expenditure for U.S. ...rms. Using
U.S. data, Xu and Gong (2017) ...nd a negative e¤ect on R&D spending for low-productivity ...rms but a positive
impact for high-productivity ...rms.
    4
      Using a similar framework with Spanish ...rm data, Máñez, Rochina-Barrachina, and Sanchis-Llopis (2015)
...nd that two activity variables, exporting and R&D, increase both productivity and the probability of undertak-
ing the complementary activity in future periods. An exception to the ...nding of a positive relationship between
trade exposure and technology upgrading is the study by Santos (2017). He ...nds that reductions in trade costs
increase competition among domestic ...rms and reduce their incentives to adopt new technologies.


                                                        5
that a 20 percent output tari¤ on German exports reduces the long-run payo¤ to R&D by 24.2
to 46.9 percent for the median ...rm across ...ve high-tech manufacturing industries. This leads to
a reduction in the probability of investing in R&D by between 5.0 and 16.0 percentage points.
In both cases the payo¤ to R&D investment is signi...cantly impacted by the pro...tability of the
export market.
    Two other empirical studies also utilize a structural framework to quantify the e¤ect of
trade exposure on the ...rm's incentive to innovate. Lim, Tre   er, and Yu (2018) use a calibrated
structural model to focus on the roles of export market expansion and competition on the
patterns of patenting, R&D spending, and new product sales for Chinese manufacturing ...rms.
They ...nd that market expansion positively impacts innovation measures and competition neg-
atively impacts them, but ...rms can escape the competition e¤ects if they are able to innovate
into less-competitive niche markets. Using a general equilibrium model calibrated to U.S. data,
Akcigit, Ates, and Impullitti (2018) ...nd that import tari¤s provide small welfare gains in the
short run, but reduce the incentives to innovate which results in large welfare losses in the long
run. They also ...nd that R&D subsidies are e¤ective in promoting R&D investment for new
and incumbent ...rms.
    The empirical model developed in sections 4 and 5 will be used to analyze di¤erences in the
rate of return to R&D between exporting and non-exporting ...rms and measure how each will
respond, on both the intensive and extensive margin of R&D investment, to changes in export
market pro...tability and R&D subsidies.


3    R&D Investment and Exporting by Swedish Manufacturing
     Firms
In the Swedish manufacturing sector, high-tech products account for a substantial fraction of
output, and many industries are both export and R&D intensive. Firm export and innovation
strategies are closely linked and ...rm-level decisions in these two dimensions must be analyzed in
concert. This is particularly true when using counterfactual simulations to analyze the impact
of innovation and trade policies. This section describes some patterns of R&D investment and
exporting among Swedish manufacturing ...rms that will be important in the speci...cation of the
structural model.
     The data set we construct contains ...rm-level observations for the years 2003-2010 on do-
mestic and export sales, input use, and R&D investment for a sample of Swedish manufacturing
...rms. We aggregate the ...rms into twelve industries, and categorize six of them as high-tech and
six as low-tech industries based on the R&D-sales ratios in the industry. A detailed description
of the data set construction is given in the Appendix.
     Table 1 summarizes R&D intensity, measured as industry R&D expenditure relative to
total industry sales, and export intensity, industry exports as a share of total industry sales.
There is a marked di¤erence in R&D investment between the high-tech and low-tech groups.
In the high-tech industries R&D expenditure equals 6.5 percent of sales, on average across the
years, while in the low-tech industries it equals 0.9 percent of sales. Both industry groups are
dependent on export market sales. In the high-tech industries, exports account for 53.0 percent
of total industry sales and in the low-tech industries they account for 47.6 percent of sales. The


                                                6
structural model developed in the next section allows for a di¤erent impact of R&D in the two
industry groups and between export and domestic market sales.
      Table 2 looks within the industry groups and summarizes the variation in R&D investment
across ...rms with variation in their export intensity. The top half of the table summarizes the
relationship for ...rms in the high-tech industry group and the bottom half summarizes it for the
low-tech group. Firm observations are divided into four export categories. The ...rst group are
the non-exporting observations. In the remaining three, exporting ...rms are assigned into three
groups based on their export intensity: below the 25th percentile of the intensity distribution,
between the 25th and 50th, and above the 50th percentile. For observations in each of these
four groups, the columns of the table summarize the distribution of R&D investment. The ...rst
column is the fraction of ...rms that invest in R&D, the remaining three columns give the 10th,
50th, and 90th percentile of the distribution of R&D intensity.
      The table shows that there is substantial variation within each group in both the extensive
and intensive margin of R&D investment and both margins are correlated with export intensity.
Focusing on the high-tech industries, the ...rst column shows that the fraction of ...rms investing
in R&D, the extensive margin, rises with the export intensity of the ...rm. Among the non-
exporters, the probability of investing in R&D is 0.175 and this rises monotonically to 0.776 for
...rms that are in the upper half of the export intensity distribution. Among the ...rms that invest
in R&D, the intensity of investment varies substantially across observations. Among the non-
exporters, 10 percent of the observations have R&D expenditure that is less than two-tenths
of one percent of sales (0.0017). The median ...rm has an expenditure equal to 1.54 percent of
sales and the ...rm at the 90th percentile has R&D expenditure equal to 13.80 percent of annual
sales. The R&D investment can be undertaken by the ...rm to impact future pro...ts from its
domestic market sales but also in order to increase expected future pro...ts from export sales
and possibly induce entry into exporting. Among the ...rms that export, the R&D intensity
varies substantially, from 0.0021 at the 10th percentile to 0.1442 at the 90th percentile. The
table also documents a clear positive relationship between R&D intensity and export intensity
among exporting ...rms.
      For the low-tech industries, there are two primary di¤erences in these patterns. The rela-
tionship between exporting and R&D investment is weaker and, consistent with the evidence
seen in Table 1, there is less overall investment in R&D. The ...rst column shows that the prob-
ability of investing in R&D rises from 0.162 among the non-exporters to 0.464 for ...rms with
an export intensity above the median. Only about 46 percent of the high-intensity exporters
invest in R&D compared with 77 percent in the high-tech industries. The R&D intensity levels
are much smaller than in the high-tech industries. At the median, the R&D intensity varies
from 0.0066 to 0.0099 across the export groups. At the 90th percentile the R&D intensity varies
from 0.0414 to 0.0686 across export categories but does not increase monotonically with the
export intensity at either the 50th or 90th percentiles.
       These simple summary statistics indicate a positive correlation between exporting and
R&D investment on both the extensive and intensive margin but the strength of the correlation
di¤ers between the low-tech and high-tech industry groups. There are also a substantial group
of ...rms that invest in R&D but do not export and still others that export at a high rate but
do not invest in R&D. The dynamic model of R&D investment developed in the next sections
contains two sources of ...rm-level heterogeneity, an export market productivity and a domestic

                                                 7
market productivity, that can each be impacted by the ...rm'   s R&D expenditure. These two
productivity shocks will help to explain the observed relationship between exporting and R&D
investment on both the extensive and intensive margin. The large di¤erence in R&D investment
rates between the two industry groups also suggests substantial di¤erences in the bene...ts or
costs of R&D and the model will be estimated separately for the two industry groups as a
result.


4     A Model of the Firm'
                         s Investment in R&D
In this section we develop a dynamic model of the ...rm' s R&D investment. We begin by deriving
the ...rm's revenue functions in the domestic and export market and its static pro...t function.
In each period t, ...rm j observes its capital stock, productivity in domestic and export market
sales, and past R&D investments. The ...rm maximizes its period t pro...ts by choosing its
optimal output prices, production quantity, and whether or not it sells to foreign markets. The
...rm then chooses its R&D investment which acts to improve the expected future values of its
productivities and pro...ts at home and abroad. We develop the ...rm'  s dynamic decision rule for
R&D incorporating both the intensive and extensive margin of investment.

4.1   Domestic Revenue, Export Revenue, and Short-Run Pro...ts
In period t; ...rm j produces output at constant, short-run marginal cost

                             ln cjt =     0   +   k   ln kjt +    w    ln wt    jt ;

where kjt is the ...rm capital stock, wt contain the prices of variable inputs, which are assumed
to be equal across all ...rms, and jt is the ...rm's production e¢ ciency, which is known by the
...rm but not observed by the researcher.
     The demand curve for ...rm j 's product in the domestic market is given by
                                     d
                                    qjt = ~d   d
                                           t (pjt )
                                                            d   exp(    d
                                                                        jt );                  (1)

where ~ d                                                             d
          t denotes the industry aggregate demand for this product, pjt is the price for ...rm j 's
                                                                                              d
product in the domestic market, d is the constant elasticity of demand ( d < 0), and jt is
a ...rm-speci...c domestic demand shock. The latter represents di¤erences in consumer demand
across ...rms and is known to the ...rm but not the researcher.
     Each ...rm also faces a CES demand for its output in the export market
                                         f
                                        qjt = ~f   f
                                               t (pjt )
                                                            f   exp(    f
                                                                        jt )                   (2)

where ~ f                                                                       f
        t is the aggregate component of demand in the aggregate export market, pjt is the
price ...rm j charges in the export market, and f is the constant elasticity of demand. f        jt
is a ...rm-speci...c export demand shifter that captures di¤erences in the total demand for the
...rm j 's output in the export market due to consumers'taste for ...rm j 's product or the ...rm's
export scope. Because ...rms can export to a di¤erent number of destinations, ...rms with a large


                                                        8
number of export destination will tend to have larger values for f
                                                                 jt : This demand representation
abstracts from di¤erences in demand across destinations, but allows us to represent the ...rm'   s
total export demand as a function of a ...rm-speci...c demand component f   jt : Similar to jt and
 d      f
 jt ;    is known to the ...rm but is not observed by the researcher.
        jt
   In the domestic market, the ...rm chooses its output price to maximize its domestic pro...t.
The ...rm' s revenue in the domestic market at the optimal price is:

                                     d      d        d
                                 ln Rjt =   0   +    t   +(   d   + 1)(   k   ln kjt       ! jt ) + "d
                                                                                                     jt                               (3)
                             h              i
where d                                                                          d       ~d
         0 = ( d + 1) ln 1+ d + 0 captures all constant terms, and t =ln t + (1 + d ) w ln
                                   d


wt incorporates all time-varying demand and cost factors that are common across ...rms. The
term ! jt = jt          ( 1      ) djt captures all variation in domestic revenue for ...rm j arising from
                            d +1
unobserved cost and demand factors. We refer to ! jt as the ...rm'           s domestic productivity and
di¤erences across ...rms can arise from di¤erences in production e¢ ciency, product quality, or
markups. Domestic productivity will be a key state variable in the ...rm'            s dynamic choice of
                               d
R&D. The error term "jt captures transitory shocks to domestic revenue that are unknown to
the ...rm when it maximizes pro...ts.
    Not all ...rms participate in the export market. When deciding to export ...rms observe an
export cost cz  jt that contains, for instance, transaction costs related to the export activities, sunk
costs, and adjustment costs when ...rms alter their set of export destinations.5 Given knowledge
of jt; f             z
          jt , and cjt , ...rm j maximizes its foreign market pro...ts by choosing its optimal foreign
market prices and whether or not to export. If the ...rm chooses to export, its export revenue
at the optimal output price is:
                                     f      f        f
                                 ln Rjt =   0   +    t   +(   f   + 1)(   k   ln kjt         jt )   + "f
                                                                                                       jt                             (4)
                              h                 i
             f                                                f
where        0   =(   f   + 1) ln 1+f +     0       and       t   =ln ~ f
                                                                        t + (1 +           f ) w ln    wt . All the ...rm-speci...c
                                      f
                                                                                                            1          f
unobserved cost and demand factors are captured in                               jt    =     jt        (           )   jt   which we will
                                                                                                            f +1

label the ...rm's unobserved foreign revenue productivity. The error term       captures transitory         "f
                                                                                                             jt
shocks to export revenue that are unknown to the ...rm when it maximizes pro...ts.
    If ...rm j competes in monopolistically competitive markets and has the cost and demand
structure speci...ed, their short-run pro...ts in the domestic and export markets are fractions of
their sales in the respective market. Speci...cally, the gross pro...ts in domestic ( d ) and export
( f ) markets are:
                                      d =      1 d
                                      jt          Rjt ( d
                                                        t ; kjt ; ! jt )
                                                d
                                      f                                                          (5)
                                      jt =
                                               1
                                                  Rjt ( f
                                                   f
                                                        t ; kjt ; jt ).
                                                          f

    Because exporting ...rms also have to incur export costs, a ...rm will choose to export if the
net pro...t from exporting is greater than zero. Before the export cost is realized the probability
   5
    We do not distinguish ...xed costs of exporting from sunk entry costs because very few ...rms in our data
switch their export status. Das, Roberts, and Tybout (2007) discuss how switches in export status are used
to identify ...xed and sunk costs. Export choice is endogenous in this model but it is not treated as a dynamic
decision.


                                                                  9
of exporting for ...rm j is given by
                                             f                                        f
                                            Pjt = Pr(ejt = 1) = Pr(                   jt   > cz
                                                                                              jt );                                  (6)

where ejt takes the value 1 if ...rm j exports to any destination and zero otherwise. The expected
short-run total pro...t of the ...rm is
                                        d       d                     f      f       f                              f
             (kjt ; ! jt ;   jt )   =       (   t ; kjt ; ! jt )   + Pjt [       (   t ; kjt ;    jt )   E (cz
                                                                                                             jt j   jt   > cz
                                                                                                                            jt )];   (7)
               f
where E (cz          z
          jt j jt > cjt ) is the expected ...rm export cost conditional on the ...rm exporting. The
short-run expected pro...ts of the ...rm are determined by its capital stock, market level factors
in both the domestic and export market, the cost of exporting, and the ...rm-speci...c revenue
productivities ! jt and jt .

4.2   The Role of R&D
The two key factors that capture unobserved ...rm heterogeneity in the domestic and export
market are ! jt and jt . We let these two factors evolve persistently and stochastically over time
but also allow for them to be a¤ected by the ...rm'  s R&D expenditure. We specify the ...rm'    s
domestic revenue productivity process as

                                                ! jt = g! (! jt       1 ; rdjt 1 )     +     jt ;                                    (8)

where ! jt 1 is the ...rm's previous productivity level, allowing for productivity to persist over
time. The ...rm'  s last period's R&D expenditure is denoted by rdjt 1 , allowing for R&D in-
vestment to a¤ect the path of future productivity. Through the persistence in the productivity
process, the impact of R&D investment will be carried over time and allow for the gain from
R&D to be long-lived. The stochastic component of the process is jt , which is assumed to
be iid across ...rms and time with E[ jt ] = 0 and V ar[ jt ] = 2 . The productivity shocks jt
are realized in t and are not correlated with ! jt 1 or rdjt 1 . This allows for ...rms with the
same previous period productivity and R&D expenditure to di¤er in their current productivity
through luck or other sources of randomness in the innovation process.
    Similarly, we model the ...rm' s export market productivity to depend on its previous level,
its R&D e¤ort, and a stochastic component

                                                  jt   =g (        jt 1 ; rdjt 1 )     +     jt                                      (9)

where the shocks jt are iid with E[ jt ] = 0 and V ar[ jt ] = 2 . There is both persistence and
randomness in the export market productivity, captured by the presence of lagged jt 1 and
  jt . The process of foreign market productivity evolution is allowed to di¤er from the process
for domestic market productivity as discussed in the trade and endogenous growth literature.
Grossman and Helpman (1993, 1995) point out that ...rms operating in international markets
may have access to a broader set of opportunities for innovation, be exposed to new products
or production processes by their foreign competitors, or be better able to exploit innovations
that they develop as a result of their R&D investment. This will be captured in our framework
by di¤erent processes for productivity evolution in each market. These processes specify the

                                                                      10
impact of R&D on ...rm productivity, a crucial component of the return to R&D investment
and thus the ...rm's incentives to invest.6
    Our framework allows for two underlying sources of persistent heterogeneity and each of
them can be a¤ected in a di¤erent way by the ...rm'      s choice of R&D expenditure. If R&D
investment has a larger impact on than on ! , it can induce new ...rms to enter the export
market but also lead to di¤erences in the pro...tability path between exporting ...rms and those
that focus solely on the domestic market.

4.3    Dynamic R&D Investments
In this section we model the ...rm's dynamic decision to invest in R&D. In this framework, the
...rm uses R&D investment to buy improvements in expected future productivity. How much
it costs the ...rm to achieve the desired level of improvement depends on the returns to scale
in the innovation process, adjustment costs, and any startup costs that the ...rm must occur
when it begins to invest in R&D. The cost of a productivity improvement is speci...ed with an
innovation cost function that is the sum of a variable cost and a ...xed cost:

                      CI (rdjt ;   jt ; I (rdjt 1 ))   = V C (rdjt ;   jt )   + F C (I (rdjt   1 )):         (10)
The variable cost of innovation V C ( ) is a function of the ...rm's current spending on R&D, rdjt ;
and a ...rm-time speci...c shock jt : The shock captures, for example, di¤erences in the ...rm'    s
cost e¢ ciency in producing productivity improvements, di¤erences in the portfolio of investment
projects, or di¤erences in subsidies or tax treatment of the ...rm'   s R&D spending. The shock is
observed by the ...rm at the time it chooses rdjt but is not observed by the econometrician. This
speci...cation recognizes that the variable cost is endogenous because of the endogenous choice
of R&D expenditure. Since the dynamic choice of R&D depends on the ...rm'         s productivities !
and ; which evolve with some persistence over time, this will introduce a source of persistence
in the ...rm's variable cost of innovation.7 The ...xed cost F C ( ) captures any di¤erences in the
cost of innovation that are not related to the amount of R&D spending and can include its
past experience and expertise in innovation. Denoting I (rdjt 1 ) as a discrete indicator of prior
period expenditure, ...xed costs will di¤er between ...rms that are paying a start-up cost to begin
R&D investment I (rdjt 1 ) = 0 or a maintenance cost for ongoing operations I (rdjt 1 ) = 1:
F C is treated as a draw from a known distribution that di¤ers depending on I (rdjt 1 ).
   6
     Several studies have generalized the original model of exogenous productivity evolution by Olley and Pakes
(1996) to incorporate endogenous ...rm choices. Doraszelski and Jaumandreu (2013) allow a ...rm'      s productiv-
ity index to evolve endogenously with investments in R&D. Peters, Roberts, Vuong, and Fryges (2017) model
revenue productivity as evolving endogenously with realizations of product and process innovations by the ...rm.
Aw, Roberts, and Xu (2011) extend the stochastic productivity framework to interrelated export and domestic
markets where productivity evolution is a¤ected by the ...rm'  s discrete investment in R&D and discrete partic-
ipation in the export market. The latter allows for learning-by-exporting that is potentially important in their
developing country context. Foreign revenue productivity evolves exogenously and is not a¤ected by the ...rm'    s
R&D investment. Peters, Roberts and Vuong (2018) allow R&D to di¤erentially a¤ect productivity in the export
and domestic market where productivity evolution depends on indicators of product and process innovation.
   7
     The models by Aw, Roberts, and Xu (2011) and Peters, Roberts, and Vuong (2018) treat the total cost of
innovation as a stochastic shock which does not allow for persistence in a ...rm's innovation cost over time.




                                                           11
    In this environment, the ...rm chooses the optimal R&D expenditure to maximize the dis-
counted sum of future pro...ts. The ...rm's value function, before the R&D ...xed cost and variable
cost shock is realized, is given by:

                                                                     Z
V (kjt ; ! jt ;   jt ; I (rdjt   1 )) =    (kjt ; ! jt ;    jt ) +       maxfV 0 (kjt+1 ; ! jt+1 ;   jt+1 );               (11)

                                          max V 1 (kjt+1 ; ! jt+1 ;          jt+1 )   CI (rdjt ;   jt ; I (rdjt 1 ))   gd dF C
                                          rd>0

where V 0 ( ) and V 1 ( ) are the discounted expected future value of the ...rm if they choose to
not invest in R&D or invest in R&D, respectively. They are de...ned as
                                             Z Z
              V 0 (kjt+1 ; ! jt+1 ; jt+1 ) =     V (k; g ! (!; ); g ( ; )jrdjt = 0)d d       (12)

and                                                        Z Z
                      1
                   V (kjt+1 ; ! jt+1 ;    jt+1 )   =             V (k; g ! (!; rd; ); g ( ; rd; ))d d                      (13)

where is the discount rate. The ...rm that does not invest in R&D has its subsequent period
value of ! and determined solely by the persistence in the Markov process and the random
shocks and . The ...rm that invests in R&D at the optimal, positive level, has its future value
additionally a¤ected by the shifts in the ! and processes that result from R&D investment.
The optimal choice of R&D rdjt is a function of the state variables and satis...es the ...rst-order
condition:
                                @V (kjt ; ! jt ; jt ; I (rdjt 1 ))
                                                                   =0                          (14)
                                             @rdjt

5     Estimation
5.1     The Evolution of Domestic and Foreign Market Productivity
The ...rst goal of the empirical model is to estimate the parameters of the revenue functions,
equations (3) and (4), the parameters of the productivity processes, equations (8) and (9), and
to construct estimates of ...rm domestic and foreign-market productivity ! jt and jt . To do
this we rely on the insights from the stochastic productivity literature as originally developed
by Olley and Pakes (1996), and extended to the case of two unobserved ...rm-level shocks in
Ackerberg, Benkard, Berry, and Pakes (2007).8
    Though not explicitly modelled in our framework, we assume a ...rm makes capital investment
decision in each period based on its current capital stock, and levels of domestic and foreign
revenue productivity
                                      ijt = it (kjt ; ! jt ; jt ):                           (15)
  8
    Jaumandreu and Yin (2018) estimate a production model with both unobserved demand and cost shocks.
They use data on the revenue of Chinese ...rms in the domestic and export market to recover the two shocks.




                                                                 12
   When the ...rm decides about its export activities that maximize total period pro...t, it
implicitly chooses the number of destination markets it exports to. The log of the number of
destination markets ndjt then depends on the state variables

                                               ndjt = ndt (kjt, ! jt ;        jt ):                                       (16)

The variable ndjt provides information about the destination networks of the exporters. It does
not only measure pure demand shocks in foreign markets, it also provides information about
exporter e¢ ciency in expanding its network of countries.9 Under certain regularity conditions
(monotonicity and supermodularity, Pakes (1994)), the two policy functions can be inverted to
express the unobserved productivities as functions of the observable capital stock, investment,
and number of export destinations:10

                                          ! jt = it 1 (kjt, ijt ; ndjt )                                                  (17)
                                                                  1
                                            jt        = ndt (kjt, ijt ; ndjt )

Substituting these expressions into the domestic and export revenue functions, equations (3)
and (4), allows us to write sales in each market as a function of observable variables. Replacing
! jt in the domestic revenue function with a general function of kjt , ijt and ndjt gives:
                                      d
                                  ln Rjt =       I    +    t   + ht (kjt, ijt ; ndjt ) + ud
                                                                                          jt                              (18)

where the function ht (kjt, ijt ; ndjt ) = ( d + 1)( k ln kjt ! jt (kjt, ijt ; ndjt )); I is an industry
intercept, t captures common, time-varying factors in ln d                      d
                                                                  t , and ujt is a transitory error.
Similarly, replacing jt in the export revenue function gives:
                                       f
                                   ln Rjt =       I   +    t   + bt (kjt, ijt ; ndjt ) + uf
                                                                                          jt                              (19)

where the function bt (kjt, ijt ; ndjt ) = ( f + 1)( k ln kjt           jt (kjt, ijt ; ndjt )), I is an industry
intercept, t captures common, time-varying factors in ln t ; and uf   f
                                                                                   jt is a transitory error.
    We approximate ht (kjt, ijt ; ndjt ) and bt (kjt, ijt ; ndjt ) by polynomial functions in their argu-
ments and estimate equations (18) and (19) using ordinary least squares.11 We can then express
   9
     Recent empirical studies have shown that several dimensions of ...rm heterogeneity are important in explaining
patterns of export participation, the number of markets a ...rm serves, the speci...c destinations a ...rm enters, and
the distribution of exporting ...rm sales. Eaton, Kortum, and Kramarz (2011), Das, Roberts and Tybout (2007),
and Arkolakis (2010) ...nd that di¤erences in e¢ ciency and entry costs are two important dimensions of ...rm
heterogeneity that are related to export patterns. Roberts, Xu, Fan, and Zhang (2018) ...nd that productivity,
demand, and entry cost di¤erences are important in explaining pricing, output, and entry decisions across
destination markets for Chinese exporters.
  10
     See also Maican and Orth (2020) for a detailed discussion of the properties of policy functions in complex
dynamic programming problems with endogenous states.
  11
     Relying solely on export revenues of exporting ...rms to uncover the foreign revenue productivity jt , induces
a selection e¤ect that a¤ects the identi...cation of k . Similar to Olley and Pakes (1996), we control for the
selection bias by including the export probability into the Markov process of the foreign productivity:

                                               =g (                       ^f
                                          jt              jt 1 ; rdjt 1 ; Pjt )   +   jt :

                                                f
  The probability of exporting is estimated as Pjt = (ijt              1 ; kjt 1 ; ndjt 1 ),   where the nonparametric function


                                                                 13
                                                                                               ^
the lagged unobserved domestic and foreign productivities as functions of these ...tted values h
     ^
and b and the unknown parameters d ; f , and k :

                                                                           1    ^ jt
                                             ! jt    1     =                    h                       1   +     k   ln kjt   1                                      (20)
                                                                       ( d + 1)
                                                                           1    ^
                                                  jt 1     =                    bjt                     1   +     k   ln kjt   1
                                                                       ( f + 1)

      To estimate the processes for productivity evolution, we specify the functions g! ( ) and g ( )
as:
                                                        2                                                2
               ! jt =       1 ! jt 1         +      2 ! jt 1   +       3 rdjt 1                +     4 rdjt 1          +     5 ! jt 1 rdjt 1       +     jt           (21)
                                                      2                                                 2
                  jt   =    1 jt 1           +      2 jt 1     +       3 rdjt 1            +        4 rdjt 1          +     5 jt 1 rdjt 1          +   jt:            (22)
Substituting equations (20), (21), and (22) into the revenue functions, equations (3) and (4)
gives domestic and foreign market revenue in terms of observables and the structural parameters
 k ; d ; f ; 1 ::: 5 ; 1 ; ::: 5 :


            d                                                              2                                                    2
        ln Rjt =           (       d   + 1)        1 ! jt 1    +       2 ! jt 1            +       3 rdjt 1          +      4 rdjt 1     +    5 ! jt 1 rdjt 1       ) (23)
                        +(         d   + 1)       k kjt   +    I   +       t       (       d   + 1)         jt   +    ud
                                                                                                                       jt




              f                                                          2                                                   2
          ln Rjt =             (       f   + 1)     1 jt 1     +       2 jt 1              +       3 rdjt 1          +   4 rdjt 1       +    5 jt 1 rdjt 1      )     (24)
                           +(          f   + 1)    k kjt   +       I   +       t       (       f   + 1)      jt   +    uf
                                                                                                                        jt


    The error terms are ( d + 1) jt + ud   jt and    ( f + 1) jt + uf   jt which consist of the period t
transitory shocks to productivity evolution and the revenue functions. The moment conditions
specify that these errors are uncorrelated with Zjt =(h  ^ jt 1 , h
                                                                  ^2 , ^         ^2
                                                                    jt 1 bjt 1 , bjt 1 , kjt , kjt 1 , rdjt 1 ,
rd2              ^                ^
  jt 1 , (rdjt 1 hjt 1 ); (rdjt 1 bjt 1 ); Dt ; DI ) where the latter two arguments are year and
industry dummies. To identify the demand elasticities d and f ; we rely on the static demand
and short-run marginal cost assumptions. At pro...t maximizing prices and quantity, marginal
cost is equal to marginal revenue in each market, such that

                                    d         f         d                                           1        f                  1
                           tvcjt = qjt cjt + qjt cjt = Rjt (1 +                                         ) + Rjt (1 +                   ) + ujt ;                      (25)
                                                                                                    d                              f

where the error term ujt is the measurement error in total variable cost. We add two additional
moment conditions specifying that ujt is uncorrelated with Rjt d and Rf : This gives a total of
                                                                         jt

  ( ) is approximated by a second-order polynomial. This estimate of the probability of exporting does not
take full advantage of the structure of the export decision outlined in section 4.2, but rather is a reduced-form
approximation that controls for the endogenous choice of exporting when estimating the process for the foreign
                                                                          f
revenue productivity jt . The results show that the terms that include Pjt   are not statistically signi...cant in the
foreign revenue productivity process, which implies that our estimates are not a¤ected by export selection bias.


                                                                                   14
40 moment conditions. Minimizing the sum of the weighted moment conditions, using Z 0 Z as
the weighting matrix, provides estimates of the structural parameters of the pro...t function and
productivity processes.12

5.2     R&D and Export Cost Functions
The second goal of the empirical model is to estimate the dynamic parameters for the innovation
and export cost. The variable cost of innovation is speci...ed as:
                                                                                     2
                                  V C (rdjt ;     jt )     =    1 rdjt      +    2 rdjt   + rdjt          jt :                             (26)

The parameter 2 > 0 re       ects the adjustment cost or increasing marginal cost of innovation.
The deviations jt are stochastic and we assume             N (0; 2 ): The structural error term jt
allows for di¤erences in the variable and marginal costs of innovation across ...rms and will
account for heterogeneity in the level of R&D expenditure across ...rms. The parameter
re  ects the dispersion in the marginal cost of innovation across ...rms.13 The shocks are rescaled
as =          where        N (0; 1) and the variable cost function becomes
                                                                                    2
                               V C (rdjt ;      jt )   =       1 rdjt   +       2 rdjt   +         rdjt     jt :                           (27)

    The ...xed cost of innovation is modeled as a ...rm-time speci...c shock. It is speci...ed as a
draw from an exponential distribution where the mean of the distribution depends on the ...rm'    s
prior period R&D experience I (rdjt 1 ):
                                                       m                                  s
                   F C (I (rdjt   1 ))   exp(              I (rdjt      1   > 0) +            (1        I (rdjt    1   > 0)))              (28)

The parameter m is interpreted as the mean ...xed cost for ...rms that are maintaining an
ongoing R&D investment and s is the mean ...xed cost for ...rms that are just starting to invest
in R&D. The variable cost of R&D investment a¤ects the ...rm'       s investment decision on the
intensive margin, while the ...xed cost does so on the extensive margin.
    We also specify the distribution of exporting cost faced by the ...rms when making their
export decision. The export cost is assumed to be a ...rm-time speci...c draw from an exponential
distribution with mean parameter f : cz   jt   exp( f ). Therefore, according to the equation (6),
the probability of exporting is
                                       f
                                     Pjt = 1 exp( f          f
                                                        jt = )                               (29)
                                                                                                   f                        f         f     f
and the mean export cost, conditional on exporting is E (cz
                                                          jt j                                     jt   > cz
                                                                                                           jt ) =           jt [(1   Pjt )=Pjt ]:
                      f              f
The expressions for Pjt and E (cz          z
                                jt j jt > cjt ) can be substituted into the ...rm's short-run pro...t
function, equation (7) to complete the speci...cation of the model parameters.
  12
     The measure ^  bjt is estimated from the export revenue equation. Thus, the equation (20) only gives us jt
for exporting ...rms. To impute the revenue productivity jt for non-exporting observations, we invert the capital
investment equation (15) and regress the obtained jt for exporters on their (kjt ; ijt ; ! jt ). Because the investment
policy function is given for all ...rms, the foreign revenue productivity for non-exporters is then constructed as
the ...tted value of jt using the non-exporters'information on (kjt ; ijt ; ! jt ).
  13
     Barwick, Kalouptsidi, and Bin Zahur (2019) and Ackerberg, Benkard, Berry, and Pakes (2007) develop
dynamic models with shocks that a¤ect the continuous part of the ...rm'      s choice variable.


                                                                   15
5.3     The Firm Value Function and R&D Policy Function
The sources of ...rm-level heterogeneity in long-run pro...ts and R&D investment at the extensive
and intensive margin are the state variables kjt ; ! jt ; jt ; I (rdjt 1 ). To estimate the dynamic
parameters for innovation and export costs, we approximate the value function for each ...rm at
a given value of the dynamic parameters using basis functions. We approximate the two value
functions, equations (12) and (13) as:

                   V 1 (k; g ! (!; rd; ); g ( ; rd; ))                 (k; g ! (!; rd; ); g ( ; rd; ))c1
                           V 0 (k; g ! (!; ); g ( ; ))                 (k; g ! (!; ); g ( ; ))c0

where c0 is a vector of approximation parameters for ...rms that do not do R&D, c1 is a
vector of approximation parameters for ...rms that do R&D, and the basis functions (k; g ! ; g )
are Chebyshev polynomials. The left hand side of the value function equation (11) can be
approximated as either V 0 or V 1 depending on the ...rm's past R&D:

 V (kjt ; ! jt ;   jt ; I (rdjt 1 ))   = (1   I (rdjt   1 ))   (kjt ; ! jt ;   jt )c0   + I (rdjt   1)   (kjt ; ! jt ;   jt )c1   (30)

    The full set of parameters estimated in the dynamic stage is = ( 1 ; 2 ; ; f ; m ; s ; c0 ; c1 ):
For given values of the parameters ; we solve the ...rst-order condition, equation (14) to ...nd
the optimal R&D level at each state and draw of the cost shock : Using the optimal R&D
investment, we ...nd the value function approximation parameters c0 and c1 by solving the Bell-
man equation (11) at a set of approximation nodes. Since the ...xed costs of innovation and
exporting are assumed to follow exponential distributions, we obtain analytical expressions for
their integrals as functions of the parameters m , s ; and f : We use numerical quadrature to
integrate over the variable cost shocks and productivity shocks and in the domestic and
foreign markets, respectively.
    The structural parameters are estimated using the method of indirect inference (Gourier-
oux, Monfort, and Renault (1993), Gourieroux and Monfort (1996), and Li(2010)). For ...rms
that invest in R&D, the estimator matches the percentiles of the observed log R&D distribution
Qx , where x = (0:05; 0:10; 0:15; 0:20;   ; 0:95), with percentiles of average R&D generated by
the model. It also matches the mean probability of investing in R&D (conditional on past
R&D) and the mean probability of exporting. Thus, the coe¢ cients of the R&D variable cost
function, 1 ; 2 ; ; are estimated from the percentiles of the distribution of log R&D expen-
diture for ...rms that invest in R&D. The ...xed costs m and s are identi...ed by matching the
mean of the discrete R&D decision conditional on the previous R&D decision, and the export
cost f is identi...ed by matching the mean of the discrete export decision. In each case, denote
the vector of moments generated by the model as Q      ~ ( ); and Q as the corresponding vector of
data moments. The criterion function minimizes the distance between the moments Q       ~ ( ) and
Q
                                 J( ) = [Q Q   ~ ( )]0 A[Q Q   ~ ( )],                         (31)
where A is the weighting matrix A = V ar[Q]                      1.




                                                               16
6     Empirical Results
In this section we summarize the parameter estimates for the productivity processes, pro...t
function, and costs function for innovation. We then use the estimates to summarize the
distribution of expected bene...ts from R&D investment and show how this di¤ers between
exporting and non-exporting ...rms.

6.1     Productivity Evolution and the Pro...t Function
Table 3 reports the estimates of the structural parameters for the pro...t functions and pro-
ductivity processes. The qualitative patterns in the coe¢ cients are similar across the four
industry-market pairs. The coe¢ cient on lagged productivity is positive and large. This means
...rm productivity is highly persistent, therefore productivity gains resulting from R&D will be
long lived. The coe¢ cient on the squared value of lagged productivity is negative, indicating
that the degree of persistence will be smaller for high-productivity ...rms. The positive coe¢ -
cient on R&D and the negative coe¢ cient on R&D squared indicate that R&D has a positive
but diminishing e¤ect on productivity in the four industry-market pairs. The interaction term
between R&D and lagged productivity is positive, showing that the return to R&D is increasing
in the ...rm's own productivity. The magnitude of the R&D coe¢ cients do di¤er across industry
and market groups. The ...rst-order coe¢ cient on R&D is larger in the high-tech industries
relative to the low-tech industries and in the export markets relative to the domestic markets,
implying a larger impact of R&D on productivity and pro...ts in the export market relative to
the domestic market.
     The elasticities of productivity with respect to R&D expenditure and lagged productivity
depend on the current R&D expenditure and productivity and therefore vary across ...rms. Table
4 summarizes the distribution of these elasticity estimates across the ...rm-year observations.
The top two lines report elasticities with respect to R&D. In the high-tech industries, the
                                                                         @! it
elasticity of domestic market productivity with respect to R&D, @ln(      rdit 1 ) ; varies from 0.004
at the 10th percentile to 0.0130 at the 90th. The median value is 0.0082. The elasticity of
foreign market productivity is larger, with a value of 0.0104 at the median and 0.0165 at the
90th percentile. Both elasticities are smaller in the low-tech industries but the foreign market
elasticity remains larger than the domestic market elasticity.
     The elasticity of market x revenue (x = d; f ) with respect to R&D is a measure of the short-
run return to R&D, and is calculated by multiplying the productivity elasticity by (1 + x ):
For the high-tech industries, the median values are 0.0180 and 0.0206, in the domestic and
foreign markets, respectively. In the low-tech industries the medians are 0.0040 and 0.0084.
The larger values for the foreign market revenue imply that an increase in R&D spending will
have a larger impact on total ...rm pro...ts through their foreign market sales than their domestic
market sales. This means that ...rms with a larger share of sales in the foreign market will have
a higher return to R&D investment. Within each market, there is substantial heterogeneity in
the R&D elasticity across ...rms - the 90th percentile is about three times larger than the 10th
percentile in high-tech which implies di¤erent returns to R&D across ...rms.14
  14
     These estimates are in line with the results of related studies. In their review of the literature, Hall, Mairesse,
and Mohnen (2010) report that revenue elasticity estimates vary across studies from 0.01 to 0.25 and are centered


                                                          17
     The last two rows of the table report the persistence in each market'    s productivity. These
elasticities are uniformly high, between 0.88 and 0.98 across all ...rms in both markets. This
implies that the productivity gains from R&D expenditure depreciate slowly, so that current
investments have a long-lasting impact on future ...rm pro...ts and thus ...rm value. The similarity
in elasticities within each market implies that di¤erences in productivity depreciation rates are
not a major source of across-...rm di¤erences in the return to R&D. The across-...rm di¤erences
are more heavily a¤ected by the elasticities of R&D.

6.2    The Firm'
               s R&D Investment Decision
The results reported in Table 4 indicate that both domestic and export productivities ! and
improve over time if the ...rm invests in R&D. This provides the ...rm with positive incentives
to invest in R&D. In our model, the ...rm'      s optimal choice of R&D and exporting are both
functions of the productivities ! jt , jt , and capital stock kjt . Before estimating the ...rm'    s
dynamic demand for R&D, we assess the importance of these state variables in explaining the
...rm's R&D investment and export market participation by estimating the reduced-form policy
functions for the three choice variables: the discrete R&D decision, the log expenditure on
R&D, and the discrete export decision. We specify each of the policy functions as a quadratic
function of the three state variables. The results for the high-tech industry are reported in the
second, third, and fourth columns of Table 5. Columns labeled "Discrete" report estimates of
logit regressions using a discrete indicator of exporting or R&D. Columns labeled "Log Expend"
report OLS estimates with log R&D expenditure as the dependent variable.
     Overall, the policy function estimates for the high-tech industries demonstrate that ! jt ; jt ;
and kjt are all important determinants of the ...rm' s export and R&D decisions. In the case of the
R&D reduced forms, some of the individual coe¢ cients are not statistically signi...cant, while
most of the individual coe¢ cients are signi...cant for the export decision. More importantly,
we test the null hypotheses that the coe¢ cients related to each of the three state variables are
jointly equal to zero. The test statistics for these hypotheses are presented in the last three rows
of the table and show that the null hypothesis that one of the state variables is not important
is rejected in every case.
     The estimates of the parameters characterizing the cost of innovation and exporting are
reported in Table 6. The parameter estimates satisfy three conditions on the ...rm'        s choices:
(i) the ...rm chooses the R&D expenditure that satis...es the ...rst-order condition implicit in the
second line of equation (11), (ii) the net payo¤ to this expenditure is greater than the payo¤
to not investing in R&D, and (iii) the ...rm chooses to export if the current period pro...ts from
exporting are greater than a ...xed cost. The parameters to be estimated are 1 ; 2 ; and
in the variable cost function of R&D, m and s ; which are the unconditional means of the
...xed maintenance and ...xed startup cost distributions of R&D, and f the unconditional mean
around 0.08. Doraszelski and Jaumandreu (2013, Table 7) report estimates of the elasticity of output, not
revenue, for ten Spanish manufacturing industries. The average value over all ...rms is 0.015, and the average
at the industry level varies from -0.006 to 0.046 across the ten industries, with half of the industries falling
between 0.013 and 0.022. Peters, Roberts, Vuong, and Fryges (2017, Table 11) report estimates based on the
extensive margin of R&D investment, comparing the revenue of ...rms that invest in R&D and ...rms that do not,
for German manufacturing industries. The average value of the revenue elasticity is 0.122 for a group of ...ve
high-tech industries and 0.061 for seven low-tech industries.


                                                      18
of the ...xed cost distribution for exporting. The parameter 2 is positive in all industries,
indicating rising marginal cost of innovation as the ...rm increases its R&D expenditure. In the
electrical machinery industry 2 is virtually zero, implying constant marginal cost of innovation.
The parameter          measures the dispersion in the marginal cost of innovation, holding the
level of R&D expenditure ...xed. The estimates are between 0.1345 and 0.5622 in the high-
tech industries and between 0 and 0.2024 in the low-tech industries. These estimates indicate
substantial dispersion in the marginal cost of innovation across ...rms and time, which also
implies substantial dispersion in the expected bene...ts of R&D investment across ...rms and
time.
      The R&D maintenance cost parameter m is always smaller than the startup cost s . This
implies that ...rms with positive R&D investment in the previous year face lower ...xed costs if
they continue their investment than ...rms without previous R&D spending. Because their ...xed
cost is drawn from an exponential distribution with lower mean, they also face less uncertainty
in their total R&D cost. The ...xed cost of exporting is a measure of the level of export pro...ts
needed to induce the ...rm to export. In the high-tech industries the export cost parameter f
implies that average export costs are less than 2.5 million SEK in ...ve out of six industries.15
This re    ects the fact that the export participation rates in our sample are high, with only a
few ...rms not exporting. In contrast, the ...xed cost parameters in the low-tech industries are
higher, ranging between 1.6 and 13.6 million SEK, indicating that fewer Swedish ...rms in these
industries will ...nd it pro...table to export.
      Table 7 summarizes the distribution of the expected marginal cost of innovation (EM C )
across observations where the expectation is taken over the random shock : In the high-
tech industries it shows substantial heterogeneity arising from di¤erences in the level of R&D
expenditure. Both the level of EM C and its dispersion within-industry di¤ers across industries.
The level is particularly large in the metal and vehicle industries indicating that all ...rms in those
industries face high costs of innovation. In low-tech industries, the marginal cost of innovation
is high in the upper percentiles of the distribution, indicating that for a substantial number
of ...rms the long-run payo¤ to R&D will have to be high in order to make R&D investment
pro...table for them.
      After estimating the structural parameters of the model, we assess the ability of our model
to explain the R&D and exporting patterns in the data. Table 8 summarizes the ...t of the model
with respect to the discrete R&D and export decisions for high-tech and low-tech industries.
In the case of the discrete R&D decision, we distinguish between ...rms that are paying a
maintenance cost to continue investing, columns two and three, versus paying a startup cost to
begin investing, columns four and ...ve. Overall, the mean frequencies of the maintenance cost
of R&D and the start up cost of R&D are matched well for all industries. The mean frequencies
of the export cost are also matched almost perfectly. Table 9 reports the ...t of the model with
respect to the level of R&D expenditure for observations with positive R&D investment. In
each industry the ability of the model to replicate the distribution of R&D expenditures across
...rms and over time is very good.
  15
       In 2010, 1 USD=7.2 SEK and 1 EUR=9.54 SEK




                                                   19
6.3   The Long-Run Return to R&D Investment
Measuring the private rate of return to R&D has been a goal of productivity researchers for
many years. The most commonly used measure of the gross rate of return is constructed from
production function estimates of the marginal product of knowledge capital, measured as a
depreciated sum of past R&D expenditures, on output. In their comprehensive review of the
literature, Hall, Mairesse, and Mohnen (2010) summarize a wide range of estimates that are
generally in the 20 to 30 percent range, but can be as high as 75 percent. The model we
develop here provides an alternative measure based on the increase in ...rm value resulting from
R&D spending. As part of our estimation, we solve for the value functions and construct the
expected payo¤ to R&D at each state. We de...ne the long-run expected bene...t of R&D as the
di¤erence between the value function when investing at the optimal level of R&D minus the
value function when not investing in R&D: EB = V 1 V 0 . It is normalized in two ways. First,
as EB=R&D; which summarizes the total payo¤ to the R&D investment per krona spent, and,
second, as EB=V 0 ; which summarizes the proportional gain in long-run ...rm value from the
optimal R&D investment.
     Table 10 summarizes the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles of the distribution of EB=R&D
across ...rm observations for both the non-exporting and exporting ...rms. Three patterns stand
out. First, the distribution of expected bene...ts for exporters stochastically dominates the
distribution for non-exporters in every industry. For example, in the chemical industry, the
25th and 75th percentiles among the non-exporters are 1.006 and 1.712, while the values for
the exporters are 4.477 and 110.797. The median values among the non-exporters vary from
0.526 to 5.372 across industries. For two industries, electrical machinery and instruments, the
values are less than one, implying that the total bene...ts to R&D investment would not exceed
the expenditure. Second, there is also substantially more heterogeneity among the exporting
...rms. The fourth and last columns report the interquartile range relative to the median.
The dispersion among exporting ...rms is, in general, larger than for non-exporting ...rms. The
di¤erence in dispersion is largest for the metals, vehicles, plastics, and miscellaneous industries.
This re    ects the role played by the heterogeneity in export market productivity among the
exporters.
     Third, among the non-exporters, the bene...ts of R&D are larger in several of the low-
tech industries than in the high-tech industries. For example, in the paper, ceramics, and
miscellaneous industries, the bene...ts at the 75th percentile of the distribution are larger than
the corresponding percentiles in all the high-tech industries. This ...nding does not extend to the
exporting ...rms. Among exporting ...rms the bene...ts at the 25th percentile are not substantially
di¤erent between the high- and low-tech industries, but at the median and 75th percentile the
bene...ts from the optimal R&D expenditure in the high-tech sectors are substantially higher in
most industries. Overall, the table demonstrates that there are large di¤erences in the bene...ts
of R&D across ...rms within the same industry. The upper tails of the payo¤ distribution
are particularly large for exporting ...rms in the high-tech industries, emphasizing the positive
relationship between exporting and incentives to invest in innovation.
     The median value of the proportional gain in ...rm value resulting from R&D investment,
EB=V 0 ; is reported in Table 11 for each industry. This clearly illustrates the di¤erences in the
gain from R&D between the high-tech and low-tech industries and between ...rms with di¤erent


                                                20
export status. For the non-exporting ...rms, the median gain is less than 2.2 percent in all
but one high-tech industry and less than 0.7 percent in all low-tech industries. Non-electrical
machinery is the one outlier in this pattern. For the exporting ...rms, the proportional gains are
much higher in the high-tech industries, exceeding 38.6 percent in four of the six industries. In
contrast, they never exceed 1.4 percent in the low-tech industries. R&D investment clearly has
the largest impact on long-run ...rm value among the exporting ...rms in the high-tech industries,
particularly chemicals, nonelectrical and electrical machinery and instruments.
    The patterns reported in Tables 10 and 11 indicate that across-...rm variation in the long-
run payo¤ to R&D is substantial and arises from di¤erences in domestic and foreign market
productivity and ...rm size. This ...rm-level heterogeneity in long-run bene...ts is an important
factor contributing to the di¤erences in R&D investment across industries and between export-
ing and non-exporting ...rms that were seen in Table 2. In the next section we simulate how
R&D investment on both the extensive and intensive margin responds to changes in the export
market conditions and innovation costs.


7     Counterfactual Analysis of Tari¤s and R&D Subsidies
While Sweden has long advocated free trade policies, policy-makers have recently noted that,
because of increasing threats to free trade, the role of innovation is particularly important to
maintaining the international competitiveness of Swedish exports and have focused e¤orts on
improving Sweden'    s position in world markets (Swedish government, 2012, 2019). However, the
Organization for Economic Co-operation has emphasized the lack of accurate evaluations of the
role of R&D investment across sectors that can help guide policy choices (OECD, 2013).
    The structural model of R&D investment developed in this article provides the necessary
framework to analyze the impact of trade and innovation policies that impact the bene...ts
or costs of R&D investment. Export tari¤s on Swedish manufactured products will impact
the pro...tability of export market sales, which, as shown in the previous section, contributes
substantially to the return on R&D. Import tari¤s that raise the cost of imported materials
will also reduce the pro...tability of Swedish producers in both domestic and export markets and
a¤ect the payo¤s to R&D investment. Subsidies to ...rms that invest in R&D, either through
direct payments or through bene...cial tax treatment of R&D expenditures, impact the cost of
innovation and can a¤ect the amount of R&D investment undertaken. In this section we use
the estimated model to simulate the e¤ect of tari¤s and R&D subsidies on the intensive and
extensive margin of R&D investment.16

7.1    Output and Input Tari¤s
Most of the empirical literature summarized in section 2 has focused on the impact of trade lib-
eralizations on the incentives of ...rms to invest in innovation-related activities and generally ...nd
that openness encourages innovation investments. In this section we simulate how restrictions
in international markets due to output and input tari¤s a¤ect both the probability of investing
  16
     In the counterfactual analysis we change one or more of the structural parameters and resolve the model
for the optimal R&D spending in the new environment. Changes in the optimal R&D yield changes in future
productivities and short- and long-run pro...ts.


                                                    21
in R&D (the extensive margin) and the amount of R&D spending (the intensive margin) by
Swedish manufacturing ...rms. Countries like Sweden, that are technologically advanced but
have small domestic markets, rely heavily on export markets for their sales and the return to
R&D can be substantially a¤ected by access to those markets.17
     Table 12a reports the results from a simulation of a permanent 20 percent tari¤ on Swedish
exports. In the model this is equivalent to reducing the intercept of the export market revenue
function. This results in a change in the optimal amount of R&D spending and thus a¤ects
both the total bene...ts and total costs of the investment. To summarize the total impact
on the ...rm we de...ne the expected net bene...ts of R&D as the expected bene...ts net of the
total cost of innovation: EN B = V 1 V 0 CI (rd): The table reports ...ve dimensions in
which the tari¤ a¤ects the endogenous variables for ...rm choices and outcomes. The ...rst
two columns report the percentage change in the continuous variables, EN B and the optimal
R&D expenditure, respectively. The last three columns report the impacts on the extensive
margins: the probability of a ...rm continuing to invest in R&D, beginning to invest in R&D, and
exporting. The values reported are the median values across ...rms in each industry.18 For the
six high-tech industries, the net bene...t of investing in R&D falls by between 27.06 and 42.05
percent. This leads to a reduction in expenditure on R&D of between 10.47 and 18.02 percent
for the median ...rm across industries. The largest impacts are in the instruments industry and
the smallest in the vehicle industry. There is also a large impact on the intensive margin of
R&D investment in ...ve of the six low-tech industries. With the exception of the food industry,
the net bene...t of R&D investment falls between 25.45 and 40.76 percent, resulting in a decline
in R&D expenditure in these industries of between 7.25 and 12.03 percent. Reductions in the
pro...tability of the export market lead to signi...cant downward adjustments in the amount of
R&D spending.
     On the extensive margin the changes are much smaller. For the high-tech industries, there
is no impact on the probability that a ...rm that is investing in R&D will stop completely and
there is a small reduction, between 0.6 and 2.1 percentage points, in the probability that a ...rm
will begin investing in R&D. There is also a reduction in the probability of exporting in two
industries, metals and instruments, which contributes to the reduction in the expected payo¤
to R&D. The impact on the extensive margins in the low-tech industries are larger than in
the high-tech industries, with three of the industries showing a reduction in the number of
...rms that continue R&D of a least one percentage point, and four of the industries showing at
least a one percentage point reduction in the probability of starting to invest in R&D. Export
participation is reduced by between 2.39 and 13.42 percent in ...ve of the six industries. Overall,
the reduction in export market pro...tability due to the output tari¤ discourages some ...rms from
undertaking R&D but the larger impact occurs on the intensive margin where the reduction
in the amount of R&D spending by the investing ...rms is substantial. The export market is a
signi...cant source of the ...rms'overall return to R&D and restrictions on exporting lead to less
  17
     In practice, export and import tari¤s are set by the European Union and Sweden is not free to vary tari¤s
independently. These counterfactuals are designed to show how restrictions in the export or import markets
a¤ect long-run ...rm value and the return to R&D.
  18
     We also construct the total reduction in R&D spending over all sample ...rms and this number is very similar
to the reduction for the median ...rm that is reported in Tables 12a-14a. For clarity we will focus on the impact
on the median ...rm, but this is a good estimate of the impact on total R&D investment in the industry.



                                                       22
investment in R&D, thus reducing a source of the dynamic gains from exporting.
      While Table 12a reports impacts for the median ...rm in the sample, Table 12b summarizes
impacts across the distribution of ...rms. In this case, ...rms are distinguished by their level of
domestic and foreign market productivity ! and : Each ...rm is assigned to a cell based on the
industry quartile in which its productivities lie. Moving across each row, the foreign market
productivity increases, and moving down each column domestic productivity ! increases.
The table reports the percentage change in expected net payo¤ to R&D, EN B; at the median
within each cell.
      Focusing on the high-tech industries, the tari¤ has a larger negative impact on ...rms with
larger foreign productivities. The reduction in net bene...ts is between -31.12 and -60.62 percent
for the most productive foreign-market ...rms. This is consistent with the fact that ...rms with
high foreign productivity will tend to have larger foreign sales and thus be more heavily impacted
by the export market tari¤. However, there is a more heterogeneous pattern when both and
! vary. The loss in bene...ts is increasing with ! when is low, but decreasing with ! when
    is high. The former pattern implies that high productivity domestic ...rms that export little
are a¤ected as options to expand exports are reduced, while the latter pattern implies that the
...rms with high foreign productivity are less impacted by the tari¤ if they are simultaneously
good in the domestic market.
      The counterfactual reported in Table 13a maintains the 20 percent output tari¤ on Swedish
exports and adds a 20 percent tari¤ on imported materials.19 This represents the case where a
retaliatory tari¤ is imposed to protect domestic suppliers of intermediate materials. This input
tari¤ raises the cost of the Swedish manufacturers and impacts sales in both the domestic and
export markets. The results in Table 13a show the same qualitative pattern as the export
tari¤ alone, but the magnitudes of the e¤ects are magni...ed. Across all the high- and low-tech
industries, the expected net bene...t of investing in R&D falls by between 37.89 and 56.89 percent
with the largest impacts in the low-tech industries. This reduction generates reductions in the
amount of R&D spending by between 15.99 and 24.80 percent, with the largest reductions
in spending in the high-tech industries. The dual tari¤s also have a larger impact on the
probability of maintaining R&D investment in the low-tech industries. The probability of
maintaining R&D falls by 2.64 to 7.7 percent in ...ve of the industries (and by 25.22 percent in
the remaining industry). The probability of starting R&D investment falls by a magnitude that
is approximately twice as large as what was observed with just the output tari¤, with reductions
between 1.38 and 4.55 percent in all but one industry. Finally, the reduction in the probability
of exporting is approximately equal to what was observed with just the output tari¤.
      Focusing on the distribution of the reduction in bene...ts across ...rms with di¤erent produc-
tivities in Table 13b, the reduction in the expected bene...ts, relative to the output tari¤ alone,
is much larger. The decline in net bene...ts is particularly large for the ...rms with lower levels of
foreign productivity : For the ...rms in the lowest quartile of ; the median percentage decline
in EN B varies from 25.39 to 48.96 percent across industries. This decline is at least three times
larger than was observed with the output tari¤ alone. Penalizing all ...rms with the additional
tari¤ impacts the ...rms least exposed to the foreign market most heavily.
   19
      In the data we do not observe the fraction of materials that are imported by each ...rm. We impute the
fraction of imported materials using the average value in the industry. These account for approximately half of
input expenditures in Swedish industries.


                                                      23
7.2    Subsidies to R&D expenditure
Firm R&D investments can be below the socially desired level. Reasons for this include R&D
investments being costly to ...rms that are ...nancially constrained; the outcome of the R&D
process being subject to high level of uncertainty; and ...rms not internalizing the full bene...ts
of innovations resulting from their R&D undertakings. To encourage R&D investment, gov-
ernments often promote policies designed to lower the R&D cost incurred by ...rms, such as
applying tax credits or accelerated depreciation. Relying on our model estimates, we assess
the e¤ectiveness of policies that subsidize innovation costs in terms of their impact on ...rm'         s
investment and export activities.20 In particular, we simulate the ...rm'      s R&D investment and
export decisions for a 20 percent reduction in the variable cost of innovation.
     To simulate the e¤ect of a 20 percent subsidy of the ...rm'          s R&D expenditure, we set
   1 =  0 :80 ^1 in the variable cost function  equation    (27)  which  reduces the marginal cost of
investment but does not a¤ect the slope of the marginal cost curve by leaving the adjustment
cost component 2 una¤ected. We simulate the e¤ect of this cost change on the same ...ve
...rm-level outcomes as the tari¤ counterfactuals. Table 14a summarizes the median of these
measures for ...rms in the high-tech and low-tech industries, respectively.
     With a 20 percent subsidy, lower marginal cost leads to a higher optimal R&D investment
level. Across industries, the percentage change in R&D investment is heterogeneous. The R&D
level increases between 1.84 (chemical) and 28.57 percentage points (electrical machinery). A
substantial increase in R&D spending, such as the rise observed in electrical machinery, re          ects
a marginal bene...t curve @V 1 =@rd that is fairly     at, so that cost reductions generate signi...cant
increases in the intensive margin of R&D investment.
     The second column reports the growth in the total net bene...ts EN B to the ...rm from
the expansion in its R&D. The results show that the 20 percent subsidy increases ...rm'         s total
bene...ts from R&D between 0.79 (chemical) and 5.91 percent (vehicle) in high-tech industries.
For example, the median ...rm in the chemical industry has an R&D net bene...t that amounts to
82.7 percent of ...rm value (see Table 11); an increase of 0.79 percent in R&D bene...t is therefore
non-negligible. The growth in ...rm'   s net bene...t is a multiple of the innovation cost saving ...rms
receive from the subsidy because the growth re         ects the impact of additional R&D investment
on two sources: the increase in marginal bene...ts from improved future (!; ) paths and the
reduction in future marginal costs due to the subsidy.
     The change in the marginal cost has little impact on increasing R&D participation rates for
both ...rms continuing and starting R&D. At the median, the change in R&D at the extensive
margin for continuing ...rms amounts to zero while it is below 1 percent for ...rms starting new
R&D investments. One reason for the small impact of the subsidy is that a large proportion of
...rms in these industries already invest in R&D and have a high probability of continuing even
without the subsidy. Another reason is the subsidies do not generate su¢ cient additional R&D
spending and hence su¢ cient additional bene...t to cover the maintenance and startup costs that
  20
     The empirical literature on the e¤ects of R&D subsidies on investment and innovation is vast. Hall and Van
Reenen (2000) provide a survey. Recent works by González, Jaumandreu, and Pazó (2005) and Arqué-Castells
and Mohnen (2015) using Spanish ...rm data, and Takalo, Tanayama, and Toivanen (2013, 2017) using Finnish
data, estimate structural models of ...rm R&D investment and use them to conduct counterfactuals on the level
of subsidies.



                                                      24
would occur in case of investment. The same pattern can be observed for the export market
participation. The median change in export participation is zero for most of the industries.
While an expansion in R&D investment has a positive impact on ...rm productivity (!; ),
increases its export sales, and enhances its chance of exporting, this gain does not su¢ ciently
o¤set the ...xed cost for exporting to make exporting pro...table for the ...rm.
    A similar pattern characterizes the low-tech industries. The reduction in ...rm'
                                                                                   s R&D variable
cost generates positive gains in R&D investment levels and R&D net bene...ts. The gains are
smaller and have smaller variation than those of the high-tech industries. Except for the food
industry, the percentage change in R&D spending across industries is below 5.48 percent and
below 2.86 percent in the R&D net bene...t. The cost reduction also shows little impact on the
extensive margin in the low-tech industries. The change in R&D participation and the export
participation rate is positive but close to zero.
    Focusing on the percentage change of R&D bene...t by their productivity levels ! and
reported in Table 14b, ...rms in the high-tech industries enjoy a higher percentage gain in R&D
bene...t than those in the low-tech industries. The percentage gain ranges between 25.16 percent
in the lowest (!; ) quartile and 1.08 percent in the highest productivity quartile in high-tech.
In low-tech those numbers range between 6.45 and 0.33 percent. As productivity levels (!; )
increase the percentage gain decreases monotonically in high-tech, whereas no clear pattern
emerges in the low-tech industries.
    In an alternative policy experiment, we simulate ...rms'responses to a 20 percent reduction
in the startup cost for R&D investment, and ...nd that this cost reduction causes between 1
and 3 percent more ...rms to start investing in R&D. At the same time there is virtually zero
change in the industry level of R&D investment. This indicates that a startup cost subsidy
creates incentives for ...rms to invest in R&D, which would not have done so without the cost
reduction; however, these ...rms invest only a small amount.
    Overall, the counterfactual simulations show that subsidies reducing the variable cost of
R&D investment have signi...cant impacts on R&D expenditure by ...rms that are already invest-
ing. However, it has little impact on inducing new R&D participation in Swedish manufacturing
industries.


8    Conclusion
This article develops an empirical model of the ...rm'  s dynamic decision to invest in R&D,
where the decision is both whether or not to invest and how much to spend on R&D. The ...rm'  s
investment choice impacts the path of future productivity in both domestic and export market
sales. The model provides a measure of the expected long-run gain from investing in R&D that
depends on the ...rm' s export and domestic market productivities. It also estimates the cost
function for innovation, which includes the actual expenditure on R&D, adjustment costs, ...xed
costs of maintaining an R&D program, and startup costs for ...rms beginning to invest.
    The empirical results show that R&D expenditures operate through both domestic and
export productivity channels and increase expected future ...rm value substantially. Investment
in R&D is found to have a larger impact on revenue and pro...ts in export markets than in the
domestic market. At the median across ...rms in a group of high-tech industries, the elasticity


                                               25
of revenue with respect to R&D expenditure is 0.018 for domestic sales and 0.0206 for foreign
market sales. This di¤erence will contribute to a higher return on R&D for ...rms that are
substantial exporters and act as a source of dynamic productivity gains for exporters relative
to non-exporting ...rms.
     The model provides a direct measure of the return to R&D as the increase in long-run ...rm
value resulting from the R&D investment. This return is much larger in a group of six high-tech
industries than in a group of six low-tech industries, and a large premium for exporting ...rms
is also found. The median of the expected gain in ...rm value from investing in R&D is less
than 0.7 percent and 1.4 percent for non-exporters and exporters, respectively, in the low-tech
industries. The expected gain is generally less than 2.2 percent for non-exporting ...rms in the
high-tech industries but is substantially larger for the exporting ...rms. Across the six high-tech
industries the median gain varies from 5.1 to 84.7 percent, with four of the industries having
values above 38 percent.
     The estimated decision rules for R&D investment and export market participation allow us
to study counterfactual environments where pro...tability in both markets is impacted by export
and import tari¤s and the cost of innovation is reduced by R&D subsidies. The results show
that a 20 percent export tari¤ on Swedish high-tech exports reduces the expected net payo¤
to R&D by between 27.06 to 42.05 percent across the six high-tech industries. This decline
in bene...t of R&D generates a reduction in R&D spending on the intensive margin of between
10.47 and 18.02 percent in the high-tech industries. A similar decline is seen in ...ve of the six
low-tech industries. These results indicate that the ability to export to a larger world market
has a substantial e¤ect on the return to R&D and the level of R&D spending in the Swedish
manufacturing industries. More modest e¤ects of the export tari¤ on the extensive margin of
R&D investment are observed in the counterfactual results. The output tari¤ has virtually
no impact on the decision of ...rms to stop investing in R&D and reduces the probability of a
...rm to begin invest in R&D by one to two percentage points. Another set of counterfactuals
...nds that a 20 percent subsidy to R&D spending increases R&D expenditure by 1.84 to 28.57
percent across the high-tech industries with three of the industries having an increase of more
than 10 percent.
     This study has explored the di¤erences in long-run bene...ts of R&D investment between
exporting and non-exporting ...rms and how this impacts their decisions to undertake R&D
investment, how much to spend on R&D, and whether or not to export. The underlying
mechanism is that R&D spending can have a di¤erent impact on the productivity of a ...rm
in each market. The export market is shown to be an important source of pro...ts for Swedish
manufacturing ...rms and high productivity in export market sales substantially increases the
payo¤ to R&D investment. Policies that reduce export market pro...tability or reduce innovation
costs do impact the amount of R&D spending that ...rms undertake on the intensive margin
but have relatively small e¤ects on the extensive margin decisions to begin investing in R&D
or begin exporting.
     Our results are relevant to recent policy concerns about promoting innovation in an envi-
ronment with increasing restrictions to free trade. In particular, we ...nd that the imposition
of tari¤s that reduce export market pro...tability will signi...cantly reduce the amount of R&D
spending that ...rms will undertake, and will o¤set innovation policies designed to stimulate
R&D investment. The linkages between the ...rm'     s trade exposure and innovation decisions are

                                                26
important for policy makers to recognize when attempting to stimulate investment in innova-
tion.


References
 [1] Ackerberg, Daniel, Lanier Benkard, Steven Berry, and Ariel Pakes (2007), "Econometric
     Tools for Analyzing Market Outcomes," in J. Heckman & E. Leamer, eds, Handbook of
     Econometrics, Vol. 6A, North-Holland, Amsterdam, pp.4171.

 [2] Aghion, Philippe, Antonin Bergeaud, Matthieu Lequien, and Marc J. Melitz (2018), "The
     Impact of Exports on Innovation: Theory and Evidence," NBER Working Paper 24600.

 [3] Akcigit, Ufuk, Sina T. Ates, and Giammario Impullitti (2018), "Innovation and Trade in
     a Globalized World," NBER Working Paper 24542.

 [4] Altomonte, Carlo, Tommas Aquilante, Gabor Bekes, and Gianmarco Ottaviano (2013),
     "Internationalization and Innovation of Firms: Evidence and Policy," Economic Policy,
     Vol. 28, No. 76, pp. 663-700.

 [5] Arkolakis, C. (2010), "Market Penetration Costs and the New Consumers Margin in In-
     ternational Trade," Journal of Political Economy, Vol 118, No. 6, pp. 1151-1199.

 [6] Arqué-Castells, Pere and Pierre Mohnen (2015), "Sunk Cost, Extensive R&D Subsidies
     and Permanent Inducement E¤ects,"The Journal of Industrial Economics, Vol. 63, No. 3,
     pp. 458-494.

 [7] Atkeson, Andrew and Ariel Burstein (2010), "Innovation, Firm Dynamics, and Interna-
     tional Trade," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 118, No. 3, pp. 433-484.

 [8] Autor, David, David Dorn, Gordon H. Hanson, Gary Pisano, and Pian Shu (2017), "Foreign
     Competition and Domestic Innovation: Evidence From U.S. Patents." NBER Working
     Paper 22879.

 [9] Aw, Bee Yan, Mark J. Roberts and Tor Winston (2007), "Export Market Participation,
     Investments in R&D and Worker Training, and the Evolution of Firm Productivity," The
     World Economy, Vol. 14, No. 1, pp. 83-104.

[10] Aw, Bee Yan, Mark J. Roberts, and Daniel Yi Xu (2011), "R&D Investment, Exporting
     and Productivity Dynamics," The American Economic Review, Vol. 101, No. 4 (June), pp.
     1312-1344.

[11] Barwick, Panle Jia, Myrto Kalouptsidi, and Nahim Bin Zahur (2019), "China's Industrial
     Policy: An Empirical Evaluation," NBER Working Paper 26075.

[12] Becker, Sacha O. and Peter H. Egger (2013), "Endogenous Product vs Process Innovation
     and a Firm's Propensity to Export," Empirical Economics, Vol. 44, No. 1, pp. 329-354.



                                            27
[13] Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen (1997), "Exporters, Skill Upgrading, and the
     Wage Gap," Journal of International Economics, Vol. 42, pp. 3-31.

[14] Bloom, Nicholas, Mirko Draca, and John Van Reenen (2016), "Trade Induced Technical
     Change? The Impact of Chinese Imports on Innovation, IT, and Productivity," The
     Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 83, No. 1, pp 1347-1393

[15] Burstein, Ariel and Marc Melitz (2013), "Trade Liberalization and Firm Dynamics," in
     Advances in Economics and Econometrics Tenth World Congress. Applied Economics,
     Econometric Society Monographs. Vol 2. Cambridge U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

[16] Bustos, Paula (2010), "Multilateral Trade Liberalization, Exports and Technology Upgrad-
     ing: Evidence on the Impact of MERCOSUR on Argentinean Firms," American Economic
     Review. Vol 101, No. 1, pp. 304-340.

[17] Coelli, Federica, Andreas Moxnes, and Karen Helene Ulltveit-Moe (2015), "Better, Faster,
     Stronger: Global Innovation and Trade Liberalization," working paper.

[18] Constantini, James A., and Marc J. Melitz (2008), "The Dynamics of Firm-Level Adjust-
     ment to Trade Liberalization," in The Organization of Firms in a Global Economy, E.
     Helpman, D. Marin, and T. Verdier (eds.), Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

[19] Damijan, Joµ   µ Kostevc and Matija Rojec (2017), "Exporting Status and Success in In-
                ze, Crt
     novation: Evidence from CIS Micro Data for EU Countries," The Journal of International
     Trade & Economic Development, Vol. 26, No. 5, pp. 585-611.

[20] Das, Sanhamitra, Mark J. Roberts, and James Tybout (2007), "Market Entry Cost, Pro-
     ducer Heterogeneity, and Export Dynamics," Econometrica, Vol. 75, No. 3 (May), pp.
     837-873.

[21] Doraszelski, Ulrich, and Jordi Jaumandreu (2013), "R&D and Productivity: Estimating
     Production Functions When Productivity is Endogenous," Review of Economic Studies,
     Vol. 80, No. 4, pp.1338-1383.

[22] Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum, and Francis Kramarz (2011), "An Anatomy of Interna-
     tional Trade: Evidence from French Firms," Econometrica, Vol. 79, No. 5, pp.1453-1498.

[23] González, Xulia, Jordi Jaumandreu, and Consuelo Pazó (2005), "Barriers to Innovation
     and Subsidy E¤ectiveness," Rand Journal of Economics, Vol. 36, pp.930-950

[24] Gourieroux, C., Monfort, A. (1996), "Simulation Based Econometric Models,"CORE Lec-
     tures, Oxford University Press, New York.

[25] Gourieroux, C., Monfort, A., Renault, E. (1993), "Indirect Inference," Journal of Applied
     Econometrics, Vol. 8, pp. 85-118.

[26] Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman (1993), Innovation and Growth in the Global
     Economy, MIT Press.


                                             28
[27] Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman (1995), "Technology and Trade," in Handbook
     of International Economics,Vol. III, G Grossman and K. Rogo¤ (eds.), Elsevier Science
     B.V., pp. 1279-1337.

[28] Hall, Bronwyn H., Jacques Mairesse, and Piere Mohnen, (2010) "Measuring the Returns
     to R&D,"In B.H. Hall and N. Rosenberg, eds., Handbook of the Economics of Innovation,
     Vol. 2, Chapter 22, North-Holland, Amsterdam: Elsevier.

[29] Hall, Bronwyn H. and John Van Reenen (2000), "How E¤ective are Fiscal Incentives for
     R&D? A Review of the Evidence," Research Policy, Vol. 29, pp.449-469.

[30] Jaumandreu, Jordi and Heng Yin (2018), "Cost and Product Advantages: Evidence from
     Chinese Manufacturing Firms," Working Paper, Boston University.

[31] Li, T. (2010), "Indirect Inference in Structural Econometric Models," Journal of Econo-
     metrics, Vol. 157, pp. 120-128.

[32] Lileeva, Alla and Daniel Treer (2010), "Improved Access to Foreign Markets Raises Plant-
     Level Productivity...For Some Plants," Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 125, No. 3,
     1051-1099.

[33] Lim, Kevin, Daniel Tre er, and Miaojie Yu (2018), "Trade and Innovation: The Role of
     Scale and Competition E¤ects,"Working Paper, Rottman School of Management, Univer-
     sity of Toronto.

[34] Maican, Florin and Matilda Orth (2020),"Entry Regulations and Product Variety in Re-
     tail," Working Paper, University of Gothenburg.

[35] Máñez, Juan A., Maria Rochina-Barrachina, and Juan A. Sanchis-Llopis (2015), "The
     Dynamic Linkages Among Exports, R&D, and Productivity," The World Economy, Vol.
     38, No. 4, pp. 583-612.

[36] Melitz, Marc J. (2003), "The Impact of Trade on Aggregate Industry Productivity and
     Intra-Industry Reallocations," Econometrica, Vol. 71, No. 6, pp. 1695-1725.

[37] OECD (2013), "OECD Reviews of Innovation Policy: Sweden," OECD Publishing, 2013.

[38] Olley, G. Steven, and Ariel Pakes (1996), "The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecom-
     munications Equipment Industry," Econometrica, Vol. 64, No. 6, pp.1263-1297.

[39] Pakes, Ariel (1994), "The Estimation of Dynamic Structural Models: Problems and
     Prospects Part II. Mixed Continuous-Discrete Control Models and Market Inter-actions,"
     in Advances in Econometrics: Proceedings of the 6th World Congress of the Econometric
     Society, La¤ont, J. J. and Sims, C. (eds.), Chapter 5.

[40] Peters, Bettina, Mark J. Roberts, Van Anh Vuong, and Helmut Fryges (2017), "Estimating
     Dynamic R&D Demand: An Analysis of Costs and Long-Run Bene...ts,"The Rand Journal
     of Economics, Vol. 48, No. 2 (Summer), pp. 409-437.


                                             29
[41] Peters, Bettina, Mark J. Roberts, and Van Anh Vuong (2018), "Firm R&D Investment
     and Export Market Exposure" NBER working paper 25528.

[42] Roberts, Mark J., Daniel Yi Xu, Xiaoyan Fan, and Shengxing Zhang (2018), "The Role
     of Firm Factors in Demand, Cost, and Export Market Selection for Chinese Footwear
     Producers," Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 85, pp. 2429-2461.

[43] Santos, Carlos Daniel (2017), "Sunk Costs of R&D, Trade, and Productivity: The Moulds
     Industry Case," Economic Journal, Vol. 127, No. 63, pp. 1626-1664.

[44] Shu, Pian and Claudia Steinwender (2018), "The Impact of Trade Liberalization on Firm
     Productivity and Innovation," NBER Working Paper 24715.

[45] Swedish government (2012), "Research and Innovation," Prop. 13/30, 2012.

[46] Swedish government (2019), "Trade and Investment Promotion," 2019.

[47] Syverson, Chad (2011), "What Determines Productivity?," Journal of Economic Litera-
     ture, Vol. 49, No. 2, pp. 326-365.

[48] Takalo, Tuomas, Tanja Tanayama, and Otto Toivanen (2013), "Estimating the Bene...ts
     of Targeted R&D Subsidies," The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 95, No. 1, pp.
     255-272.

[49] Takalo, Tuomas, Tanja Tanayama, and Otto Toivanen (2017), "Welfare E¤ects of R&D
     Support Policies," Working Paper, University of

[50] Van Beveren, Ilke and Hylke Vandenbussche (2010), "Product and Process Innovation and
     Firms'Decision to Export," Journal of Economic Policy Reform, Vol. 13, pp. 3-24.

[51] Van Long, Ngo, Horst Ra¤, and Frank Stähler (2011), "Innovation and Trade with Het-
     erogenous Firms," Journal of International Economics, Vol. 84, pp. 149-159.

[52] Xu, Rui, and Kaiji Gong (2017), "Does Import Competition Induce R&D Reallocations?
     Evidence from the U.S.," International Monetary Fund Working Papers 17/253.




                                            30
Table 1: R&D and Export Intensity (Share of Value of Shipments)
                High-Tech Industries                 Low-Tech Industries
  Year    R&D Intensity Export Intensity R&D Intensity Export Intensity
  2003        0.078             0.540              0.006            0.600
  2004        0.073             0.531              0.010            0.430
  2005        0.064             0.532              0.009            0.532
  2006        0.058             0.516              0.009            0.435
  2007        0.068             0.554              0.017            0.585
  2008        0.054             0.521              0.006            0.384
  2009        0.070             0.529              0.011            0.480
  2010        0.056             0.517              0.007            0.365
Average       0.065             0.530             0.009            0.476




                                   31
Table 2: R&D Investment by Export Category
                              Pr(R&D>0) Percentiles for R&D   Intensity
                                           P(10)   P(50)       P(90)
     High-Tech Industries
No Exports                       0.175     0.0017 0.0154      0.1380
Export Intensity P(25)           0.393     0.0021 0.0167      0.1442
P(25)<Export Intensity P(50)     0.582     0.0028 0.0190      0.1107
Export Intensity>P(50)           0.776     0.0040 0.0330      0.1429
     Low-Tech Industries
No Exports                       0.162     0.0009 0.0086      0.0901
Export Intensity P(25)           0.259     0.0010 0.0081      0.0686
P(25)<Export Intensity P(50)     0.292     0.0010 0.0066      0.0414
Export Intensity>P(50)           0.464     0.0014 0.0099      0.0470




                                32
Table 3: Revenue Functions and Productivity Evolution (standard errors)
Parameter (variable)     High-Tech Industries    Low-Tech Industries
                        Domestic Market Revenue
 1 (! t 1 )                  0.9944 (0.0296)        1.0376 (0.0060)
      2
 2 (! t 1 )                 -0.0309 (0.0006)        -0.0322 (0.0030)
 3 (ln(rdt 1 ))              0.0173 (0.0024)        0.0050 (0.0006)
                2
 4 (ln(rdt 1 ))            -0.0011 (2.4 10 5 )    -0.0005 (2.4 10 5 )
 5 (ln(rdt 1 )! t 1 )      0.0058 (7.0 10 5 )       0.0027 (0.0001)
 k                          -0.1081 (0.0004)         -0.079 (0.0008)
                                           6
 d                         -3.1965 (2.0 10   )     -3.235  (3.0 10 6 )
                         Export Market Revenue
 1( t 1)                     0.9968 (0.0207)        0.9791 (0.0005)
     2
 2( t 1)                    -0.0221 (0.0001)      -0.0006 (6.1 10 5 )
 3 (ln(rdt 1 ))              0.0229 (0.0029)       0.0098 (6.1 10 5 )
               2                           5
 4 (ln(rdt 1 ))            -0.0016 (2.6 10 )      -0.0003 (4.3 10 5 )
                                           5
 5 (ln(rdt 1 ) t 1 )       0.0062 (6.3 10 )         0.0004 (0.0002)
 k                          -0.1061 (0.0004)         -0.249 (0.0060)
                                           6
 f                         -2.9697 (7.0 10   )     -2.574  (1.0 10 6 )
sample size                       3374                    1834
All models include industry and year dummies




                                  33
Table 4: Elasticities of Productivity
                                                       High-Tech Industries        Low-Tech Industries
                                                    10th Median       90th     10th Median       90th
Impact of R&D
                                 @! it
Domestic Market Productivity: @ln( rdit       1)
                                                   0.0040   0.0082   0.0130   0.0002   0.0018   0.0028
                                 @ it
Export Market   Productivity: @ln( rdit 1 )
                                                   0.0052   0.0104   0.0165   0.0042   0.0053   0.0067
Impact of Lagged Productivity
                               @! it
Domestic Market Productivity: @! it 1
                                                    0.883    0.919    0.957    0.906    0.937    0.961
                                  @ it
Export Market Productivity:     @ it 1
                                                    0.883    0.922    0.959    0.975    0.978    0.980




                                                      34
Table 5: Reduced Form Policy Functions for R&D and Exporting
                                        High-Tech Industries                                  Low-Tech Industries
                               R&D              R&D            Export             R&D               R&D             Export
                             Discrete      Log Expend        Discrete           Discrete        Log Expend        Discrete
Intercept                     -1.259          4.903**        127.359**            0.490             1.521            -5.485
                             (1.325)          (0.645)         (15.700)          (2.103)           (1.553)           (3.919)
!t                            -0.995           -0.119        -46.888**           -3.958             1.785             0.356
                             (1.546)          (0.681)          (8.727)          (3.054)           (1.932)           (7.778)
!2t                            0.090            0.093          4.893**           -0.172            -0.533          17.281**
                             (0.508)          (0.218)          (1.654)          (1.262)           (0.664)           (5.176)
kt                             0.656          .687**          37.268**            0.539            0.0004            3.309*
                             (0.351)          (0.196)          (4.109)          (0.563)           (0.346)           (1.576)
 2
kt                            -0.004            0.025          2.477**           -0.051           -0.0008          1.013**
                             (0.036)          (0.024)          (0.294)          (0.049)           (0.024)           (0.224)
 t                            -0.958           -0.210        -116.97**            0.605             0.837             3.914
                             (0.527)          (0.309)         (12.983)          (0.670)           (0.467)           (2.590)
 2
 t                           0.580**          0.348**         26.216**           -0.033             0.073           6.642**
                             (0.104)          (0.067)          (2.850)          (0.116)           (0.086)           (0.815)
 t    !t                       0.413            0.152         21.332**            0.796             0.169         -22.509**
                             (0.320)          (0.171)          (3.109)          (0.527)           (0.329)           (3.666)
kt ! t                         0.205            0.011         -6.581**            0.438             0.227          -7.705**
                             (0.227)          (0.111)          (1.113)          (0.477)           (0.232)           (2.072)
kt     t                      -0.445         -0.216**        -16.304**           -0.197            -0.107          3.383**
                             (0.100)          (0.072)          (1.738)          (0.114)           (0.081)           (0.691)
Goodness of ...ta              0.285            0.625           0.825             0.225             0.540             0.716
Sample Size                    3374             2260            3374              1834               888              1834
Test Statistics (P-value)b
H0 : coe¢ cients on ! =0   16.91 (0.00)     3.53 (0.01)    82.21 (0.00)        13.57 (0.01)      2.27 (0.06)    109.97 (0.00)

H0 : coe¢ cients on   =0    155.92 (0.00)    83.07 (0.00)    492.78 (0.00)     62.89 (0.00)     17.83 (0.00)    220.86 (0.00)

H0 : coe¢ cients on k =0     41.53 (0.00)    14.51 (0.00)    471.54 (0.00)     31.80 (0.00)      1.76 (0.10)    108.68 (0.00)

All models contain industry and year dummies.
a
  Likelihood ratio [1 LL( )=LL(0)] for logit models, R2 for OLS models.
b
  Likelihood ratio test for logit models, F-test for OLS models. All tests have 4 restrictions.




                                                     35
     Table 6: Estimates of Structural Cost Parameters (bootstrap standard errors)
                                                 R&D Variable Cost                                         R&D Maint       R&D Startup        Export Cost
                                                                                                                m                   s                 f
                                     1                      2
     High-Tech Industries
     Chemicals              0.0855   (0.0013)      0.0089   (0.0001)         0.3450    (0.0066)            4.309 (0.305)   84.542 (10.010)    0.822   (0.048)
     Metals                 0.9075   (0.0094)      0.0126   (0.0002)         0.4371    (0.0042)           10.897 (0.589)   121.040 (6.566)    6.221   (0.265)
     Non elect machinery    0.2830   (0.0047)      0.0076   (0.0001)         0.4839    (0.0088)            7.484 (0.705)   55.636 (3.096)     2.309   (0.146)
     Electrical machinery   0.4146   (0.0090)   6.89 10 4   (9.77 10 6 )     0.1345    (0.0022)           5.298 (0.303)     62.095 (3.574)    1.088   (0.077)
     Instruments            0.0831   (0.0012)      0.0155   (0.0002)         0.1773    (0.0022)            4.622 (0.241)   15.714 (0.993)     2.506   (0.109)




36
     Vehicles               0.6587   (0.0129)      0.0108   (0.0002)         0.5622    (0.0093)           14.439 (1.084)   98.709 (8.700)     1.566   (0.095)

     Low-Tech Industries
     Food                   0.7984   (0.0116)     0.0411    (0.0006)          0.2024   (0.0027)           23.022 (0.563)   59.786   (3.262)   13.562 (0.477)
     Textiles               0.1740   (0.0019)     0.3957    (0.0057)          0.1607   (0.0019)            7.287 (0.244)   23.021   (1.871)    1.647 (0.088)
     Paper                  0.0396   (0.0008)     0.7093    (0.0115)          0.0503   (0.0007)           19.048 (1.260)   99.678   (5.556)    8.416 (0.375)
     Plastics               0.1479   (0.0025)     0.2154    (0.0032)          0.1324   (0.0019)           12.350 (0.607)   39.239   (1.731)    2.127 (0.092)
                                                                                                  7
     Ceramics               0.1661   (0.0025)     0.4711    (0.0064)       1.14 10 5   (1.69 10       )   13.383 (0.849)   93.633   (4.581)    3.315 (0.155)
     Miscellaneous          0.4055   (0.0054)     0.2440    (0.0037)          0.0839   (0.0012)           12.673 (0.509)   48.420   (1.955)   2.979 (0.108)
Table 7: Expected Marginal Cost of Innovation
                     Percentiles of the Distribution of EM C (!; ; k)
                      10th     25th     50th      75th       90th
High-Tech Industries
Chemicals            0.538     0.553    0.618     0.741     0.985
Metals               1.165     1.180    1.258     1.362     1.653
Non elect machinery  0.839     0.850    0.908     0.998     1.086
Electrical machinery 0.458     0.459    0.466     0.476     0.494
Instruments          0.313     0.328    0.366     0.449     0.503
Vehicles             1.170     1.182    1.222     1.316     1.402
Low-Tech Industries
Food                 0.839     0.860    0.953     1.022     1.121
Textiles             0.494     0.561    0.737     1.090     1.580
Paper                0.421     0.722    1.176     2.136     3.249
Plastics             0.356     0.508    0.778     1.107     1.487
Ceramics             0.440     0.678    0.953     2.088     2.316
Miscellaneous        0.511     0.644    1.046     1.397     1.583




                                 37
Table 8: Model Fit - Actual and Predicted Probabilities (mean)
                        Maintain R&D           Start R&D              Export
                      Actual Predicted Actual Predicted          Actual Predicted
High-Tech Industries
Chemicals              0.903     0.904      0.340       0.341    0.984    0.987
Metals                 0.806     0.803      0.152       0.152    0.802    0.804
Non elect machinery    0.887     0.889      0.296       0.294    0.936    0.938
Electrical machinery   0.863     0.863      0.212       0.213    0.918    0.918
Instruments            0.880     0.880      0.333       0.333    0.870    0.870
Vehicles               0.804     0.804      0.264       0.264    0.935    0.937
Low-Tech Industries
Food                   0.517     0.517      0.104       0.104    0.420    0.420
Textiles               0.537     0.537      0.125       0.125    0.903    0.903
Paper                  0.523     0.524      0.125       0.126    0.774    0.775
Plastics               0.636     0.635      0.246       0.246    0.960    0.959
Ceramics               0.589     0.589      0.157       0.157    0.813    0.813
Miscellaneous          0.639     0.639      0.219       0.219    0.898    0.897




                                        38
Table 9: Model Fit - Distribution of log R&D Expenditures (thousands of SEK)
                         10th Percentile         Median            90th Percentile
                      Actual Predicted Actual Predicted Actual Predicted
High-Tech Industries
Chemicals              6.907      6.478     9.321     9.815      11.229     10.265
Metals                 5.991      5.490     8.292     8.597      10.571     10.553
Non elect machinery    6.684      6.312     9.210     9.549      11.708     11.466
Electrical machinery   6.397      6.393     8.987     8.796      10.714     11.356
Instruments            6.404      6.518     8.780     8.654       9.851      9.986
Vehicles               6.331      5.951     8.578     8.804      11.127     11.030
Low-Tech Industries
Food                   4.605      4.928     6.955     7.028       8.239      8.158
Textiles               5.298      5.348     6.397     6.620       7.400      7.416
Paper                  5.298      5.794     6.895     6.705       7.601      7.615
Plastics               5.298      5.724     7.313     7.263       8.307      7.979
Ceramics               5.962      6.100     6.908     6.790       7.972      7.753
Miscellaneous          5.298      5.683     7.090     7.058       7.824      7.797




                                       39
Table 10: Percentiles of Distribution of R&D Bene...ts (V 1   V 0 )=R&D
                                   Non-exporters                                 Exporters
                         P25     P50       P75   IQR=P50         P25       P50        P75     IQR=P50
High-Tech Industries
Chemicals               1.006 1.085       1.712     0.651        4.477    56.595    110.797    1.879
Metals                  2.431 3.867       5.726     0.852        3.551    10.174    161.685    15.54
Non elect machinery     1.219 1.894       3.534     1.222        5.483    45.127    103.844    2.180
Electrical machinery    0.213 0.526       0.967     1.433        2.063    21.294    47.711     2.144
Instruments             0.429 0.573       0.802     0.631        3.501    25.145    57.251     2.138
Vehicles                1.237 1.707       3.167     1.131        3.345    11.718    90.606     7.447
Low-Tech Industries
Food                    1.798 2.924       4.173     0.812        6.536     9.985     19.095    1.258
Textiles                1.925 2.124       4.046     0.999        2.687     4.628      8.711    1.302
Paper                   2.987 5.372 10.469          1.393        5.585    11.126     22.394    1.511
Plastics                1.167 2.180       2.451     0.589        4.310     8.795     79.705    8.572
Ceramics                1.811 2.912       6.385     1.571        7.555    16.498     31.469    1.450
Miscellaneous           2.003 3.347       6.490     1.341        4.581     9.939     54.469    5.019




                                                 40
Table 11: Proportional Increase in Firm Value (V 1   V 0 )=V 0 (median)
                       All Firms Non-exporters            Exporters
High-tech Industries
Chemicals                0.827          0.015              0.847
Metals                   0.034          0.022              0.051
Non elect machinery      0.543          0.119              0.667
Electrical machinery     0.229          0.004              0.386
Instruments              0.401          0.010              0.547
Vehicles                 0.069          0.008              0.089
Low-tech Industries
Food                     0.006          0.003              0.013
Textiles                 0.009          0.004              0.009
Paper                    0.009          0.007              0.010
Plastics                 0.013          0.004              0.013
Ceramics                 0.013          0.003              0.014
Miscellaneous            0.012          0.003              0.013




                                 41
Table 12a: Change in Variables in Response to 20% Export Tari¤ (Median)
                          Percentage Change                 Change in Probability
                            EN B        R&D       Maintain R&D Start R&D             Export
High-Tech Industries
Chemicals                  -0.3018     -0.1303         0.0000         -0.0210        -0.0000
Metals                     -0.3512     -0.1402         0.0000         -0.0154        -0.0843
Non elect machinery        -0.3025     -0.1383         0.0000         -0.0119        -0.0002
Electrical machinery       -0.2857     -0.1429         0.0000         -0.0062        -0.0003
Instruments                -0.4205     -0.1802         0.0000         -0.0107        -0.0339
Vehicles                   -0.2706     -0.1047         0.0000         -0.0135        -0.0003
Average - High-Tech       -0.3221     -0.1394         0.0000         -0.0131        -0.0198
Low-Tech Industries
Food                       -0.0550     -0.0178        -0.0113         -0.0004        -0.0770
Textiles                   -0.3994     -0.1203        -0.0317         -0.0116        -0.0717
Paper                      -0.3725     -0.1013        -0.0192         -0.0078        -0.1342
Plastics                   -0.4076     -0.1185        -0.0079         -0.0266        -0.0042
Ceramics                   -0.2545     -0.0725        -0.0041         -0.0214        -0.0343
Miscellaneous              -0.3327     -0.1040        -0.0074         -0.0153        -0.0239
Average - Low-Tech       -0.03036 -0.0891            -0.0136         -0.0139        -0.0576


    Table12b: Percentage Change in EN B from 20% Export Tari¤ (Median)
                     P0       P25 P25 <       P50 P50 <      P75 P75 <              P100
    HighTtech Industries
    P0 ! P25              -0.0334         -0.4421        -0.5942              -0.6062
    P25 < ! P50           -0.0853         -0.3790        -0.4329              -0.4143
    P50 < ! P75           -0.1346         -0.3023        -0.3448              -0.3515
    P75 < ! P100          -0.1329         -0.2286        -0.2596              -0.3112
    Low-Tech Industries
    P0 ! P25              -0.0816         -0.3376        -0.4158              -0.4975
    P25 < ! P50           -0.1436         -0.2762        -0.4322              -0.5178
    P50 < ! P75           -0.1882         -0.2875        -0.3788              -0.4986
    P75 < ! P100          -0.2014         -0.3030        -0.3379              -0.4120




                                           42
Table 13a: Change in Variables in Response to 20% Export and Import Tari¤s (Median)
                         Percentage Change                 Change in Probability
                           EN B       R&D        Maintain R&D Start R&D           Export
High-Tech Industries
Chemicals                 -0.3789    -0.1818          0.0000          -0.0367      0.0000
Metals                    -0.5287    -0.2349          0.0000          -0.0268     -0.0849
Non elect machinery       -0.3843    -0.2016          0.0000          -0.0225     -0.0002
Electrical machinery      -0.4705    -0.2480          0.0000          -0.0185     -0.0003
Instruments               -0.5295    -0.2379          0.0000          -0.0251     -0.0342
Vehicles                  -0.4743    -0.1919          0.0000          -0.0275     -0.0003
Average - High-Tech -0.4610 -0.2160                  0.0000         -0.02618     -0.0200
Low-Tech Industries
Food                      -0.4368    -0.1785         -0.0770          -0.0043     -0.0773
Textiles                  -0.5689    -0.1964         -0.0622          -0.0192     -0.0719
Paper                     -0.5580    -0.1756         -0.0446          -0.0138     -0.1344
Plastics                  -0.5652    -0.1892         -0.0264          -0.0378     -0.0042
Ceramics                  -0.4981    -0.1599         -0.0331          -0.0455     -0.0344
Miscellaneous             -0.5452    -0.2098         -0.0252          -0.0308     -0.0224
Average - Low-Tech       -0.5287 -0.1849            -0.0447          -0.0252     -0.0574

  Table13b: Percentage Change in EN B from 20% Export and Import Tari¤s (Median)
                   P0       P25 P25 <       P50 P50 <      P75   P75 <      P100
  High-Tech Industries
  P0 ! P25              -0.2539         -0.6032        -0.6826            -0.6803
  P25 < ! P50           -0.3731         -0.5434        -0.5702            -0.4702
  P50 < ! P75           -0.4402         -0.5201        -0.4395            -0.4101
  P75 < ! P100          -0.4686         -0.4730        -0.3771            -0.3772
  Low-Tech Industries
  P0 ! P25              -0.4566         -0.5465        -0.5893            -0.6224
  P25 < ! P50           -0.4498         -0.5138        -0.5861            -0.6239
  P50 < ! P75           -0.4478         -0.5172        -0.5555            -0.6287
  P75 < ! P100          -0.4896         -0.5257        -0.5323            -0.5775




                                           43
Table 14a: Change in Variables in Response to 20% Variable R&D Cost Reduction (Median)
                         Percentage Change                 Change in Probability
                          EN B       R&D         Maintain R&D Start R&D          Export
High-Tech Industries
Chemicals                 0.0079     0.0184          0.0000          0.0015      0.0000
Metals                    0.0539     0.1777          0.0000          0.0020      0.0003
Non elect machinery       0.0443     0.0527          0.0000          0.0060      0.0000
Electrical machinery      0.0457     0.2857          0.0000          0.0017      0.0000
Instruments               0.0211     0.0312          0.0000          0.0022      0.0001
Vehicles                  0.0591     0.1074          0.0000          0.0046      0.0000
Average - High-Tech 0.0387          0.1122          0.0000          0.0030       0.0001
Low-Tech Industries
Food                      0.0686     0.2338          0.0021          0.0007      0.0004
Textiles                  0.0186     0.0318          0.0017          0.0005      0.0001
Paper                     0.0019     0.0038          0.0001          0.0001      0.0000
Plastics                  0.0123     0.0228          0.0004          0.0006      0.0000
Ceramics                  0.0080     0.0142          0.0006          0.0003      0.0000
Miscellaneous             0.0286     0.0548          0.0009          0.0010      0.0000
 Average - Low-Tech      0.1380     0.0602          0.0010          0.0005       0.0001




Table 14b: Percentage Change in EN B from 20% Variable R&D Cost Reduction (Median)
                 P0         P25 P25 <      P50 P50 <      P75    P75 <      P100
High-Tech Industries
P0 ! P25             0.2516         0.1264         0.0551            0.0392
P25 < ! P50          0.1816         0.0652         0.0382            0.0148
P50 < ! P75          0.0909         0.0489         0.0244            0.0146
P75 < ! P100         0.0459         0.0293         0.0193            0.0108
Low-Tech Industries
P0 ! P25             0.0645         0.0230         0.0067            0.0141
P25 < ! P50          0.0174         0.0208         0.0090            0.0167
P50 < ! P75          0.0033         0.0048         0.0159            0.0063
P75 < ! P100         0.0178         0.0056         0.0070            0.0034




                                          44
9     Appendix: Construction of the Swedish Firm Data
Estimation of this dynamic model of R&D investment requires ...rm-level panel data that in-
cludes input and output variables that can be used to measure productivity, R&D expenditures,
the volume of the ...rm'  s exports, and domestic sales. We combine data from four censuses or
surveys that are administered by Statistics Sweden. All the sources use a common ...rm id which
allows very accurate matching of the ...rm observations across the four data sources.
     The ...rst data source is the Financial Statistics (FS), a census of all Swedish manufactur-
ing ...rms belonging to the Swedish Standard Industrial Classi...cation (SNI) codes 15 to 37.21
FS is register data collected for tax reporting. Over 99 percent of the ...rms are single-plant
establishments. It contains annual information on capital, investment, materials, value-added,
labor, wages, and revenues that are su¢ cient to measure ...rm productivity.
     The second and third data sources are the R&D survey (SCB-RD) and the Community
Innovation Survey (CIS), which together provide information on R&D spending. Each SCB-
RD survey is sent to a representative sample of 600-1000 manufacturing ...rms including all ...rms
with more than 200 employees. The SCB-RD is administered in the odd years (1999, 2001,
2003, 2005, 2007, 2009), but also collects R&D information for the even years (2000, 2002, 2004,
2006, 2008, 2010). The CIS survey collects information on own R&D expenditure, outsourced
R&D expenditure, and product and process innovations. It is administered in the even years
(2004, 2006, 2008, 2010), and the design follows the common standard across countries in the
EU.22 The survey covers approximately 2000 manufacturing ...rms, including all ...rms with more
than 250 employees. In order to be included in SCB-RD or CIS surveys the minimum number
of full-time adjusted employees per ...rm is 3-5. Since large manufacturing ...rms account for
a disproportionate share of economic activity, the CIS and SCB-RD surveys include the ...rms
that are responsible for the majority of total R&D, exports, and sales in Sweden. For smaller
...rms, the SCB-RD and CIS samples are not identical, but combining data from both surveys
gives us broader coverage of the population of small manufacturing ...rms.
     The ...nal data source, Industrins Varuproduktion (IVP), contains ...rm-level information on
imports and exports. In particular, it contains annual foreign sales for each ...rm to each of
almost 250 export destinations. The median number of export destinations across the ...rms is
21, the 90th percentile is 65 and the maximum is 188.
     After merging the data sources, we aggregate the ...rms into two industry groups based on
the average intensity of R&D in the industry in the OECD countries. Industries assigned to the
high-tech group all have R&D-sales ratios that exceed 0.05 while those in the low-tech group all
have R&D-sales ratios less than 0.02. The high-tech industry group includes: chemicals (SNI
23,24), basic and fabricated metals (SNI 27,28), non-electrical machinery (SNI 29), electrical
machinery (SNI 30-32), instruments (SNI 33) and motor vehicles (SNI 34-35). The low-tech
industry group includes: food and beverages(SNI 15,16), textiles (SNI 17-19), wood and paper
(SNI 20-22), plastics (SNI 25), ceramics (SNI 26) and miscellaneous (SNI 36-37).
  21
     These numbers refer to SNI codes for 2002. The SNI standard builds on the Statistical Classi...cation of
Economic Activities in the European Community (NACE). The SNI standard is maintained by Statistics Sweden
(http://www.scb.se).
  22
     Swedish ...rms are obliged to answer. In 2010 the response rate was over 85 percent, which is substantially
higher than many other European countries.



                                                      45
