                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  INPUT-OUTPUT NETWORKS AND MISALLOCATION

                                          Jing Hang
                                        Pravin Krishna
                                         Heiwai Tang

                                      Working Paper 27983
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27983


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2020




We thank Robert Feenstra, Hugo Hopenhayn, Chang-Tai Hsieh, Pete Klenow; Sam Kortum,
Ernest Liu, William Maloney, Gianmarco Ottaviano, Diego Restuccia, Michael Song, Chad
Syverson, Felix Tintelnot, Johannes Van Biesebroeck, Daniel Xu, Xiaodong Zhu, conference
participants at CEPR's Conferences on Global Value Chains and Trade and Development and
NBER's China Meeting and seminar participants at Columbia University, Fudan University,
Hitotsubashi University, Peking University, Stanford, UC Berkeley, UC Davis and the World
Bank for many helpful comments and suggestions. Research support from the World Bank is
gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Jing Hang, Pravin Krishna, and Heiwai Tang. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Input-Output Networks and Misallocation
Jing Hang, Pravin Krishna, and Heiwai Tang
NBER Working Paper No. 27983
October 2020
JEL No. E1,E23,L16,O11,O4

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper develops a framework for studying the macroeconomic costs of resource
misallocation. The framework enables the assessment of the conditions under which the existing
estimates in the misallocation literature, which are largely based on a value-added production
structure and ignore inter-sectoral linkages, provide an unbiased estimate of misallocation costs in
relation to a more general setting, in which production of gross output relies upon input-output
linkages across sectors. We show that in the absence of intermediate input distortions, the two
approaches are isomorphic and will yield the same estimated aggregate productivity loss. When
firm-specific intermediate input distortions are present, however, the value-added model produces
biased estimates of TFP losses due to both model misspecification and incorrect inferences of
firms' productivity and distortions. Using Chinese and Indian enterprise data, we find
quantitatively similar TFP losses from resource misallocation for China, regardless of the model
used, while for India, we infer significantly larger TFP losses under the gross output model.


Jing Hang                                        Heiwai Tang
Sun Yat-sen Univeristy                           Johns Hopkins University
514 Lingnan Administrative Center                1740 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
135 Xingang West Street                          Washington, DC 20036
Haizhu District                                  hwtang@jhu.edu
Guangzhou 510275
China
hangj5@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Pravin Krishna
Johns Hopkins University
1717 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
Room 741
Washington, DC 20036
and NBER
Pravin_Krishna@jhu.edu
1       Introduction

A vast literature, pioneered by Restuccia and Rogerson (2008) and Hsieh and Klenow (2009), has
studied how resource misallocation across heterogeneous firms, induced by idiosyncratic policy dis-
tortions, could lower countries' aggregate productivity and provide an explanation for the staggering
income differences observed across countries.1 In particular, Hsieh and Klenow (2009) (HK here-
after) develop an accounting framework to estimate the cost of resource misallocation from different
types of market frictions using firm-level data. Subsequent contributions to the literature have pro-
vided arguments for why their estimates could be systematically biased for various reasons. Jones
(2011, 2013) has posited that ignoring inter-sectoral linkages in production, as HK do, may result
in an underestimation of economic losses due to misallocation, as the effects of distortions within
sectors will be amplified by inter-sectoral linkages. Other studies show that the dispersion of firms'
physical total factor productivity (TFP) is significantly smaller if gross output instead of value-
added production functions are used (Gandhi et al., 2017), implying a potential overestimation of
losses in the existing misallocation literature that uses value-added data.
    This paper develops a framework to study the relevance of these criticisms about the quanti-
tative assessment of aggregate TFP losses resulting from resource misallocation and to study the
circumstances under which the existing estimates in the literature, based on value added production
functions, may be biased.2
    We first approach the question theoretically by developing a model of an economy in which
output in each sector is produced by heterogeneous firms using primary factors of production and
also intermediate inputs from different sectors; i.e., firms are linked through an inter-sectoral input-
output (IO) network as in Long and Plosser (1983). With identical primitives (firm-level produc-
tivity and distortions), we derive expressions for an economy's aggregate output in the two different
settings: one in which it is based on gross output from sectors connected through IO linkages
    1
      This literature includes Banerjee and Duflo (2005), Alfaro et al. (2009), Guner et al. (2008), Restuccia and
Rogerson (2008), Hsieh and Klenow (2009), Buera et al. (2011), and Bartelsman et al. (2013), among many others.
See Restuccia and Rogerson (2013) and Hopenhayn (2014) for reviews.
    2
      To compare to HK, we focus on the percentage gain in aggregate TFP from removing distortions. That is, we
evaluate efficient TFP using actual TFP as benchmark. It is the opposite of the TFP loss from misallocation, which
means evaluating actual TFP using efficient TFP as benchmark. We sometimes use TFP loss in the paper when
there is no confusion.



                                                        2
(henceforth the GO model) and another in which it is the sum of sectoral value added (henceforth
the VA model) as in HK.3 As is conventional in the literature, we then examine and compare ag-
gregate TFP gains from the removal of all distortions in the two models. Specifically, we explore
the conditions under which the VA model can produce the same aggregate TFP gain as the GO
model, i.e, the circumstances under which the VA model is unbiased.
    Our main conclusion is that whether the VA model can be used to measure the costs of mis-
allocation accurately depends critically on the presence of intermediate input distortions. If there
are no such distortions, we show that one can calibrate the VA model to be consistent with the
GO model. Importantly, in the absence of intermediate input distortions, we show that consistency
between the two models requires three important "adjustments": (1) rescaling firm productivity;
(2) changing the sectoral weights in the final good production function; and (3) transforming the
elasticity of substitution between output varieties in the sectoral production function in the GO
model to its VA counterpart.
    The first adjustment, which requires a rescaling of firm productivity, has been emphasized in
earlier studies (e.g., Bruno (1978)). Consider an increase in a firm's output productivity. If the firm
does not adjust its intermediate inputs, the percentage increase in value-added will be obviously
larger than that in gross output, given that value-added equals gross output minus the costs of
intermediate inputs. If the firm increases its demand for intermediate inputs in response to higher
productivity, the percentage increase in its value-added will be even higher than that in gross
output as its output increases more than the cost of intermediate inputs.4 Hence, a firm's measured
value-added productivity, which ignores the change in intermediate input use, will be larger than
its measured output productivity.5
    The second adjustment involves changing the sectoral weights in an economy's final good pro-
   3
      The comparison between the GO model and the VA model is legitimate as the intermediate inputs cancel out
in aggregation. For the aggregate economy, both models take the primary factors, capital and labor, as inputs and
produce a single final output. In fact, our model offers a more complete description of the economy and reduces to
the value-added framework of HK when intersectoral linkages are shut down. This allows us to evaluate the potential
bias of the HK framework due to the use of value-added production functions.
    4
      Note that the marginal product of additional intermediate inputs equals the market price of intermediate inputs
only for the last unit of inputs. Infra-marginal increase intermediate inputs raises output more than the market
price.
    5
      Incidentally, this finding largely explains why Gandhi et al. (2017) find a larger dispersion of firm productivity
when firms' value-added data are used, because differences in firm productivity are magnified when measured in
value-added due to the adjustment of intermediate inputs.


                                                           3
duction. In particular, a sector's weight in the GO model, which is the economy's expenditure
share, needs to be changed to its value added share in the VA model. Without intermediate input
distortions, a sector's value added share is just the product of the sector's sales-to-GDP ratio (the
so-called Domar (1961) weight) and its output elasticity with respect to the primary factors of
production.6
   Finally, the elasticity of substitution between varieties in a sector's production function needs
to be adjusted when firms' outputs are changed from gross output to value added instead, using
the output elasticity with respect to the primary factors of production.
   In the absence of intermediate input distortions and with necessary adjustments, a theoretical
isomorphism between the two models can be established. This appears to stand in contrast to Jones
(2011, 2013), who argues that firm- or sector-level distortions can be amplified through IO networks.
Our analysis clarifies that measures of value added implicitly incorporate the amplification effect
of inter-sectoral linkages, which is revealed in data as a more dispersed distribution of value added
productivity within sectors. Correspondingly, in the GO model, the IO amplification and the smaller
dispersion of firm gross output productivity completely offset each other, leaving the TFP gain from
removing distortions orthogonal to the economy's IO structure. This invariance is a key theoretical
result of this paper.
   We also show, in the absence of intermediate input distortions, how to correctly infer firm
primitives using the VA model. A firm's value added productivity, after appropriate rescaling, will
be identical to its gross output productivity (as mentioned above). Furthermore, a firm's distortions
inferred from its value added measure will also be identical to those inferred from its gross output
measure. The two models hence lead to identical measured efficiency loss from misallocation when
applied to the same data.
   The isomorphism between the VA and GO approaches breaks down when there are interme-
diate input distortions. The VA model will be misspecified and no calibration of the VA model
can rationalize the data, given the same underlying distortions. Using data on value added will
   6
     In the GO model, the effect of a sectoral productivity shock on aggregate productivity is determined by the
propagation from upstream sectors to downstream sectors in the production network, which is summarized in a
vector called the "influence vector" (Acemoglu et al., 2012). According to Hulten's (1978) theorem, in the absence
of distortions in the production network, the vector of Domar weights equals the "influence vector".



                                                        4
also lead to biased estimation of firm primitives. Firms subject to idiosyncratic distortions face
different effective intermediate input prices. As a firm's VA is computed as its revenue minus cost
of intermediate inputs, while assuming the same market intermediate input prices, its marginal
products and productivity inferred from the VA model will both be biased (Bruno (1978)).7 In
sum, when intermediate input distortions exist, the VA model produces biased estimates of TFP
gains from the removal of all distortions due to both model misspecification and incorrect inference
of firm primitives. However, the VA model does not necessarily underestimate or overestimate the
TFP gain. The direction and magnitude of the bias depend on the extent of intermediate input
distortions and their correlation with other firm characteristics. The assessment of the potential
bias of the VA model is thus an empirical matter.
    We hence study the potential biases in the assessment of the cost of misallocation using Chinese
and Indian industrial enterprise data, as also used by HK. Interestingly, using the Chinese Annual
Survey of Industrial Production (1998-2007), we find for China that the two models produce very
similar measured TFP gains from the removal of all distortions. The average difference in the
estimated TFP gains between the two models is around 5 percentage points, compared to the average
TFP gain of over 100% based on the GO model.8 The small bias of the VA model indicates that
intermediate input distortions should be significantly smaller than those associated with the primary
factors, which we confirm in the data. In particular, the variance of the distortions intermediate
inputs (in logs) is only about 0.03, compared to 0.53 for the primary factors (a weighted sum of
capital and labor). The implied lower TFP gain is amplified by inter-sectoral IO linkages, which
renders the overall estimated TFP gain based on the GO model to be close to that according to
the VA model in the case of China.
    For India, however, based on the Indian Annual Survey of Industries (1999-2009), we find sub-
stantially larger TFP gains from removing all distortions based on the GO model than the VA
model. The difference averages to around 114 percentage points, with the average TFP gain es-
timated in the GO model at 180%. According to our model, this must be because of the larger
   7
     As the price of intermediate inputs no longer equals its marginal product, the differences in input prices will be
embedded in the value-added measures, affecting the meaures of productivity (Basu and Fernald, 1995).
   8
     Depending on the year, the aggregate TFP gain measured using the value-added model can be smaller or larger
than that using the GO model.



                                                          5
dispersion of the intermediate input distortions in India, as compared to China. Indeed, we find
that for India, the variance of the distortions on intermediate inputs equals 0.27, while its dispersion
of the primary input distortions is similar to that of China.
    It is a common practice in the literature to apply the elasticities of substitution estimated with
gross output data to the VA model. In a final exercise, we evaluate the size of the bias in the
estimated TFP gains due to such inconsistent use of elasticities.9 As the output elasticity is larger
than 1 in practice, our model suggests that the elasticity chosen by the existing studies using the
VA model has been larger than the intended one.10 In other words, if the correct elasticity is
chosen for both models, the TFP gains estimated in the existing VA studies should be reduced.
When we impose HK's baseline elasticity (=3) in both models, we find that China's aggregate TFP
gains from removing all distortions will increase significantly, implying a mistaken 40 percentage-
point additional gain on average as compared to our GO counterpart. For India, the implied TFP
gain from removing all distortions also increases significantly based on the VA framework, closing
the gap between the estimates from the two models by almost 90 percentage points. That said,
our proposed GO model still suggests a larger TFP gain for India, implying that distortions on
intermediate inputs are still significantly more severe in India than China. These findings highlight
the importance of choosing the right elasticity in calibrating the models with different concepts of
output, as has been emphasized in Herrendorf et al. (2013).
    This paper contributes to three inter-related strands of literature. First, it contributes to the
growing literature on resource misallocation, in particular those studies that complement and extend
the analysis of the HK model.11 Important studies along this line include Asker et al. (2014) and
David and Venkateswaran (2019) which allows for dynamic capital adjustment, Bartelsman et al.
(2013) which add a fixed cost to production and Song and Wu (2015) and Gollin and Udry (2017)
which consider heterogeneity in firm technology. Our results are also related to another line of
research that tries to distinguish measurement errors from misallocation (Dong, 2011; Song and
    9
      For example, HK choose the elasticity based on estimates from Broda and Weinstein (2006) and Hendel and
Nevo (2006) which are more suitable for the GO model.
   10
      If the elasticity is less than 1, the output elasticity is smaller than the value-added elasticity. See Proposition 3
for the transformation of the elasticity between the two models.
   11
      The HK framework has been used by Kalemli-Ozcan and Sorensen (2012), Ziebarth (2012, 2013) , Brandt
et al. (2013), Oberfield (2013), Hsieh and Klenow (2014), Adamopoulos et al. (2015), Chen and Irarrazabal (2015),
Gopinath et al. (2017), and Restuccia and Stantaeul`      alia-Llopis (2017), among others.


                                                            6
Wu, 2015; Gollin and Udry, 2017; Bils et al., 2018; Haltiwanger and Syverson, 2018).12
    Second, in exploring the role of intersectoral linkages and the potential isomorphism between
the VA and GO approaches, this paper contributes to the literature on production networks, and
is thus related to the important studies of Jones (2011, 2013) on the role of production networks
in amplifying the effect of given distortions. It also relates to several other recent papers on the
network propagation of distortions, which include, among others, Altinoglu (2020), Bartelme and
Gorodnichenko (2015), Bigio and La'O (2020), Baqaee and Farhi (2019b, 2020a,b),Caliendo et al.
(2017), Liu (2019), Luo (2019), and Osotimehin and Popov (2020).13 While these latter studies
mainly focus on the aggregate effects of idiosyncratic distortions in production networks, we pay
close attention to the issue of TFP gains from moving to efficiency between a model with production
networks and a model without. Our theoretical analysis extends the seminal work of Hulten (1978)
to incorporate both firm heterogeneous productivity and factor distortions.
    Third, our finding of the bias of the VA model echoes an earlier literature on the validity of the
concept of real value added (Sato, 1976; Bruno, 1978). Bruno (1984) and Basu and Fernald (1995,
1997, 2002) have shown that the use of value added measures can lead to biased results in different
scenarios.14 Most closely related to our paper is Gandhi et al. (2017), which shows that the use
of data on value added could lead to overestimated costs of misallocation, given that empirically
distortions mostly benefit the less productive firms at the expense of the more productive ones. We
show, somewhat to the contrary, that adding inter-sectoral linkages with the required adjustments
can completely offset the overestimation, in the absence of intermediate input distortions. Finally,
Herrendorf et al. (2013) which examines different sources of structural transformation, discusses
how sectors can be viewed either as categories of final expenditure or value added and how these
different views require changes in the preference specifications. Our findings confirm the importance
of this distinction in the measurement of misallocation. We find a significant upward bias in the VA
model's estimates of the cost of misallocation due to the use of an incorrect elasticity of substitution.
  12
      Other important contributions to the misallocation literature include Banerjee and Duflo (2005), Restuccia and
Rogerson (2008), Guner et al. (2008), Banerjee and Moll (2010), Buera and Shin (2013), Midrigan and Xu (2014),
Moll (2014), David et al. (2016), among many others.
   13
      Sectoral interlinakges have also been studied by Hirschman (1958), Long and Plosser (1983), Horvath (1998,
2000), Ciccone (2002), Acemoglu et al. (2012), Baqaee (2018), and Baqaee and Farhi (2019a,c), to name a few.
   14
      The other studies mainly focus on measuring productivity growth over time, while this paper compares produc-
tivity across firms.


                                                         7
      The rest of the paper is structured as follows. The next section presents the two models for
measuring efficiency loss of misallocation. Section 3 studies the specification of the VA model
theoretically, while Section 4 discusses the measurement of firm productivity and wedges using
different concepts of output. Section 5 evaluates the bias in data. Section 6 concludes.



2        Two Theoretical Approaches

This section first introduces the GO model, which adds a production network a la Long and Plosser
(1983) to the HK framework, in preparation for an evaluation of the misallocation costs compared
to the VA approach.15 We view the GO model as a natural representation of production in an
economy as firms employ both primary inputs and intermediate inputs in reality. We then briefly
present the corresponding HK framework, which we label as the VA model. This framework, which
abstracts from inter-sectoral linkages is, in a sense, a simplified version of the GO model. Clearly,
both the GO and VA models require capital and labor to produce a final product (GDP). However,
the GO model considers endogenous intermediate input uses, while the VA model does not.


2.1      The Gross Output (GO) Model

The are S sectors in the economy. Output from any sector QS is used as either intermediate input
MS or for final consumption CS .16 A final product, Y , is produced by a representative firm according
to,
                                            S                   S
                                                   s
                                      Y =         Cs ,   with         s = 1.                              (1)
                                            s=1                 s=1

Let the final output, Y , be the numeraire. The demand for sectoral output from final good producers
is given by Ps Cs = s Y . Market clearing for sectoral output implies


                                                Q s = C s + Ms ,                                          (2)
    15
     Bils et al. (2018) study a model similar to the GO model.
    16
     We use C to denote consumption, but it should be understood as expenditure including both consumption and
investment.




                                                         8
                    S
where Ms =          q =1   Msq with Msq being the demand from sector q for the output of sector s. The
sectoral output itself is produced using differentiated intermediate varieties Qsi ,

                                                                              s
                                                         Ns       s -1
                                                                              s -1
                                                                  s
                                            Qs =              Qsi                    ,                             (3)
                                                      i=1


where Ns is the total number of varieties in sector s and s is the sector-specific elasticity of
substitution. We assume that each variety is produced by one single firm, such that firm and variety
                                                                                                       1       1
                                                                                    s
                                                                                                           -
can be used interchangeably. The inverse demand for a variety is given by Psi = Ps Qs Qsi s , with
                                                                      1
                                                   S      1-s       1-s
the sectoral price index given by Ps =             i=1   Psi                  .
    The firms produce goods with two primary inputs, capital and labor, as well as intermediate
inputs from all sectors, using a Cobb-Douglas technology:

                                                                          S              1-s
                                                 s 1-s s                           qs
                                    Qsi = Asi   Ksi Lsi                           Mqsi         ,                   (4)
                                                                         q =1


         S
with     q =1   qs = 1. Different from HK who assume a monopolistic competition market structure,
we assume that firms take prices as given.17 As we will discuss in detail later, the change in market
structure however does not affect our comparison of the two models in the empirical analysis.18
However, assuming perfect competition makes the GO model easier to implement.19
    Each firm then solves the following profit maximization problem, facing idiosyncratic distortions
  17
      One way to think about this is there are many firms with access to identical technology with negligible entry
costs, i.e., the market is contestable. In equilibrium there will be only one firm operating but the firm acts like a
competitive producer. Otherwise, we can assume there are many firms producing one variety and they all have the
same technology and face the same distortions.
   18
      The benchmark results of HK will not be altered by the change in the market structure. In the GO model,
the change in market structure distorts between sector allocation of resources for two reasons. First, the presence
of markups distorts the relative price of intermediate inputs to primary inputs, which further distorts the sectoral
allocation of primary inputs. Second, between-sector allocations can still be distorted if sectors have different
markups. However, since we only focus on within-sector misallocation in our empirical analysis, the changes in sectoral
allocation does not impact our results other than through the determination of sectoral weights in aggregation. Our
calibration procedure in Section 5 makes sure the weights are affected by the same proportion due such distortions
in the two models.
   19
      As discussed later, under perfect competition we do not actually need information on the input-output matrix
because the Domar weights are sufficient statistics for estimating the TFP gain. Under monopolistic competition
this is no longer true and we have to solve the Leontief inverse in order to compute the sectoral weights for the GO
model.




                                                              9
in the factor markets:

                                                                                                            S
               max            si = Psi Qsi - (1 + Ksi )RKsi - (1 + Lsi )W Lsi - (1 + M si )                       Pq Mqsi .
       Qsi ,Ksi ,Lsi ,{Mqsi q }
                                                                                                           q =1


Following HK, we assume that the wedges will not affect actual output besides distorting firms' input
decisions. They correspond to the type of distortions in which payments are not discarded in Bigio
and La'O (2020). One way to think of this is to view the wedges as shadow prices for the constraints
the firms might face in the factor markets, such as a collateral constraint for renting capital. The
wedges could also reflect some genuine differences in prices that firms face.20 Alternatively, we can
think of the wedges as actual taxes that are rebated to the households lump sum.21
    Finally, factor market clearing for capital and labor requires

                                           S       Ns                   S   Ns
                                                        Ksi = K, and             Lsi = L.                                      (5)
                                           s=1 i=1                     s=1 i=1


Sector s's demand for intermediate inputs from sector q is the sum of demand across all variety
                            Ns
producers Mqs =             i=1   Mqsi .
    We prove in Appendix A the following lemma that a sector's production function inherits the
structure of the firm's production function.

Lemma 1 Taking the inputs of a sector as given and solving the within-sector allocation problem,
the sectoral production function is given by

                                                                                                                     1
                                               S           1-s                      Ns                     s -1     s -1
                  s 1-s                s            qs                                         T F P Rs
   Qs = T F Ps · Ks Ls                             Mqs           , and T F Ps =          Asi                               ,   (6)
                                            q =1                                   i=1
                                                                                               T F P Rsi
  20
      For example, Luo (2019) argues that trade credits provide by suppliers would show up in the prices of interme-
diate inputs. Firms differing in their use of trade credits will then face different intermediate input prices.
   21
      Bigio and La'O (2020) also discuss the case where payments due to wedges are discarded. They find that wedges
with discarded payments are isomorphic to productivity shocks. Since we don't observe the amount of output lost
due to distortions in data, we assume firm productivity Asi already incorporates this kind of wedges and focus on
the case where payments due to wedges are not discarded.




                                                                  10
where sectoral and firm revenue productivity (TFPR) are defined as

                                                                        Ps Q s
                                       T F P Rs                                             1-s     (7)
                                                          s L1-s )s          S       
                                                        (Ks  s               q =1   Mqsqs
                                                                       Psi Qsi
                                       T F P Rsi                                            1-s ,   (8)
                                                          s 1-s       s      S         qs
                                                         Ksi Lsi             q =1   Mqsi


This lemma facilitates further aggregation of production as we now only have to deal with production
at the sector level.
   As in previous analyses which undertake aggregation of a Cobb-Douglas network economy with
distortions (Jones, 2013; Bigio and La'O, 2020), a key to the aggregation turns out to be the Domar
               Ps Qs
weight vs =     Y
                     ,   which is simply the sectoral sales-to-GDP ratio (Domar, 1961). We can rewrite
the market clearing condition for sectoral output in vector form


                                                                   -1
                                                   V =  + B  diag(TM  )V,


where V is the 1 by S vector of Domar weights,  is the vector of sectoral shares in final consumption,
B is the direct requirement matrix with its element given by bsq = sq (1 - q ), TM is the vector
                     Ps Qs
of TM s = (1 - s )qs P q Mqs
                             summarizing the distortions in intermediate input use within a sector,22
diag(·) transforms a vector into a diagonal matrix, and  is the element-wise Hadamard product
(with  - 1 indicating the Hadamard inverse). The Domar weight vector can then be solved as


                                                                 -1              -1
                                                V = I - B  diag(TM  )                 


The Domar weight hence is determined by both technology and distortions in intermediate input
                                                                                              ~ 
markets. If there is no distortion in the network, namely TM s = 1 for all sectors, we define V
             ~ is the influence vector in Acemoglu et al. (2012), which captures how sectoral
(I - B )-1 . V
productivity shocks propagate downstream to other sectors through the production network. The
influence vector is a key determinant of the shape of the aggregate production function. We denote
  22                               1
       Note that TM s =         Psi Qsi 1
                                              is a weighted average of firm level distortions.
                            i    Ps Qs M si




                                                                 11
                  ~s .23 With the Domar weights, we can relate the sectoral capital and labor demand
its element to be v
to the Domar weights as,

                                                              1
                                        Ks                      v
                                                            TKs s s s
                                           =               S     1
                                                                            Ks ,
                                        K                  q =1 TKq q q vq
                                                              1
                                        Ls                  TLs
                                                                (1 - s )s vs
                                           =               S     1
                                                                                              Ls ,
                                        L                  q =1 TLq (1 - q )q vq



where TKs = s s P s Qs
                RKs
                       and TLs = (1 - s )s P s Qs
                                           W Ls
                                                  summarize the effects of distortions on sectoral
capital and labor demand. Without intersectoral distortions, TKs = 1 and TLs = 1.
    Given these shares, we are ready to present the following aggregation result for this economy.

Proposition 1 The economy admits an aggregate production function given by


                                                          Y = AK  L1- ,                                             (9)


             S
with  =      s=1   v
                   ~s s and total factor productivity given by

                                                    S                       S
                   A=                                    (T F Ps )   ~s
                                                                     v
                                                                                  (Ks )s s v
                                                                                           ~s
                                                                                              (Ls )(1-s )s v
                                                                                                           ~s
                                                                                                              ,    (10)
                          network distortions      s=1                      s=1

                                                within-sector distortions             between-sector distortions


                           s                                     (1-s )qs v
                                                                          ~s
               S     s           S        S          1
where  =       s=1   vs          s=1      q =1          b vs
                                                    TM s qs vq
                                                                                  .

Notice that distortions have no effect on the shape of the production function. The output elasticity
of capital in the aggregate production function is an average of the sectoral output elasticities
weighted by elements of the influence vector. Distortions, however, result in a lower aggregate TFP
which can be decomposed into three terms. The first term,  , summarizes the distortions in the
production network. The second term is the weighted average of sectoral TFP, which reflects the
misallocation within sectors. Due to the presence of distortions, Hulten's theorem (Hulten, 1978)
breaks down: The output elasticity of sectoral TFP is given by the influence vector instead of the
  23
    Distortions affect the allocation of resources across sector. How the technology shocks transmit through the
production networks however is not affected. Given the the Cobb-Douglas technology, the impact of a technology
shock in an upstream sector on a downstream sector is always given by the input share of the upstream sector in the
production of the downstream sector.

                                                                     12
Domar weights.24 On the other hand, an increase in sectoral TFP will not change the allocation
of resources given the Cobb-Douglas technology (Baqaee and Farhi, 2019c). Finally, the third term
reflects distortions in primary input use.
                 ~s is larger than 1,25 the propagation of market distortions emphasized by Jones
   As the sum of v
(2011, 2013) comes from the presence of the influence vector in aggregate TFP. In particular, the
TFP loss coming from within-sector misallocation as studied by HK will be amplified through the
production network.


2.2       The Value-Added (VA) Model

The VA model ignores sectoral linkages and assumes each firm to have simply a value added pro-
duction. For the whole economy, the single final product is still denoted by Y . It is produced with
sectoral value-added,
                                                S                     S
                                      Y =            Yss ,    with            s = 1                          (11)
                                               s=1                    s=1

where  is a normalizing constant to ensure that the final products in the two models are identical.
We use a hat as notation to indicate a variable that is different between the two models. Profit
maximization implies PY s Ys = s Y . Sectoral value added is an aggregate over its varieties:

                                                                       s
                                                      Ns       s -1
                                                                       s -1
                                                               s
                                           Ys =              Ysi               ,                             (12)
                                                      i=1


where the elasticity of substitution between varieties s will be different from that in the GO
                                                                          1        1
                                                                               -
model. The inverse demand for a variety is PY si = PY s Yss Ysi s with the price index equal PY s =
                    1
    Ns     1-s    1-s
    i=1   PY si         .
   Each firm i uses only primary factors to produce its varieties:


                                                        s 1-s
                                             Ysi = Asi Ksi Lsi .                                             (13)
  24
      Without distortions, Hulten (1978) only focus on the impact of sectoral TFPs on aggregate output, but not
between-sector allocation. In his study, the influence vector equals the vector of Domar weights. The sales-to-GDP
ratio fully measures how sectoral TFP shocks affect aggregate output.
   25   S           S
        s=1 v
            ~s >    s=1 vs s = 1, where the latter equality simply states the aggregate production function has
constant returns to scale.



                                                            13
The firm faces idiosyncratic distortions in the factor markets and maximizes profit as follows26


                           max si = PY si Ysi - (1 + Ksi )RKsi - (1 + Lsi )W Lsi ,
                        Ysi ,Ksi ,Lsi



where we have assumed that the magnitudes of the distortions are identical across the two models.
Note that using a value added production function should not affect the size of the distortions.27
Factor prices of primary inputs too are not distinguished between the two models: as factor prices
are observed, they should remain the same if both models can rationalize the data. Factor markets
are assumed to clear as usual.
   HK show that the sectoral production function is given by

                                                                                                  1
                                                                  Ns                      s -1    -1s

                                  s 1-s                                       T F P Rs
                Ys = T F P s ·   Ks Ls ,       with T F P s =           Asi                               .       (14)
                                                                  i=1         T F P Rsi


Thus, the formula for sectoral TFP in the VA model has the same form as that in the GO model,
except that now firm revenue productivity (TFPR) and physical TFP are expressed in terms of the
value added measures.28
   Given the sectoral production function, sectoral demand for capital and labor is given by:

                                                      1
                                        Ks              
                                                    TKs s s
                                           =       S
                                                                   Ks ,
                                        K                1
                                                   q =1 TKq q q
                                                      1
                                        Ls          TLs
                                                        (1 - s )s
                                           =       S
                                                                          Ls ,
                                        L                1
                                                   q =1 TLq (1 - q )q



where TKs =      Y s Ys
            ^ s PRK  s
                        and TLs = (1 - ^s) P Y s Ys
                                           W Ls
                                                    are defined as above. Plugging these factor demand
equations into the production function, we obtain the aggregate production function, as summarized
  26
      Another minor difference between our model and the original HK model is that they assume an output and a
capital wedge while we assume a capital and a labor wedge. The assumption simplifies the algebra a little but will
not affect the results in this paper in any way. The wedges changes the marginal revenue product of the production
factors. Because there are three wedges (output, capital, and labor wedge) but only two production factors, we can
match the same marginal revenue products with different sets of wedges.
   27
      However, inferred distortions using data might be different in these two models, depending on whether there
are intermediate input distortions. We will discuss the inference in Section 4.
                                                                         PY s Ys
   28
      Sectoral and firm revenue productivity are defined as T F P Rs      s 1-s
                                                                                 and T F P Rsi  P Y si Ysi
                                                                                                 s 1-s .
                                                                        Ks Ls                           Ksi Lsi




                                                        14
in the following proposition.

Proposition 2 The VA model also admits an aggregate production function given by


                                                       Y = AK  L1- ,                                      (15)


                                             S         29
where the capital share is  =                s=1 s s ,      and total factor productivity is given by

                                             S                     S
                                                            s                      s          1-s s
                                 A=               TFPs                     Ks           Ls            ,   (16)
                                            s=1                    s=1

                                       within-sector distortions         between-sector distortions


     Again, the shape of the production is determined by the technology parameters. The effect
of distortions on aggregate TFP can be decomposed into the within-sector and between-sector
components. Different from the GO model, there is no network propagation at work in the VA
model by definition. The exponents on sectoral TFP and the allocation terms are the sectoral
value-added shares in final output, which sum to one.



3         Model Comparison

This section compares measured TFP gains in the two models theoretically. As the VA model
ignores intersectoral linkages, it is natural that we view the GO model as the data generating
process. Taking the technology parameters, firm-level productivity and wedges in the GO model
as given, we construct the measures of TFP gains in both models in terms of these parameters.
Importantly, we will also build a mapping of model parameters between the two models.


3.1         Calibration of the VA model

In evaluating the TFP gain, we compare the actual state of the world to the counterfactual one
with zero distortion, taking the same observed data as given. For the VA model to be consistent
with the GO model, the VA model should be able to rationalize the same data as the GO model
    29                           S
         The share of labor is   s=1 s (1   - s ). It is obvious that they sum to 1.



                                                                   15
in both states of the world. In this subsection, we establish the conditions for the VA model to be
consistent with the GO model.
    As the two models use different concepts of output, we must first define value added in the GO
model. We compute firm value added as revenue minus the cost of intermediate inputs:

                                                                 S
                                        PY si Ysi = Psi Qsi -          Pq Mqsi                                 (17)
                                                                q =1


A key assumption here is that distortions in intermediate inputs are not recorded in the prices
paid by the firms. What we have in mind are shadow prices of financial constraints (Bigio and
La'O, 2020), or taxes/subsidies that are not directly recorded as costs of intermediate inputs. This
assumption rules out firm-level intermediate input price differences as discussed by Luo (2019).
Because we only observe the value of intermediate inputs but not the quantity,30 allowing for
distortions that are recorded as firm-specific prices would make the quantity of intermediate input
unobserved.31 Our simplifying assumption induces a bias in the estimates of the TFP loss from
misallocation in the GO model, as the intermediate input distortion will be measured with error if
recorded intermediate prices are different across firms. However, it can be shown that the VA model
inherits the same bias, so that the differences in measured TFP loss from misallocation between
the two models are not affected by this assumption.32
    With firm value added defined, we are ready to calibrate the VA model. The model parameters
that needed to be determined include {s , s , s } and firm productivity Asi . We take primary input
distortions as given and calibrate the VA model to match the allocation of capital, labor and firm
nominal value added as generated by the GO model. Intermediate input distortions are not observed
in the VA model. However, whether the VA model is consistent with the GO model depends on the
properties of these distortions. Specifically, the following assumption is in order.

Assumption 1 M si = 0,  s  {1, 2, ...S } and i  {1, 2, ...Ns }.

  30
      An exception is Atalay (2014), who observes firm-specific prices of intermediate inputs in a detailed dataset
from the US Census Bureau.
   31
      In a sense, HK also make this assumption in measuring capital stock, as they only observe the value of total
assets in data. Using sector-specific deflators to deflate the value leads to a biased measure of capital stock, had
firms used different prices to value their assets.
   32
      This proof is available upon request.


                                                        16
   We prove in Appendix A the calibration results that are summarized in the following proposition.

Proposition 3 Under Assumption 1, the VA model can generate the same observed allocation and
                                                                                               1
                                                                           s
nominal output as the GO model if the following conditions hold: (1) Asi  Asi , (2) s = s , (3)
s = 1 + s (s - 1), (4) s = s v
                             ~s , and (5)  is adjusted such that final production is equated in
the two models. If Assumption 1 does not hold, we cannot find a calibration of the VA model that
is consistent with the data generated by the GO model.

   The above proposition shows that the value added specification may not generate the data that
are consistent with those from the GO model. If firms face intermediate input distortions, the
two models are theoretically inconsistent with each other. Since intermediate input distortions are
present in actual data (Bigio and La'O, 2020; Liu, 2019), we should not expect the two models to
produce the same TFP gain from removing distortions. Before proceeding to construct the TFP
gain measures, a discussion about the proposition is in order.
   First, note that we cannot determine the absolute level of firm value added TFP. This is because
we only observe nominal output in the data, which incorporates both quantity and price. As the
production of final goods uses a Cobb-Douglas technology, sectoral nominal value added is not
affected by sectoral TFP: an increase in productivity is perfectly offset by a decrease in price.33
Firm productivity is thus only comparable within a sector but not across sectors. Across sectors,
comparison of TFP measures are meaningless as we can always change TFP in a sector by using a
different unit of output measurement. This claim is invalidated when output prices and quantities
are separately observed. We can also determine the level of firm TFP if the elasticity of substitution
between sectoral output is different from one, which means that changes in firm TFP will induce
resource reallocation across sectors.
   As the firm's GO production function is separable in primary and intermediate inputs, we can
simply write the firm's gross output as a function of value-added and intermediate inputs.

                                                            S            1-s
                                                      s            qs
                                            Qsi =   Ysi           Mqsi
                                                           q =1


This gives the intuitive results on factor shares and value added TFP. In particular, value added
  33
       The effect of the change in sectoral productivity on final output can be offset by adjusting .

                                                          17
                                                             1
TFP is gross output TFP raised to a power of                 s
                                                                 > 1. This is also the reason why value added
TFP is more dispersed than gross output TFP, as documented by Gandhi et al. (2017). There are
two economic forces at work. First, in response to an increase in output productivity, if the firm
does not adjust its intermediate input, the percentage increase in value-added will be larger than
that in gross output.34 Second, an increase in firm gross output productivity induces an increase
in the demand for intermediate inputs, holding the intermediate prices constant. This induces a
larger increase in value added because the contribution of additional intermediate inputs is larger
than the increased costs.
     The scaling up of firm value added productivity has been recognized in the literature. What's
new is that the sectoral production function has different elasticity of substitution under different
concepts of output. The difference is related to the value added ratio to gross output. As s
increases, the gap between the two elasticities diminishes. If there is no intermediate input use, the
two elasticities converge. The economic reason behind this is as follows. Without loss of generality,
let us consider the more reasonable case of s > 1. If the output productivity increases by one
percent, the price of the firm's good will decrease by one percent, holding factor prices constant.
In the VA model, the corresponding increase in productivity and the decrease in price would be
1
s
    percents. The decrease in prices induces the firm to increase the demand for primary inputs
                                                    1
by s - 1 percent in the GO model, and               s
                                                      ( s   - 1) in the VA model. The percentage increase in
input demand should be identical in the two models. This leads to the relationship between the
two elasticities.35 The value added elasticity is smaller than the output elasticity if s > 1. The
reverse holds if s < 1. The two elasticities thus should be on the same side of 1, with the value
added elasticity closer to 1.
     The calibration of the elasticity of substitution should depend on the output concept of the
model. This is a point that has not been appreciated enough in the literature. Since the elasticity
is generally estimated for gross instead of value added output, the value added studies have often
chosen the wrong parameters. For example, HK cite Broda and Weinstein (2006) and Hendel and
    34
      Since value-added is the difference between gross output and the costs of intermediate input, an increase in
gross output but not intermediate input raises value-added more in percentage terms.
   35
      The two elasticities are the same if the elasticity equals to one, regardless the size of s . This is the Cobb-Douglas
case, under which a price change will not lead to changes in factor demand.



                                                            18
Nevo (2006) for their choice of elasticity while both studies estimate the parameter for gross output
instead of value added. As the estimated TFP gain depends positively on the elasticity, this could
be a source of biases of the estimates.36 Using the adjusted elasticity of substitution will lower the
measured TFP gain. Our empirical study below shows that assigning incorrect values of elasticity
leads to a significant upward bias in the measured TFP gain in the VA model.
    Finally, the value added weights are proportional to the Domar weights up to a factor of s .
This adjustment corresponds to the scaling up of value added productivity. As both models are
supposed to represent the same data, the amplification effect of sectoral linkages are always present
regardless of the concept of output used.37
    The differences in parameters between the two models resemble the differences in utility func-
tions estimated with different data in Herrendorf et al. (2013), except that we study a full general
equilibrium model and focus more on the production structure. Like us, Herrendorf et al. (2013)
emphasize that we can view sectors as producing either final expenditure or value-added, with the
two views connected through the IO structure of the economy. Hulten (1978) also compares the
differences in measuring aggregate TFP in a model with production networks and one without. But
his model without production networks examines the production of sectoral consumption goods
from primary factors instead of value added. This is quite different from the VA model presented
here.38


3.2       Aggregate TFP Gain

We now proceed to the measurement of TFP gains from removing all distortions. Assumption 1 is
assumed to hold such that the VA model is consistent with the GO model observationally. We first
   36
      For example, HK use 3 as a conservative measure of elasticity. If we take 3 as the elasticity for output, that for
value-added will be 2 if we assume s = 0.5, a reasonable number according to Jones (2011).
   37
      This can be more clearly seen from the one sector example in Jones (2013). Final output is produced by
labor and intermediate input Q = AL X 1- , which is used for consumption and intermediate inputs in production,
                                                                               1-    1
Q = C + X . GDP in this economy then is simply given by C = (1 - )  A  X . If we derive the aggregate
production from the output production function, we realize that the effect of the output productivity A is amplified
                                                  1
through input-output linkages. The exponent         is the Domar weight for this economy. If we are only given data
                                                                                       1
on value-added and primary inputs, we will see the value-added productivity is A  , which already includes the
amplification effect of the production network. The VA model does not simply ignore the production network, it
implicitly includes the effect of the network in the value-added measures.
   38
      Note that Hulten (1978) requires a producer combining capital and labor from different sectors to produce the
final product, which has no counterpart in the data.


                                                          19
construct TFP gain at the sector level. In the GO model, sectoral TFP is rewritten as

                                                                                                      1
                                Ns                                                            s -1      s
                                                             s s (1-s )s
                                                         TKs       TLs
                   T F Ps =                Asi                                                       
                                i=1
                                                 (1 +   Ksi ) s  s (1 + Lsi )(1-s )s


In the VA model, if we plug in the formula for value added productivity, sectoral TFP is

                                                                                                  1
                                Ns                       s 1-s                            s -1   s -1
                                             1
                                             s        TKs   TLs
                   TFPs =                  Asi                                                            ,
                                i=1
                                               (1 + Ksi ) (1 + Lsi )(1-s )
                                                          s




                                       1
                             s
where we have assumed Asi = Asi . This is without loss of generality as the absolute level of
productivity will not affect the measured TFP gain. Comparing the two TFPs, we have T F P s =
      1
      s
T F Psi . Sectoral efficient TFP (in the absence of any distortion) for the two models are

                                                    1                                             1
                                 Ns                 s                             Ns     s -1
                                                                                                 s -1
                                                                     E
                                         s -1
                    T F PsE =          Asi                and T F P s =                  s
                                                                                        Asi             .
                                 i=1                                              i=1


Combining all these information, sectoral TFP gain in these two models are related to each other
according to
                                                    E                     1
                                            TFPs              T F PsE     s
                                                         =                    .
                                            TFPs              T F Ps

We thus show that the two models illustrate an identical sectoral TFP gain by eliminating all
distortions at the sector level, under Assumption 1. Aggregating over sectors leads to an identical
aggregate TFP gain with all within-sector distortions removed.
   Without intermediate input distortions, the allocation of primary factors would remain the same
in the two models. For example, the allocation of capital is

                                        s s vs               Ks           s s
                                       S
                                                         =      =        S
                                                                                  .
                                       q =1 q q vq
                                                             K           q =1 q q


Plugging the between-sector allocation terms into the aggregate production function in Proposition
1 and 2, it is clear that the aggregate TFP gain from removing between-sector misallocation is also
identical in the two models. We summarize the above results in the following proposition.


                                                             20
Proposition 4 Under Assumption 1, the two models produce the same theoretical aggregate TFP
gain, conditional on observing the same data. If we decompose the TFP gain into a between-sector
and a within-sector component. The two components are also identical in the two models.

    The isomorphism between the two models contrasts with the arguments in Jones (2011, 2013)
and Gandhi et al. (2017). In particular, Jones (2011, 2013) argues that existing distortions can be
amplified through production networks such that the cost of misallocation is larger than HK have
estimated. On the other hand, Gandhi et al. (2017) find that the dispersion of firm physical TFP
is smaller if it is measured with output data, implying a smaller cost of misallocation. Proposition
4 therefore offers a more complete understanding of the effect of production networks: Value-
added measures implicitly incorporate the amplification effect of intersectoral linkages, which is
reflected in data as a larger dispersion of firm physical productivity. When there is no intermediate
input distortion, the two forces cancel out each other, implying that the TFP gain from removing
distortions is orthogonal to the input-output structure of the economy. The points made by Jones
(2011, 2013) and Gandhi et al. (2017) are, in fact, just opposite sides of the same coin.
    In sum, this section establishes that the a VA model can be consistent with data if there is
no distortion in intermediate input use, and the two models are no different in measuring TFP
gain from moving to efficiency in this case. This discussion takes firm productivity and market
distortions as given. To empirically measure the TFP gain, we also have to infer firm productivity
and wedges from the data. Moreover, Assumption 1 may not hold in the data (Bigio and La'O,
2020). We take up these issues in the next section.



4     Empirical Measures of TFP Gain

This section discusses the measurement of TFP gains using firm data. We first discuss the infer-
ence of firm productivity and wedges, which are then used to construct the empirical measures of
aggregate TFP gains from removing all firm-level distortions.




                                                 21
4.1     Inference of Firm Productivity and Wedges

To recover firm productivity and wedges, imagine we have a firm level dataset with information on
                                                                                   S
output (Psi Qsi ), capital (Ksi ), labor (Lsi ), and intermediate inputs (         q =1   Pq Mqsi ).39 Nominal value-
added is computed as firm's revenue minus the cost of intermediate inputs. Given this definition,
we relate nominal value-added to nominal output as

                                                            1-
                                       PY si Ysi =   1-                Psi Qsi .                                  (18)
                                                          1 + M si

This condition is important in understanding the results in this subsection. It says that with
distortions, the share of value-added in gross output deviates from the contribution of primary
factors.
    We also assume that we have correct values for all the technology parameters. Our discussion
in the last section shows that the literature might have incorrectly calibrated the elasticity of
substitution for the VA model, which can potentially bias the value-added TFP gain upward. We
ignore this issue in this section and only discuss its quantitative implications in the next section.
    We first discuss the inference of the wedges. For the GO model, the first order conditions for
firms imply

                                               s s Psi Qsi
                                                           = 1 + Ksi ,
                                                  RKsi
                                        (1 - s )s Psi Qsi
                                                           = 1 + Lsi ,
                                              W Lsi
                                           (1 - s )Psi Qsi
                                              S
                                                           = 1 + M si ,
                                              q =1 Pq Mqsi


where R and W are exogenously set.40 The left hand side is the ratio of marginal revenue products
to factor prices, and the right hand side is inferred firm-level distortions expressed in terms of true
  39
       Note that we have assumed that we only observe total value of intermediate inputs, which is what most firm-
level database can provide. Given that we assume the intermediate input distortion does not affect the allocation
of resources between different intermediate inputs, we can attribute total expenditure on intermediate inputs to
different inputs, which can be further used to estimate the real quantity of intermediate inputs from different sectors
given appropriate price indexes for sectoral output. This however is unnecessary for the exercise in this paper.
    40
       The exact value of factor prices is irrelevant as only the relative size of the wedges matter for measuring
misallocation.




                                                          22
distortions. The distortions are thus identified as differences in marginal revenue products. For the
VA model, we can infer the distortions as

                             s PY si Ysi                     1 - s
                                          = (1 + Ksi ) 1 -          /s ,
                                RKsi                       1 + M si
                        (1 - s )PY si Ysi                   1 - s
                                          = (1 + Lsi ) 1 -          /s ,
                             W Lsi                         1 + M si

where we have used the relationship between nominal value-added and output in the model. Both
of the inferred wedges deviate from true distortions, as the share of value-added in output does not
reflect true contribution of the primary factors.
   Identifying a firm's physical productivity is more challenging as there is no output price or value-
added price at the firm level. Following HK, we use the allocation rule for intermediate inputs and
the pricing function for the variety to infer physical productivity in the GO model as

                                                          s
                                              (Psi Qsi ) s -1
                              s                                           1-s   = Asi ,
                                   s 1-s       s        S
                                  Ksi Lsi               q =1   Pq Mqsi


where s is a sector level constant. The left hand side is observed up to a constant, and the right
hand side is true firm productivity. As discussed above, the absolute level of firm productivity does
not affect our results in any sense so we can normalize s = 1. Firm output productivity thus can
be correctly inferred using output measures. Similarly, physical productivity measured in the VA
model is given by:

                                                                  s
                                   s                 1-s          s -1
                          (PY si Ysi )
                                   s -1        1-   1+M si                             s -1
                                                                                               s
                                                                                                1
                      s       s 1-s       =                              (1 + M si )   s      Asi ,
                           Ksi   Lsi                s

where s is a sector level normalizing constant. The right hand side is inferred value-added pro-
ductivity, which deviates from its theoretical counterpart due to the presence of intermediate input
distortions. The first two terms on the right hand side reflect the effect of the distortions, which
is a combination of two effects with opposite signs. First, the share of intermediate input deviates
from its contribution in production (the first term). A positive distortion raises the contribution of
primary factors and value-added productivity. Second, a positive distortion also reduces the use of


                                                        23
intermediate input and hence lowers value-added productivity (the second term). Taken together,
the sign of the total bias in measured value-added productivity is indeterminate. Besides the size
of the distortion, the sign depends on the technology parameters. A rise in the elasticity of substi-
tution reduces the first effect while keeping the second effect unchanged. This is because nominal
value-added now is raised to a lower power in deriving real value-added. A rise in the importance
of intermediate input (a reduction in s ) increases the second effect. Its effect on the first effect
however depends on the sign of the distortion. If M si > 0, the bias due to first effect is reduced.
The bias is increased if M si < 0.41
    Our results on the inference of firm productivity and wedges are summarized as follows.

Proposition 5 Inference using value-added measures is biased due to the presence of intermediate
input distortions.

    One way to understand the economics behind the bias in the inference using value-added mea-
sures is to consider our value-added measure as a real value-added, where the prices used to value
intermediate inputs deviate from that perceived by the firms due to the presence of the intermediate
input distortions. In this case, the value of intermediate inputs recorded in data does not reflect
true productive contribution of intermediate inputs, which further leads to a bias in the contribu-
tion of primary inputs in our value-added measure. This finding resonates with an earlier literature
studying the use of real value-added indexes.42 As the market prices of intermediate inputs do
not equal the effective prices facing firms, we attribute the differences in effective prices to the
value-added measure which is essentially a partial Solow residual (Basu and Fernald, 1995). The
earlier literature mainly focuses on measuring productivity change over time using real value-added.
Changes in the relative price between output and intermediate inputs naturally brings challenges
to the valuation of intermediate inputs. Our focus here is on the comparison of productivity across
firms where the source of changes in the prices of intermediate inputs is idiosyncratic distortions in
                                           1-s
                                     1-
                                          1+M si
                                  
  41
      To see this point, note that     s
                                        s
                                               = - 12 1+ 1
                                                          M si
                                                               < 0. The last inequality requires M si > -1, which is a
                                                     s
natural assumption for the firm's problem to be well-defined. If M si > 0, the bias is positive and an increase in s
lowers the bias. If M si < 0, the bias is negative and an increase in s raises the bias.
   42
      For example, Bruno (1978) shows that marginal revenue products and productivity will be incorrectly inferred
using the real value-added index if the intermediate input prices used in constructing the real value-added measures
are different from the prices the firms face. See also the discussion in Basu and Fernald (2002).


                                                         24
the intermediate input markets.
   With correct inference of firm productivity and wedges, the GO model correctly measures the
TFP gain. A corollary of Proposition 4 and Proposition 5 regarding the VA model is as follows:

Corollary 1 If Assumption 1 holds, firm productivity and wedges can be correctly inferred using
value-added measures. The VA model and the GO model produce the same measured aggregate TFP
gain, conditional on observing the same data.

   This corollary serves as a benchmark for our understanding of the consequences of ignoring
the production network for measuring misallocation. Assumption 1, concerning the absence of
intermediate input distortions, however is highly unrealistic. We next turn to the measurement of
TFP gain in data when the assumption does not hold.


4.2    Measured TFP Gain

We now construct the empirical TFP gain measures using inferred firm productivity and wedges
from the previous subsection, allowing for distortions in the intermediate input use. We first make
the following simplifying assumption for the rest of our analysis.

Assumption 2 TJs = 1, J  {K, L, M } and s  {1, 2, ...S }.

TJs , J  {K, L, M } summarizing firm level distortion in a sector are defined above. This as-
sumption says that there is no between market misallocation. It is made mainly with the empirical
implementation of the TFP gain measures in mind. Without between sector misallocation, we can
use sectoral input shares to calibrate the output elasticity in the production function. Otherwise
the distortions and the output elasticity could not be distinguished from each other unless we have
direct measures of the distortions or the output elasticity from other sources. TM s = 1 also implies
there is no distortion in the production network such that v
                                                           ~s = vs . In this case, we do not have
to actually invert the Leontief matrix but can use the Domar weights to aggregate sectoral TFP in
the GO model directly.
   Let Y E be the efficient output, the TFP gains from moving to efficient allocation in the two



                                                 25
models are as follows if Assumption 2 holds.

                                                                                        E    s
                            o       S               vs                va       S
                    YE                    T F PsE                YE                  TFPs
                                =                        , and             =                     .                     (19)
                    Y               s=1
                                          T F Ps                 Y             s=1   TFPs

The aggregate TFP gain is the average across sectoral TFP gains, with each sector weighted by the
corresponding Domar weight in the GO model and the value-added share in the VA model. Given
Assumption 2, it can be seen that all errors in measuring the aggregate efficiency loss comes from
mismeasured sectoral TFP gains. The VA model can produce the correct empirical aggregate TFP
gain as long as the sectoral TFP gain is correctly measured, even if Assumption 1 is violated.
   To compare between the two models, we will derive actual TFP and its efficient benchmark as
functions of firm productivity and wedges, realizing that inferred measures may deviate from true
measures. To the extent that the inferred measures are unbiased based on the GO model, measured
sectoral TFP in the GO model is the same as above. We restate the result below

                                                                                                      1
                          Ns                                                                s -1     s -1
                                                            1
            T F Ps =             Asi
                          i=1
                                     (1 + Ksi )  s s (1 + Lsi )(1-s )s (1 + M si )1-s

                                                                                                             1
                                                                                            Ns              s -1
                                                                                                     s -1
where we have applied Assumption 2. Efficient sectoral TFP is T F PsE =                     i=1    Asi             .
   Measured sectoral TFP based on the VA model however will differ from its theoretical value
given the bias in the inference of firm productivity and wedges. To conserve notation, we still use
the same notation to denote sectoral TFP. Measured sectoral TFP in the VA model is

                                                                        1    s -1  s (1
                                                                                      s -1)
                                                      1                s -1
                                                           1-s
                   Ns                  A si (  s )   1
                                                    1-s - 1+M si                  
           TFPs =                                                                           .                          (20)
                                                                                  
                                                             
                                 [(1 + Ksi )s (1 + Lsi )1-s ] (1 + M si )1-s
                                                             s
                                                                                  
                          i=1




Ignoring the power terms, the term in the inner brackets only differs from that in the GO model
due to the the deviation of the contribution of primary inputs from the output elasticity. The effect
of the distortions on the use of intermediate input is recognized in the value-added sectoral TFP, as
shown in the denominator. Efficient sectoral TFP however will be mismeasured due to the presence




                                                           26
of both effects,

                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                          s -1
                                                                                                                 
                    Ns                                                     1+s (s -1)                               s (s -1)
          E                             1+s (s -1)             1 - s         s -1
    TFPs =                Asi (s )        1-s          1-                               (1 + M si )s -1                             (21)
                    i=1
                                                              1 + M si


Measurement errors at the firm level thus build up, such that both actual and efficient sectoral TFP
will deviate from the correct measures.
    Given sectoral actual and efficient TFP, how do the two measured TFP gains differ if interme-
diate input distortions are present? The comparison is not tractable. Importantly, we cannot claim
with certainty that the value-added model overstates or understates measured TFP gain.
    To illustrate this point, we approximate the measures by assuming Asi , 1 + Y si ,43 and (1 + M si )
jointly follow a log-normal distribution, with the log of the latter two having zero mean. We further
                                            1-s
assume s = 0.5 such that 1 -               1+M si
                                                      can be approximated by 1
                                                                             2
                                                                               (1 + M si ). TFP gain for a single
sector in the GO model can be approximated by44

                                          vs                            2
                              T F PsE            Ns vs (1 - s )        y    2
                                                                            m             ym
                    log                        =                          +   - ay - am +                    ,
                              T F Ps                    2              4    4             2

      2
where x is the variance of variable x and xz is the covariance between variables x and z . TFP
gain in the VA model is approximated by

                E    s
                                              2
         TFPs                 Ns vs (1 - s ) y                1   1            2                          1   1
   log                    =                     +               -              m - ay - am +                -                  ym
          TFPs                       2       4                4 s - 1                                     2 s - 1

Comparing these two measures, we have the following proposition.

Proposition 6 Assuming firm productivity and distortions follow a joint log-normal distribution
and s = 0.5, the difference between the two TFP gain measures is given by

                                                                       E   s
                                                 vs
                                    T F PsE                     TFPs                Ns vs 2
                              log                     - log                    =-        (m + ym )                                  (22)
                                    T F Ps                      TFPs                 2
  43
     1 + Y si is defined as (1 + Ksi )s (1 + Lsi )1-s , which summarizes the distortion in primary input use.
  44
     Notice the measure is raised by the Domar weights. This expression actually gives the contribution of sector s
to aggregate efficiency loss. It is the same case for the VA model.



                                                                  27
    An immediate conclusion from the above proposition is that the measured TFP gain in the VA
model can be biased away from that in the GO model in either direction. The sign and the size
of the bias depends on how the wedges for intermediate inputs are distributed. A higher variance
for the intermediate input distortions would raise the value-added TFP gain relative to the output
TFP gain. This is because the dispersion of physical productivity is larger in the VA model in
the presence of wedges, which raise the level of efficient TFP. A positive covariance between the
primary input and input distortions also increases the value-added TFP gain. In this case, firms
facing a higher primary input distortion will also have a larger measured value-added productivity,
because firm value-added overstates the contribution of primary factors due to the intermediate
input distortions. On the other hand, a negative covariance lowers the value-added TFP gain
relative to the output TFP gain. In this case, the most constrained firms in the primary input
markets also have lower measured TFP. This reduces the scope for and the gain from reallocation.
Obviously, only if the covariance is negative and large enough could the GO model have a larger
TFP gain. Finally, if the variance of the intermediate input market distortions and its covariance
with the primary market distortions are small, the difference between the two measures will be
small.
    In sum, we find that intermediate input market distortions induce measurement errors in in-
ferred firm productivity and wedges, when using value-added data, suggesting another source of
the bias embedded in the VA model. Proposition 6 shows that the bias can go in either direction,
again reflecting the fact that value-added measures already incorporates the amplification effect of
production networks. The size of the bias is also indeterminate. However, Proposition 6 only holds
under restrictive assumptions. The actual bias of the value-added measure is an empirical matter.
This is what we study using micro data in the next section.



5     Applications with Actual Data

In this section we take the models to the data and evaluate the biases in the value-added TFP gain
measure quantitatively.




                                                28
5.1     Data

We use the Chinese Annual Survey of Industrial Production (1998-2007) and the Indian Annual
Survey of Industries (1999-2009) for our empirical analysis. The Survey of Industrial Production
from China's National Bureau of Statistics covers all non-state firms with more than 5 million yuan
(about 0.6 million USD during the sample period) in revenue plus all state-owned firms in the
industrial sector, which includes mining, manufacturing, utilities, and construction. We use the
information on the firm's industry (at the four-digit level), wage payments,45 employment, output,
value-added, capital stock, and intermediate inputs. Capital stock is defined as the book value of
fixed capital net of depreciation. Labor compensation in the data is systematically under-reported
such that calculated industrial labor share is much smaller than those in the national accounts.46
To correct for the under-reporting, HK raise the wage payments of all firms to make aggregate labor
share calculated from the survey consistent with national accounts data. This adjustment however
will not affect the result so we choose to use the original numbers. Finally, to allow for differences
in worker human capital across firms, we use wage bills as our measurement of labor input instead
of employment.
   For India, the main data set is the annual plant-level data from the Annual Survey of Industries
(ASI) conducted by the Indian Ministry of Statistics . We use the annual data from 1999 to 2009.
A few caveats are in order. The sample consists of registered plants employing 10 or more workers
using power, or 20 or more workers without power. Plants with over 100 workers are surveyed
every year, while all other plants with fewer than 100 workers were randomly sampled. We use
the information on the firm's industry (at the four-digit ISIC level), labor compensation, sales,
intermediate input, and book value of the fixed capital stock. The measure of labor compensation
is the sum of wages, bonuses, and benefits, which used as our measure of labor input. Capital is
measured as the average of the net book value of fixed capital at the beginning and end of a fiscal
year.
  45
     Wage payments include wages, retirement and unemployment insurance, health insurance, housing benefits, and
employee supplementary benefits.
  46
     It can be clearly seen in the data. For example, 59% of all firms report zero unemployment insurance payment,
38% of all firms report zero health insurance payment, while both of which are mandatory by the law.




                                                       29
5.2     Calibration

Production networks introduce complicated sectoral linkages within an economy. However, our
analysis above shows that we don't have to consider all the details of the linkages. For our purpose,
we only have to find the correct sectoral weights in the aggregate production function. To measure
the TFP gain, we thus need to assign values to parameters s , s , s , and the sectoral weights v
                                                                                               ~s
and s . Following HK, we view the U.S. as an undistorted economy and calibrate the elasticities of
output with respect to inputs using U.S. industry shares matched to Chinese and Indian industries.
The U.S. shares are for six-digit NAICS industries. The output elasticity of capital s is calibrated
as 1 minus the share of labor income in industrial value-added.47 Similarly, the output elasticity of
intermediate inputs is set to the share of intermediates of sectoral gross output.48 To reduce the
burden of assigning different elasticities of substitution for different industries, we assume s to be
3 for all industries following HK. This implies that s = 1 + (s - 1)/s would be different across
industries for the VA model if s varies across industries. Given the aggregate share of intermediate
inputs in gross output is roughly 0.5, the elasticity of substitution for output is around 5 which is
substantially larger than that for value-added.49
    The choice of sectoral weights needs some discussion. If there are distortions across sectors,
neither the Domar weights nor the value-added shares of GDP are the correct weights.50 Given
that U.S. has different consumption shares s from China and India across industries, theoretically
we should combine the Chinese and India consumption shares and U.S. input-output matrix to
derive the weights. However, to make our VA model as comparable to HK as possible, we use
Chinese and Indian value-added shares for the VA model and use v
                                                               ~s = s /s to be our output
weights. We admit the choice of weights might bias our measure of aggregate efficiency. However,
it will not have a large effect on the comparison between the two models, because both weights are
  47
      In computing the U.S. labor's share, each industry's raw labor share is raised by 3/2 to adjust for the under-
reporting of non-wage benefits in the data, following HK.
   48
      If we calibrate the output elasticities using Chinese and Indian shares, the main conclusion of this paper will
not change. We do not report these results in the paper.
   49
      In results not reported here, we also experiment with assign 3 for s as in HK and back out the elasticity for
output using the formula, this would lower the efficiency loss in both models but the main conclusions does not
change.
   50                                                                   -1 -1
      Remember the Domar weights are given by V = I - B  diag(TM           )     . The value-added shares are given
by V  (1 - (1 -    ¯) TM ). Both of which are affected by distortions in intermediate input use.



                                                         30
                                         Table 1: Model Calibration

 Parameters      Targeted Value                                         Mean                        STD
 s               capital's share of value-added for US industries       0.473                       0.143
 s               intermediate's share of gross output for US industries 0.513                       0.100
 s               3, following HK                                        3                           0
                                                                        5.083(China)                1.025(China)
 s               1 + (s - 1)/s , according to the theoretical analysis
                                                                        5.091(India)                0.783(India)
                                                                        0.0024(China)               0.0050(China)
 s               sector's value-added share in GDP in China or India
                                                                        0.0082(India)               0.0235(India)
                                                                        0.0052(China)               0.0127(China)
 v
 ~s              s /s , according to the theoretical analysis
                                                                        0.0200(India)               0.0700(India)

Note: Mean and Standard deviation of s and s are computed for 422 Chinese industries in the data.
We do not report the statistics for India but note that they are similar to the Chinese numbers. Though
there are substantially fewer industries (122) in the Indian data. Statistics of s , v
                                                                                     ~s , and s are reported
separately for China and India as industries have different value-added shares in manufacturing GDP
in the two countries. The statistics are also different across years as we compute sector's value-added
share in GDP in each year separately. The reported values are for 2005, which is representative of
other years.

biased by the same proportion.51 This is certainly the case when we compare the TFP gain for each
industry instead of at the aggregate level. Our calibration of model parameters is summarized in
Table 1.


5.3      Estimation Results

5.3.1     Estimated TFP Gains from Moving to Efficiency

Figure 1 compares measured aggregate TFP gain in the two models. Panel a) shows that the two
models give different trends in resource allocation for China. There is a clear upward trend in
resource misallocation since 2004 in the VA model, while that in the GO model is more volatile.
However, despite the difference in trends, the GO model does not systematically produce larger or
smaller TFP gain than the VA model, contrast to the finding of Jones (2011, 2013) and Gandhi
et al. (2017).
      For India, the estimated TFP gain from removing all distortions is always higher under the out-
  51
   Remember that the output weights are given by V    ~ = (I - B )-1 . The value-added weights are given by  = V
                                                                                                               ~ ¯.
As  is correctly calibrated, it is clear both weights are biased by the same proportion.



                                                        31
                                                                                 Figure 1: Aggregate TFP Gain in Different Models

                            1.25




                                                                                                                                                            2.5
                         1.2




                                                                                                                                                         2
      Aggregate TFP Gain




                                                                                                                                      Aggregate TFP Gain
                 1.15




                                                                                                                                             1.5
         1.1




                                                                                                                                                            1
                            1.05




                                                                                                                                                            .5
                            1
                                                 98


                                                            99


                                                                  00


                                                                           01


                                                                                   02


                                                                                           03


                                                                                                   04


                                                                                                           05


                                                                                                                    06


                                                                                                                               07




                                                                                                                                                                                99


                                                                                                                                                                                           00


                                                                                                                                                                                                   01


                                                                                                                                                                                                              02


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        03


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              04


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      05


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              06


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        07


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  08
                                 19


                                                           19


                                                                 20


                                                                         20


                                                                                 20


                                                                                         20


                                                                                                 20


                                                                                                         20


                                                                                                                 20


                                                                                                                          20




                                                                                                                                                                19


                                                                                                                                                                                          20


                                                                                                                                                                                                 20


                                                                                                                                                                                                            20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 20
                                                                          VA, =3                Output, =1+(3-1)/                                                                                             VA, =3               Output, =1+(3-1)/



                                                                                (a) China                                                                                                                          (b) India
                                                                                                                                                                               o                                     va
                                                                                                                                     YE                                                                      YE
     Note: Aggregated TFP gain is defined as                                                                                         Y
                                                                                                                                                                                      - 1 and                Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          - 1.

                                                                                  Figure 2: Sectoral TFP Gain in Different Models
                                                 .08




                                                                                                                                                                                 .6


                                                                                                                                                                                                45° line
      Sectoral TFP Gain in the Value-added Model




                                                                                                                                      Sectoral TFP Gain in the Value-added Model
                                      .06




                                                                                                                                                                   .4
                          .04




                                                                                                                                                  .2
              .02




                                                                                                                    45° line
                            0




                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                       0               .02               .04               .06                 .08                                                    0                         .2                       .4                           .6
                                                                        Sectoral TFP Gain in the Output Model                                                                                              Sectoral TFP Gain in the Output Model



                                                                                (a) China                                                                                                                          (b) India

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   v
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ~s                              E    s
                                                                                                                                                                                                       E
                                                                                                                                                                                                  T F Ps                                   TFPs
     Note: TFP gain at the sector level is measured as log                                                                                                                                        T F Ps
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        and log                              .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TFPs



put approach, and the gap averages at 114 percent points in our sample period. If we believe the
GO model is correctly specified, this finding suggests that intermediate input distortions are sub-
stantially larger in India, and using the VA model might be associated with a significant downward
bias in evaluating the actual cost of misallocation.
   Next we examine the TFP gain at the sector level. As is shown in Figure 2, the TFP gains
measured in the two models are similar to each other for China. The difference between the two is
less than 5 percentage points for over 99% of the sector-year observations. For India, we continue


                                                                                                                                    32
to find significantly larger TFP gains using the GO model than the VA model at the sector level,
with an exception of a few observations that show higher gain under the value-added framework.

                                                  Figure 3: Dispersion of Firm Physical Productivity in Different Models
                         2




                                                   45° line                                                                                       45° line




                                                                                                                         2.5
                                                                                                         Dispersion of Log Firm TFP, Output
         Dispersion of Log Firm TFP, Output




                                                                                                                                      2
                                     1.5




                                                                                                                             1.5
                          1




                                                                                                                    1
             .5




                                                                                                          .5
                         0




                                                                                                                         0
                                              0            .5                 1               1.5   2                                         0      .5              1            1.5           2   2.5
                                                          Dispersion of Log Firm TFP, Value-added                                                         Dispersion of Log Firm TFP, Value-added



                                                                 (a) China                                                                                        (b) India
       Note: The dispersion is measured by the standard deviation of log firm productivity.


   Despite the amplification effect of production networks (Jones, 2011, 2013), a reason why the
TFP gain in the GO model is not substantially larger than that in the VA model for China is a
lower dispersion of firm TFP measured in the GO model (Gandhi et al., 2017).52 This can be clearly
seen from Panel A of Figure 3, where the standard deviation of log firm TFP in the GO model is
plotted against that in the VA model. The pattern also holds for India in Panel B, with the VA
model producing substantially lower TFP gains.


5.3.2                               Dispersion of Estimated Marginal Revenue Products

Our analysis above shows that the TFP gain measured in the VA model will only deviate from that
in the GO model if there are distortions in the use of intermediate input. The lower dispersion in
value-added TFP and the multiplier due to the amplification through input-output linkages will
offset complete with each other in the absence of intermediate input distortions. The fact that the
two measures stay close to each other for China suggests that intermediate input distortions might
be mild. Panel A of Figure 4 confirms this assertion in the data, in which we plot the density of the
marginal revenue product (in logs) of the primary inputs and intermediate inputs relative to their
  52
       Another reason is the boosted elasticity of substitution, as we discuss later.



                                                                                                        33
                                            Figure 4: Dispersion of Marginal Revenue Products




                                                                                             1.5
            4
                                                               Value-added                                                                      Value-added
                                                               Intermediate Inputs                                                              Intermediate Inputs
            3




                                                                                             1
         Density




                                                                                       Density
           2




                                                                                             .5
            1
            0




                                                                                             0
                   1/64      1/16     1/4          1       4         16          64                1/64       1/16      1/4         1       4         16          64



                                          (a) China                                                                       (b) India
                                                                                                                          s                           1-s
                                                                                                          s s Psi Qsi              (1-s )s Psi Qsi
       Note: The figures plot the density of the logs of                                                    Ksi                         Lsi
                                                                                                                                                                and
                                            qs
            S             (1-s )Psi Qsi
            q =1             Mqsi
                                                 , both relative to the industry average.


industry average respectively.53 While the marginal revenue product of primary inputs has a very
dispersed distribution with a variance of 0.525, that of intermediate inputs has a variance of merely
0.029. On the other hand, panel B of Figure 4 shows a much larger dispersion of the marginal
revenue products of intermediate inputs in India, with the variance reaching 0.267. Though the
variance for the marginal revenue product of the primary factors for India is close to that for China.
This helps explain why the output measure differs substantially from the value-added measure in
India.
    Proposition 6 also suggests that a negative covariance between the primary input and interme-
                                                                                                                              54
diate input distortions would lead to a lower value-added TFP gain.                                                                We confirm that a negative
covariance between the primary input and intermediate input distortions does help explain the
much higher output TFP gain in India. The covariance is -0.131 for India and only -0.023 for
China. Table 2 reports the variance-covariance matrix of the marginal revenue products for both
countries.
                                                       s                             1-s                                            qs
                                          (1-s )s Psi Qsi
                                                              and q=1 (1-M   s )Psi Qsi                   S
  53
      They are given by s s   Psi Qsi
                             Ksi                Lsi                             qsi
                                                                                         .
   54
      Why does a negative covariance lead to a lower value-added TFP gain? The reason lies in the bias in inferred firm
productivity and wedges using value-added measures. First, a negative covariance implies that the inferred TFPR
will have a smaller dispersion using value-added measures, given the primary input distortions in the GO model.
Second, for firms facing larger distortions in primary markets, we will also infer a lower value-added productivity.
This means firms that are highly constrained are not particularly productive in terms of measured value-added
productivity. Both biases result in a lower TFP gain in the VA model.


                                                                                      34
                                    Table 2: Variance-Covariance Matrix of Marginal Revenue Products

                                                                           China                                                   India
                                                                   Primary Intermediate                                    Primary Intermediate
                                    Primary                          0.525                                                   0.511
                                    Intermediate                    -0.023      0.029                                       -0.131       0.267

                                                                                s         -s
     Note:             Marginal revenue products are measured as M RP Ksi         M RP L1
                                                                                        si   and
               S           qs
               q =1 M RP Mqsi (in logs), both relative to the industry average.


5.3.3                 Choice of the Elasticity of Substitution

                                             Figure 5: Aggregate Efficiency Loss in Different Models




                                                                                                       1.1
                1.2




                                                                                                       1
        Aggregate TFP Gain




                                                                                               Aggregate TFP Gain
                     1




                                                                                                    .8      .9
         .8




                                                                                                       .7
                                                                                                       .6
                .6
                    98


                               99


                                      00


                                             01


                                                      02


                                                             03


                                                                    04


                                                                           05


                                                                                  06


                                                                                         07




                                                                                                           99


                                                                                                                      00


                                                                                                                             01


                                                                                                                                     02


                                                                                                                                              03


                                                                                                                                                     04


                                                                                                                                                            05


                                                                                                                                                                   06


                                                                                                                                                                          07


                                                                                                                                                                                 08
                  19


                             19


                                    20


                                           20


                                                    20


                                                           20


                                                                  20


                                                                         20


                                                                                20


                                                                                       20




                                                                                                         19


                                                                                                                    20


                                                                                                                           20


                                                                                                                                   20


                                                                                                                                            20


                                                                                                                                                   20


                                                                                                                                                          20


                                                                                                                                                                 20


                                                                                                                                                                        20


                                                                                                                                                                               20
                                                  VA, =3           Output, =3                                                             VA, =3           Output, =3



                                                  (a) China                                                                               (b) India
                                                                                                   o                                      va
                                                                                         YE                                       YE
     Note: Efficiency losses are measured as                                             Y
                                                                                                             - 1 and              Y
                                                                                                                                               - 1, with  = 3 in both
     models.

   HK calibrate the elasticity of substitution with an estimate obtained using gross output data
(Broda and Weinstein, 2006; Hendel and Nevo, 2006). The number they choose is thus more
suitable for the GO model. If we take 3 as the true elasticity of substitution for the GO model,
their calibration procedure suggests an upward bias in the measured cost of misallocation due to
the choice of a higher than intended elasticity. This is because the TFP gain is increasing in the
elasticity of substitution and the VA model should have a lower elasticity of substitution. Given the
average intermediate share of output is roughly 0.5, the value-added elasticity should be around 2
instead of 3. We evaluate this upward bias by assuming that the elasticity is 3 in both models. As
is shown in Figure 5, the difference in aggregate TFP gain between the two models is around 40
percentage points over the sample years for China. At the industry level, the measured TFP gain

                                                                                              35
using the VA model is larger for over 95% of industries. For India, the difference between the two
models is substantially narrowed by almost 90 percentage points, even though the VA model still
underestimates the TFP gain compared to the GO model. This finding suggests that the upward
bias in the value-added TFP gain measure due to incorrectly assigned elasticity of substitution is
not trivial.55 The very different results between China and India however shows that it is unclear
whether the bias would bring the value-added estimates closer or further away from the output
estimates.



6        Conclusion

This paper advances the study of the macroeconomic costs of resource misallocation by incorporating
sectoral IO linkages in a gross output model and identifying the conditions under which the existing
estimates based on a value added model will be unbiased. We show that in the absence of distortions
in the use of intermediate inputs, the two frameworks are isomorphic to each other. Specifically, if
there is no distortion in firms' uses of intermediate inputs, a model with a production network can
be transformed into the value added model, with the two models suggesting the same TFP gain
from the removal of all distortions.
     However, when there exist firm-specific intermediate input distortions, the value added model
is incorrectly specified and using value added measures may bias inferences of firm productivity
and distortions. However, this bias may go in either direction, implying that the widely-used VA
framework of HK does not necessarily understate nor overstate the cost of resource misallocation.
Furthermore, we show that the literature using the value added model might also calibrate the
elasticity of substitution to a higher value than is suitable for the gross output model, offering a
potential source of upward bias in the estimated TFP losses from resource misallocation based on
the value added model.
     The findings in this paper support the idea that sectors can be viewed either as categories of final
expenditure or value-added. Both models can be correct representations of the same underlying
    55
     Note this conclusion does not rely on the elasticity to be 3. The elasticity is smaller in the VA model for any
value larger than 1. Thus as long as we mistake the output elasticity for the value-added elasticity, there is an upward
bias in the value-added measure.



                                                          36
data. The findings also suggest that the models can be easily mis-specified or calibrated if we fail to
distinguish the two perspectives explicitly, a point also emphasized in Herrendorf et al. (2013). The
recent surge in the study of production networks provides many insights regarding how the effect of
productivity shocks and market wedges can be amplified by IO linkages. Our study shows that the
measured aggregate effects of resource misallocation across firms might be similar between the gross
output model with production networks and the value added model without, as the amplification
effect via sectoral input-output linkages is already embedded in the measures of value added. The
presence of intermediate input distortions, however, may bias the value added estimates in an
unpredictable direction and with an unknown magnitude. We suggest the use of the GO model,
which can be easily implemented, especially in the studies of evaluating the aggregate efficiency loss
from resource misallocation following HK.




                                                  37
References
Acemoglu, D., V. M. Carvalho, A. Ozdaglar, and A. Tahbaz-Salehi (2012). The Network Origins
  of Aggregate Fluctuations. Econometrica 80(5), 1977­2016.

Adamopoulos, T., L. Brandt, J. Leight, and D. Restuccia (2015, September). Misallocation, Selec-
 tion, and Productivity: A Quantitative Analysis with Panel Data from China. Unpublished.

Altinoglu, L. (2020). The Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations in a Credit Network Economy. Journal
  of Monetary Economics. Forthcoming.

Asker, J., A. Collard-Wexler, and J. D. Loecker (2014).         Dynamic Input and Resource
  (Mis)Allocation. Journal of Political Economy 122(5), 1013­1063.

Atalay, E. (2014). Materials Prices and Productivity.        Journal of the European Economic
  Association 12(3), 575­611.

Banerjee, A. V. and E. Duflo (2005). Growth Theory through the Lens of Development Economics.
  In Handbook of Economic Growth, Volume 1, Chapter 7, pp. 473­552. Elsevier.

Banerjee, A. V. and B. Moll (2010). Why does Misallocation Persist? American Economic Journal:
  Macroeconomics 2(1), 189­206.

Baqaee, D. R. (2018). Cascading Failures in Production Networks. 86(5), 1819­1838.

Baqaee, D. R. and E. Farhi (2019a). Macroeconomics with Heterogeneous Agents and Input-Output
  Networks. Working Paper.

Baqaee, D. R. and E. Farhi (2019b). Network, Barriers, and Trade. Working Paper.

Baqaee, D. R. and E. Farhi (2019c). The Macroeconomic Impact of Microeconomic Shocks: Beyond
  Hulten's Theorem. Econometrica 87(4), 1155­1203.

Baqaee, D. R. and E. Farhi (2020a). Entry vs. Rents. Working Paper.

Baqaee, D. R. and E. Farhi (2020b). Productivity and Misallocation in General Equilibrium.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 135(1), 105­163.

Bartelme, D. and Y. Gorodnichenko (2015). Linkages and Economic Development. Technical report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bartelsman, E., J. Haltiwanger, and S. Scarpetta (2013). Cross-country differences in productivity:
  The role of allocation and selection. American Economic Review 103(1), 305­334.

Basu, S. and J. G. Fernald (1995). Are Apparent Productive Spillovers a Figment of Specification
  Error? Journal of Monetary Economics 36(1), 165­188.

                                                38
Basu, S. and J. G. Fernald (1997). Returns to Scale in U.S. Production: Estimates and Implications.
  Journal of Political Economy 105(2), 249­283.

Basu, S. and J. G. Fernald (2002). Aggregate productivity and aggregate technology. European
  Economic Review 46, 963­991.

Bigio, S. and J. La'O (2020).      Distortions in Production Networks.      Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 135(4), 2187­2253.

Bils, M., P. J. Klenow, and C. Ruane (2018). Misallocation or Mismeasurement? Working Paper.

Brandt, L., T. Tombe, and X. Zhu (2013). Factor Market Distortions across Time, Space, and
  Sectors in China. Review of Economic Dynamics 16, 39­58.

Broda, C. and D. E. Weinstein (2006). Globalization and the Gains from Variety. The Quarterly
  journal of economics 121(2), 541­585.

Bruno, M. (1978). Duality, Intermediate Inputs and Value-added. In Contributions to Economic
  Analysis, Volume 2, pp. 3­16. Elsevier.

Bruno, M. (1984). Raw Materials, Profits, and the Productivity Slowdown. The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 99(1), 1­29.

Buera, F. J. and Y. Shin (2013). Financial Frictions and the Persistence of History: A Quantitative
  Exploration. Journal of Political Economy 121(2), 221­272.

Caliendo, L., F. Parro, and A. Tsyvinski (2017). Distortions and the Structure of the World
  Economy. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Chen, K. and A. Irarrazabal (2015). The Role of Allocative Efficiency in a Decade of Recovery.
 Review of Economic Dynamics 18(3), 523­550.

Ciccone, A. (2002). Input Chains and Industrialization. The Review of Economic Studies 69(3),
  565­587.

David, J. and V. Venkateswaran (2019). The Sources of Capital Misallocation. American Economic
  Review 109(7), 2531­67.

David, J. M., H. A. Hopenhayn, and V. Venkateswaran (2016). Information, Misallocation, and
  Aggregate Productivity. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131(2), 943­1005.

Domar, E. D. (1961). On the Measurement of Technological Change. The Economic Journal 71(284),
 709­729.




                                                39
Dong, B. (2011). Misallocation or Mismeasurement? Evidence from Plant-Level Data. Ph. D.
 thesis, New York University.

Gandhi, A., S. Navarro, and D. Rivers (2017, May). How Heterogeneous is Productivity? A
 Comparison of Gross Output and Value Added? Unpublished.

Gollin, D. and C. Udry (2017). Heterogeneity, Measurement Error, and Misallocation: Evidence
 from African Agriculture. Working Paper.

Gopinath, G., S           ¨
              ¸ . Kalemli-Ozcan, L. Karabarbounis, and C. Villegas-Sanchez (2017). Capital Alloca-
 tion and Productivity in South Europe. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132(4), 1915­1967.

Guner, N., G. Ventura, and Y. Xu (2008). Macroeconomic Implications of Size-dependent Policies.
 Review of Economic Dynamics 11(4), 721­744.

Haltiwanger, J. and C. Syverson (2018). Misallocation Measures: The Distortion That Ate the
  Residual. Working Paper.

Hendel, I. and A. Nevo (2006). Measuring the Implications of Sales and Consumer Inventory
  Behavior. Econometrica 74(6), 1637­1673.

Herrendorf, B., R. Rogerson, and A. Valentinyi (2013). Two Perspectives on Preferences and
  Structural Transformation. American Economic Review 103(7), 2752­2789.

Hirschman, A. O. (1958). The Strategy of Economic Development. Yale University Press.

Horvath, M. (1998). Cyclicality and Sectoral Linkages: Aggregate Fluctuations from Independent
  Sectoral Shocks. Review of Economic Dynamics 1(4), 781­808.

Horvath, M. (2000). Sectoral Shocks and Aggregate Fluctuations.             Journal of Monetary
  Economics 45(1), 69­106.

Hsieh, C.-T. and P. J. Klenow (2009). Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and India.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics (4), 1403­1448.

Hsieh, C.-T. and P. J. Klenow (2014). The Life Cycle of Plants in India and Mexico. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 129(3), 1035­1084.

Hulten, C. R. (1978). Growth Accounting with Intermediate Inputs. The Review of Economic
 Studies 45(3), 511­518.

Jones, C. I. (2011). Intermediate Goods and Weak Links in the Theory of Economic Development.
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 3.




                                               40
Jones, C. I. (2013). Misallocation, Economic Growth, and Input-Output Economics. In Advances
  in Economics and Econometrics, Tenth World Congress, Volume 2. Cambridge University Press.

Kalemli-Ozcan, S. and B. E. Sorensen (2012). Misallocation, Property Rights, and Access to Fi-
 nance: Evidence from Within and Across Africa. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
 Research.

Liu, E. (2019). Industrial Policies in Production Networks. Quarterly Journal of Economics 134(4),
  1883­1948.

Long, J. B. J. and C. I. Plosser (1983). Real Business Cycles. Journal of Political Economy 91(1),
  39­69.

Luo, S. (2019). Propagation of Financial Shocks in an Input-output Economy with Trade and
  Financial Linkages of Firms. Review of Economic Dynamics. Forthcoming.

Midrigan, V. and D. Y. Xu (2014). Finance and Misallocation: Evidence from Plant-level Data.
 American economic review 104(2), 422­58.

Moll, B. (2014). Productivity Losses from Financial Frictions: Can Self-financing undo Capital
 Misallocation? American Economic Review 104(10), 3186­3221.

Oberfield, E. (2013). Productivity and Misallocation during a Crisis: Evidence from the Chilean
 Crisis of 1982. Review of Economic Dynamics 16, 100­119.

Osotimehin, S. and L. Popov (2020, Februrary). Misallocation and Intersectoral Linkages. Working
  Paper.

Restuccia, D. and R. Rogerson (2008). Policy Distortions and Aggregate Productivity with Het-
  erogenous Establishments. Review of Economic Dynamics 11, 707­720.

Restuccia, D. and R. Stantaeul`
                              alia-Llopis (2017). Land Misallocation and Productivity. NBER
  Working Paper 23128.

Sato, K. (1976). The Meaning and Measurement of the Real Value Added Index. The Review of
  Economics and Statistics 58(4), 434­442.

Song, Z. M. and G. L. Wu (2015). Identifying capital misallocation. Working Paper.

Ziebarth, N. L. (2012). Misallocation and Productivity during the Great Depression. Unpublished.

Ziebarth, N. L. (2013). Are China and India Backward? Evidence from the 19th Century U.S.
  Census of Manufactures. Review of Economic Dynamics 16, 86­99.




                                               41
Appendix

A. Proofs

    Lemma 1 It is easy to show as firm's demand for production factors is proportional to sectoral
factor supply, with the proportionality determined by firm physical productivity and wedges. It then
follows that the sectoral production function inherits the Cobb-Douglas form of the firm production
function and we only have to find the expression for sectoral TFP. We write the sectoral production
function as follows                                                                   1-s
                                                                       S
                                                  s 1-s s                    qs
                                Qs = T F P s ·   Ks Ls                      Mqs             .
                                                                     q =1

On the other hand, we define sectoral value productivity as

                                                              Ps Qs
                                T F P Rs                                              1-s ,
                                                 s L1-s )s           S       
                                               (Ks  s                q =1   Mqsqs


Combining these two definitions, we have

                                                      Qs                              T F P Rs
                            T F Ps                                          1-s   =            .
                                        s L1-s )s          S                             Ps
                                      (Ks  s               q =1   Mqsqs


Plugging in CES price aggregator Ps and similarly noticing the prices of varieties is given as Psi =
T F P Rsi
   Asi
          ,   we have the results presented in Lemma 1.


    Proposition 1 With the Domar weights, we can solve for the sectoral intermediate input
demand as,
                                         1                   Ps Qs    1     vs
                                Mqs =          qs (1 - s )         =     bqs Qq .
                                        TM s                  Pq     TM s vq

Plugging the allocation of production factors described above and in the text into the sectoral
production function and taking logs, we have sectoral production function

                                                                       S                             1-s
                                                                                                qs
                                             s         1-s s                  1     vs
                     Qs = T F Ps · (Ks K ) (Ls L)                                bqs Qq
                                                                    q =1
                                                                             TM s vq



                                                        42
Taking logs of the sectoral production functions and stacking them in vector form,


                                       q
                                       ¯= a
                                          ¯ + q + K log K + L log L + B q
                                                                        ¯,


      ¯ is a vector of log Qs , K a vector of s s , L a vector of (1 - s )s , and q is a vec-
where q
tor of the allocation terms whose sth element is given by s s log Ks + (1 - s )s log Ls + (1 -
        S                1
s )     q =1   qs log       b vs
                        TM s qs vq
                                     . The vector of log output is solved as


                                     ¯ = (I - B -1 (¯
                                     q              a + q + K log K + L log L)


                                         s Qs
Notice that we can write Cs =            vs
                                              .   Taking logs and stacking it into a vector, we have


                                                          c
                                                          ¯ = c + q
                                                                  ¯,


                                                      s
where c
      ¯ is the vector of log Cs and c a vector of log vs
                                                         . Using the final good production function,
we have,
                                  ¯ =  [c + (I - B -1 (¯
                         log Y =  c                    a + q + K log K + L log L)]

which leads to a Cobb-Douglas aggregate production function with the factor shares for capital and
labor are given by  -1 K and  -1 L . Since the value-added shares K + L are given by (I - B )1
where 1 is the vector of ones. It is easy to show that  (I - B -1 (K + L ) = 1, such that the
aggregate production function has constant returns to scale.


      Proposition 3 Although the model has a complicated structure, it turns out we can calibrate
the parameters in a step-by-step procedure. First note that equating the allocation of capital within
a sector in the two models requires the following condition,

                                              PY si Ysi                   Psi Qsi
                                               1+Ksi            Ksi      1+Ksi
                                             S    PY qi Yqi
                                                              =     =   S     Pqi Qqi
                                             q =1 1+Kqi
                                                                Ks      q =1 1+Kqi




                                                                43
Obviously, this condition holds only if PY si Ysi  Psi Qsi . From the definition of firm value-added
and making use of the optimality condition for intermediate input use, we have

                                                        1-
                                   PY si Ysi =   1-                         Psi Qsi
                                                      1 + M si

Firm value-added will be proportional to firm output only if all firms within a sector face the same
distortion M si . For the moment, denote the distortion for all firms within a sector M s .
   From the pricing rule of firm products, we can relate firm's nominal output to productivity and
inputs in the two models as follows:

                                                                                             s -1
                                                                      S               1-s      s

                                             s 1-s s                         qs
                       Psi Qsi  Asi         Ksi Lsi                         Mqsi                    ,
                                                                     q =1
                                                          s -1
                                           s 1-s          s
                      PY si Ysi       Asi Ksi Lsi                ,


where the term in the brackets on the right hand side is the firm-level production function in
the respective model. We have established that firm value-added should be proportional to gross
output. Combined with the above conditions we reach a proportional relationship between firm
production in the two models. Intermediate inputs show up in the production of gross output but
not value-added. We replace intermediate inputs using the optimality condition for intermediate
input use. For the VA model to be consistent with data, the following conditions must hold,

                                                                                        s -1
                                               s s
                                s 1-s                                 s 1-s             s
                           Asi Ksi Lsi      s s +(1-s )
                                                                 Asi Ksi Lsi


From this condition, we establish that s = s and s = 1 + s (s - 1). Firm value-added
                                                 1
                                            s
productivity satisfies the condition, Asi  Asi .
   We next look at the allocation at the sector level. Note that a sector's value-added to GDP
ratio in the VA model is simply s . In the GO model, it equals to the product of the Domar weight
and the value-added to output ratio. The sectoral weight on final good production in the VA model




                                                     44
can be calibrated as
                                                                1 - s
                                                 s =     1-                     vs ,
                                                               1 + M s

where M s is the constant intermediate input distortion for firms within the sector. The allocation
of capital across sectors can be equated across the two models as long as

                                          1                                       1
                                            v
                                        TKs s s s             Ks                    
                                                                                TKs s s
                                       S     1
                                                            =    =             S
                                       q =1 TKq q q vq
                                                              K                      1
                                                                               q =1 TKq q q



Since firm value-added is proportional to firm gross output, the sectoral level wedges are equated
across the two models, TKs = TKs . Together with s = s , as we have shown, the above condition
holds only if s = s vs , which requires M s = 0.


    Proposition 6 The proof involves computing sectoral TFP and efficient TFP as the mean
of a log-normally distributed random variable. We show how to do this for the more complicated
                                                                                                    1-s
sectoral value-added TFP. Note that if s = 0.5, we can approximate 1 -                             1+M si
                                                                                                            = 1
                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                (1 + M si ).
Plugging this into sectoral value-added TFP, we have

                                                                           1
                                                 T F P s = (Ns xs ) s (s -1) ,


where

                 Ns                                                     s -1
            1                              Asi
       xs =                                         (1-s )-    1               , 1 + Y si = (1 + Ksi )s (1 + Lsi )1-s
            Ns   i=1   (1 + Y si   )s (1   + M si )           s -1




Given the log-normal distribution of firm productivity and wedges and making use of the properties
                                                               Asi
of normal distributions, we have log                                 (1-s )-  1
                                                                                       follows a normal distribution with
                                                 (1+Y si )s (1+M si )        s -1

the variance is given by56


           2  1 2           1   1                2                         2                  1   1
           a + y  +           -                  m - ay - 1 -                          am +     -            ym
              4             2 s - 1                                      s - 1                2 s - 1
  56
      The mean of this random variable is given by the mean of log Asi . The exact value of the mean does not matter
as it cancels out in the computation.




                                                               45
                                                  s -1
                            Asi
This means                         (1-s )-  1
                                                         also follows a log-normal distribution. We can then
              (1+Y si )s (1+M si )         s -1

approximate xs as the mean of the log-normal distribution. Repeating this procedure for other TFP
measures. We have the sectoral TFP gains given in the text.


B. Data Appendix

B.1 Data Cleaning

In the Chinese industrial enterprise data from the country's National Bureau of Statistics (NBS), we
first drop all observations with input or output data missing or having negative values. We also drop
firms employing less than 8 workers. After that, we trim the 1% tails of marginal revenue products
and TFPQ in each year, relative to the industry mean. Consistently, in the Indian enterprise data
from the Annual Survey of Industries (ASI), we first drop all observations with input or output data
missing or having negative values. After that, we trim the 1% tails of marginal revenue products
and TFPQ in each year, relative to the industry mean.
   Table 3 reports the number of plants used to compute the aggregate TFP loss for each country
and year.

                                           Table 3: Number of Plants

                                         China                         India
                                  Year   # of plants            Year   # of plants
                                  1998      96,296              1999      10,376
                                  1999     104,520              2000      11,757
                                  2000     102,522              2001      14,995
                                  2001     116,864              2002      16,575
                                  2002     125,264              2003      17,057
                                  2003     142,290              2004      22,936
                                  2004     199,657              2005      19,864
                                  2005     203,003              2006      21,920
                                  2006     228,365              2007      22,421
                                  2007     258,486              2008      20,087




                                                           46
B.2 Additional Results

                          Table 1: Dispersion of TFPQ and TFPR: China

                            TFPQ                                                            TFPR
                Output                Value-added                            Output                  Value-added
 Year   S.D.     90-10   75-25    S.D. 90-10 75-25                  S.D.      90-10      75-25   S.D. 90-10 75-25
 1998   0.476    1.240   0.659    1.718 4.409 2.333                 0.349     0.916      0.486   0.742 1.952 1.024
 1999   0.485    1.264   0.677    1.789 4.634 2.447                 0.348     0.914      0.489   0.742 1.950 1.043
 2000   0.484    1.266   0.679    1.790 4.640 2.490                 0.341     0.896      0.476   0.733 1.931 1.022
 2001   0.478    1.249   0.681    1.772 4.600 2.490                 0.341     0.894      0.474   0.727 1.912 1.021
 2002   0.482    1.268   0.685    1.800 4.664 2.542                 0.339     0.885      0.471   0.723 1.895 1.004
 2003   0.484    1.272   0.695    1.819 4.748 2.573                 0.336     0.882      0.463   0.725 1.909 1.007
 2004   0.461    1.217   0.654    1.748 4.578 2.466                 0.321     0.840      0.444   0.709 1.864 0.990
 2005   0.474    1.258   0.675    1.815 4.750 2.576                 0.325     0.852      0.453   0.723 1.904 1.013
 2006   0.488    1.296   0.702    1.833 4.839 2.593                 0.331     0.871      0.464   0.730 1.926 1.027
 2007   0.495    1.311   0.716    1.857 4.906 2.646                 0.334     0.876      0.467   0.740 1.948 1.048

                                           Psi Qsi                           PY si Ysi
Notes: TFPR is defined as         s 1-s s       S       qs    1-s   and      s 1-s
                                                                            Ksi Lsi
                                                                                         for the output and VA model
                           (     Ksi   )
                                     Lsi        q =1   Mqsi
                                                       Qsi
respectively. TFPQ is defined as      s 1-s s         qs 1-s
                                                             and K sY   1-s for the output and VA
                                                                       si
                                                                    si Lsi
                                                S
                                  (  Ksi Lsi)   q =1 Mqsi

model respectively. Reported statistics are computed for the log of firm values relative to industry
means. S.D. is standard deviation. 90-10 is the difference between 90th and 10th percentile, and
75-25 is that between 75th and 25th percentile. Statistics are computed for each industries and
then summed up with industries weighted by their output shares and value-added shares.




                                                          47
                              Table 2: Dispersion of TFPQ and TFPR: India

                               TFPQ                                            TFPR
                   Output               Value-added                Output               Value-added
 Year    S.D.       90-10   75-25   S.D. 90-10 75-25       S.D.     90-10   75-25   S.D. 90-10 75-25
 1999    0.620      1.617   0.934   1.387 3.660 2.171      0.338    0.860   0.471   0.636 1.638 0.898
 2000    0.630      1.659   0.948   1.391 3.698 2.151      0.342    0.876   0.479   0.632 1.617 0.861
 2001    0.623      1.625   0.936   1.388 3.690 2.080      0.348    0.895   0.461   0.633 1.653 0.855
 2002    0.566      1.498   0.820   1.270 3.410 1.815      0.358    0.905   0.496   0.638 1.700 0.862
 2003    0.579      1.525   0.794   1.311 3.465 1.921      0.345    0.854   0.469   0.610 1.637 0.819
 2004    0.585      1.550   0.802   1.329 3.565 1.729      0.353    0.885   0.463   0.613 1.593 0.855
 2005    0.557      1.477   0.802   1.365 3.720 1.987      0.323    0.834   0.442   0.576 1.553 0.770
 2006    0.578      1.586   0.820   1.331 3.397 2.012      0.338    0.892   0.460   0.623 1.702 0.714
 2007    0.550      1.411   0.810   1.300 3.336 1.998      0.336    0.876   0.465   0.613 1.512 0.824
 2008    0.610      1.618   0.921   1.375 3.556 2.132      0.356    0.959   0.472   0.622 1.696 0.780

                                          Psi Qsi
Notes: TFPR is defined as      s 1-s s         S      qs 1-s
                                                                  and KP Y si Ysi
                                                                       s 1-s for the GO and VA model
                                                                           Lsi
                            (Ksi Lsi    )      q =1 Mqsi               si
                                                     Qsi
respectively. TFPQ is defined as        s 1-s s          S      qs 1-s
                                                                        and K sY     si
                                                                                     L1-s for the GO and VA
                                     ( si si )
                                      K    L             q =1 Mqsi                si  si

model respectively. Reported statistics are computed for the log of firm values relative to industry
means. S.D. is standard deviation. 90-10 is the difference between 90th and 10th percentile, and
75-25 is that between 75th and 25th percentile. Statistics are computed for each industries and
then summed up with industries weighted by their output shares and value-added shares.

                                      Table 3: Aggregate TFP Gain

                         China                                              India
  Year    Output       VA Var(M )       Cov(M ,Y )       Year   Output   VA Var(M )          Cov(M ,Y )
  1998     109.0      104.6   0.039       -0.031         1999    157.9   65.7   0.260          -0.110
  1999     111.0      105.1   0.033       -0.027         2000    164.0   69.2   0.297          -0.152
  2000     107.5      103.5   0.031       -0.023         2001    194.9   71.2   0.296          -0.126
  2001     107.1      102.1   0.037       -0.025         2002    199.3   72.6   0.336          -0.163
  2002     117.5      102.5   0.029       -0.023         2003    180.3   65.0   0.291          -0.115
  2003     107.5      107.0   0.036       -0.021         2004    175.4   61.4   0.299          -0.118
  2004     104.1      107.9   0.037       -0.026         2005    149.0   57.8   0.255          -0.121
  2005     108.4      111.5   0.031       -0.022         2006    224.7   76.1   0.226          -0.076
  2006     114.5      118.4   0.031       -0.022         2007    158.3   61.6   0.246          -0.101
  2007     117.0      124.1   0.033       -0.023         2008    196.0   61.4   0.328          -0.161

                                                                                             o
                                                                                        YE
Note: Output and VA indicate aggregate TFP gains computed as 100 ×                      Y
                                                                                                 - 100 and
          E
              va
100 × YY       - 100. Var(M ) is the variance of the variance of the marginal revenue products
of intermediate inputs (in logs relative to industry means). Cov(M ,Y ) is the covariance between
the variance of the marginal revenue products of intermediate inputs and primary inputs (in logs
relative to industry means). The two statistics are averaged over industries with industry output
share as weights.


                                                    48
