                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      CHILDREN AND THE REMAINING GENDER GAPS IN THE LABOR MARKET

                                         Patricia Cortés
                                          Jessica Pan

                                      Working Paper 27980
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27980


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2020




We are grateful to Steven Durlauf and participants at the EALE/SOLE/AASLE World
Conference for helpful comments and suggestions. Lim Zhi Hao provided outstanding research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Patricia Cortés and Jessica Pan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Children and the Remaining Gender Gaps in the Labor Market
Patricia Cortés and Jessica Pan
NBER Working Paper No. 27980
October 2020
JEL No. J12,J13,J16,J22,J31

                                         ABSTRACT

The past five decades have seen a remarkable convergence in the economic roles of men and
women in society. Yet, persistently large gender gaps in terms of labor supply, earnings, and
representation in top jobs remain. Moreover, in countries like the U.S., convergence in labor
market outcomes appears to have slowed in recent decades. In this article, we focus on the role
of children and show that many potential explanations for the remaining gender disparities in
labor market outcomes are related to the fact that children impose significantly larger penalties
on the career trajectories of women relative to men. In the U.S., we document that close to two-
thirds of the overall gender earnings gap can be accounted for by the differential impacts of
children on women and men. We propose a simple model of household decision-making to
motivate the link between children and gender gaps in the labor market, and to help rationalize
how various factors potentially interact with parenthood to produce differential outcomes for men
and women. We discuss several forces that might make the road to gender equity even more
challenging for modern cohorts of parents, and offer a critical discussion of public policies in
seeking to address the remaining gaps.


Patricia Cortés
Questrom School of Business
Boston University
595 Commonwealth Avenue
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
pcortes@bu.edu

Jessica Pan
Department of Economics
National University of Singapore
1 Arts Link
Singapore
and IZA
jesspan@nus.edu.sg
1    Introduction

In recent years, there has been a surge in interest among economists to understand the sources
of the remaining gender disparities in the labor market. A large part of this interest stems from
the fact that while women have made significant progress in the labor market over the past half a
century, large gender gaps in terms of labor supply, earnings, and representation in top jobs remain.
The labor force participation rate among prime-age women in the U.S. has plateaued at about 75
percent since the mid-1990s and, even among full-time workers, women continue to earn about 20
percent less than men on an annual basis. Gender pay gaps are even more pronounced at the top of
the earnings distribution, and women continue to be heavily underrepresented in high-status and
high-income sectors, occupations, and job positions (Blau and Kahn, 2017, Bertrand, 2018). The
persistence of these gaps is all the more puzzling as women are now increasingly more educated
than men and better prepared for the labor market than ever before (Goldin et al., 2006, Bertrand,
2011). Beyond concerns of rights and fairness, the continued underrepresentation of women in the
labor market and gender pay gaps (especially among equally skilled men and women) is costly to
society from an economic efficiency perspective (Hsieh et al., 2019).

A major development in the literature has been the focus on new classes of explanations that
might help understand the remaining gender inequalities in the labor market. These include gender
differences in psychological and personality traits that might lead women and men to self-select into
different types of jobs and careers, and a more systematic exploration of the role of gender norms in
constraining women's behavior and shaping their preferences for work. Important review articles by
Bertrand (2011), Azmat and Petrongolo (2014), and Blau and Kahn (2017) summarize the recent
work in these areas. More recently, motivated by various empirical observations, economists have
returned to a set of more standard explanations that emphasize the challenges that women face when
trying to juggle work and family responsibilities. This has, for example, led to a more nuanced view
on how women's dominant role in childcare and non-market work ­ sustained perhaps by persistent
gender norms ­ might result in gender differences in preferences for certain job attributes (e.g.
workplace flexibility) and career tracks that are typically associated with lower pay and limited
career progression.

In this paper, we focus on the role of children and show that many of the explanations for the
persisting gender disparities in the labor market are related to the fact that household work,
especially raising children, continues to impose differential demands on women's time relative to
men's. The central role that children play in understanding women's relative underperformance in
the labor market is best illustrated by a series of recent papers that use an event-study framework
to examine how women and men's labor supply and earnings evolve in the years before and after the
arrival of children (Kleven et al., 2019a, Kleven et al., 2019b, Kuziemko et al., 2018). These papers



                                                 2
document that the labor market trajectories of men and women diverge sharply with the arrival of
children, with little recovery for mothers in the medium to longer-term. The empirical patterns are
strikingly similar across a variety of countries, time periods, and even within specific occupations.
This empirical regularity suggests that a focus on understanding why and how children impose a
disproportionate effect on women's careers can shed light on the sources of the remaining gender
gaps and provide directions on the design of policy responses.

The plan of the paper is as follows. In the next section, we review recent empirical evidence on the
link between parenthood and gender inequality, with a particular focus on papers that document
the presence of systematic "child penalties" in labor market earnings and participation in various
settings. To further highlight the role of children in understanding gender inequality, we expand
on earlier decompositions of the gender wage gap using data from the U.S. Panel Study of Income
Dynamics (PSID) by Blau and Kahn (2017) to account for the proportion that is due to inequality
related to children. We adopt the decomposition procedure described in Kleven et al. (2019a) that
uses event study estimates of the wage impact of children to tease out the proportion of gender
inequality that can be attributed to children versus other factors. In Section 3, we present a simple
household decision-making framework to motivate the link between children and gender gaps in the
labor market. The aim of the model is to provide a basic scaffolding for thinking about how various
factors potentially interact with parenthood to produce differential outcomes for women and men.
Section 4 reviews recent literature that provides insights into the channels through which children
affect gender inequality. These include research that highlights gender differences in preferences for
job attributes, as well as the role of gender norms and the division of household work. In Section 5,
we discuss forces in the home and at work that might make it more challenging for modern women
to balance the time demands of parenthood and labor market work. In Section 6, we turn to a
discussion of policies that aim to tackle the remaining gender disparities, focusing in particular on
policies that are most relevant for addressing the challenges that women face in trying to juggle
work and family responsibilities. Section 7 concludes.



2    Empirical Evidence on Parenthood and Gender Inequality

There has been a recent wave of papers that use rich panel data to quantify the employment and
earnings effect of parenthood. Earlier papers tended to focus on specific groups of highly-educated
professionals such as those with MBAs and lawyers, and find large earnings penalties for women,
but not men, with the arrival of the first child (Bertrand et al., 2010; Noonan et al., 2005; Azmat
and Ferrer, 2017). More recent papers study the effects on the broader population in various




                                                  3
countries and time periods suign an event-study approach.1 A number of compelling stylized facts
have emerged from this literature. First, the labor market trajectories of men and women are
similar in the years leading up to parenthood, but diverge sharply with the arrival of children,
with little recovery for mothers in the medium to longer-term (up to 10 to 20 years) (Angelov et
al., 2016; Kleven et al., 2019a; Chung et al., 2017; Goldin and Mitchell, 2017; Fitzenberger et al.,
2013). Second, the observed motherhood earnings penalty appears to be due to a decline in labor
supply, both on the intensive and the extensive margin, as well as a decline in wage rates. Part
of this arises because women disproportionately shift to lower-paying jobs that likely offer more
family amenities such as job in the public sector and in more "family-friendly" firms (Kleven et al.,
2019a; Hotz et al., 2018). Third, men's labor market outcomes remain unaffected by the arrival of
the first child.

While the overall patterns are remarkably similar across countries, the magnitude of the child
penalty differs quite considerably. A recent paper by Kleven et al. (2019b) estimates child penalties
for a diverse set of countries using the same empirical approach, specification, and sample selection
(as far as possible). The authors find that the long-run child earnings penalties for women are
smallest in Scandinavian countries such as Denmark and Sweden (around 20%­25%), compared
to about 30%­40% in the U.S. and the UK, and 50%­60% in Germany and Austria.2 These
differences in the size of the child earnings penalties across countries could be influenced by cross-
country differences in family policies, gender norms, and wage-setting institutions (Kleven et al.,
2019b; Blau and Kahn, 2013; Blau and Kahn, 1996; Blau and Kahn, 2003).


2.1     The Role of Children in Aggregate Gender Inequality in the U.S.

To provide a sense of the extent to which the child earnings penalty contributes to aggregate
gender inequality in the United States, we apply the dynamic decomposition framework proposed
by Kleven et al. (2019a) to decompose the observed gender pay gap into components attributable
to background/human capital characteristics and the differential effects of children. This analysis
complements standard gender gap decompositions, such as those reported in Blau and Kahn (2017),
by incorporating children as a potential driver of explained and unexplained gaps.

As discussed in Kleven et al. (2019a), the emphasis of the dynamic decomposition exercise is on

    1
      There is an earlier literature that examines the effects of parenthood on wages using cross-sectional and fixed
effects models. These include papers by Waldfogel (1997), Korenman and Neumark (1992), and Budig and England
(2001). Waldfogel (1998) studies the pay gap between parents and non-parents and examines the extent to which
gender differences in the returns to marriage and parental status can account for the gender wage gap at age 30 in
the U.S. in the 1980s and 1990s. She is perhaps first in the literature to identify and refer to this differential effect
of parenthood on the wages of men and women as the "family gap."
    2
      The long-run child penalty is defined as the average percentage by which women's earnings fall behind men five
to ten years after the arrival of the first child.


                                                           4
quantifying the impact of children on gender gaps without controlling for labor market choices that
are likely affected by the presence of children (e.g. labor market experience, occupation, and firm
choices). This is a key point of departure from standard gender gap decompositions that typically
focus on the residual pay gap after accounting for mean differences in the characteristics and type of
work that men and women engage in. It is also worth noting that children do not feature as a main
explanation in standard decompositions since, men and women, on average, have similar number
of children. By explicitly modeling the differential impact of children on the earnings trajectories
of men and women, the dynamic decomposition allows a further examination of the unexplained
component of standard decomposition analyses. At the same time, because children can also affect
the gender pay gap through women's labor market attachment and occupational/industry choices,
the impact of children can also work through the explained components of standard cross-sectional
decomposition analyses.


2.1.1   Event-Study Estimates of the Impact of Parenthood on Earnings

Child-related inequality in the dynamic decomposition framework is based on event-study estimates
of the impact of parenthood on earnings of mothers relative to fathers. The event-study approach
exploits within-person variation in the timing of first birth to trace out the evolution of earnings
in the years before and after the birth of the first child (i.e. the "event"). As long as the timing of
first birth is uncorrelated with trends in the unobserved determinants of individuals' outcomes, the
                                                                                                      g
event-study approach yields causal estimates of the effects of parenthood. Specifically, earnings Yit
is modeled for person i of gender g in year t as follows:

                        =10
               g
             Yit   =          g
                                · 1[ = t - ei ] +       g
                                                        a · 1[a = ageit ] +       g
                                                                                  y · 1[y = t] +   g
                                                                                                   it   (1)
                        =-5                         a                         y


where event time (time relative to the birth of the first child) is indexed by  , and ei denotes the
calendar year in which person i had their first child. Therefore, the variable 1[ = t - ei ] is an
indicator for person i in year t having had their first child  years ago. We omit the indicator
variable for the year before the first birth (i.e.  = -1), implying that the event time coefficients
( ) measure the impact of children relative to the year before the birth of the first child. The
inclusion of these fixed effects control non-parametrically for life-cycle trends and time-trends.
Hence, the event-time estimates should be interpreted as the effects of parenthood on earnings
relative to the no-child counterfactual as predicted by age and year. Standard errors are clustered
at the individual level. We also include controls for age fixed effects and calendar-year fixed effects.

We estimate equation (1) using the 1976 to 2017 waves of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics
(PSID). The sample is restricted to household heads and spouses/cohabitors who are 20 to 55 years

                                                         5
old and who had their first child between the ages of 20 and 45. We further consider parents who
are observed at least once before and after the birth of their first child and whose earnings outcomes
are observed at least four times over the fifteen-year window (i.e. five years before and ten years
after first birth).

The main outcome variable is annual labor earnings, defined in the PSID as total labor income
before taxes and transfers for the year prior to the interview.3 Individuals who are not working
are assigned zero earnings. Following Kleven et al. (2019a), earnings are specified in levels to keep
individuals with zero earnings in the data (due to non-participation). The estimated level effects
                                                                     g       ^
from equation (1) are converted into percentages by calculating P        E [Y              ~g
                                                                             ~ g | ] where Yit is the
                                                                                              it
                                                                                                g
predicted outcome when the contribution of the event dummies are omitted. In other words, P
captures the effect of children as a percentage of the no-child counterfactual at event time  .
                     g
Figure 1 plots the P   coefficients for men and women separately, along with 95% confidence bands
around the estimates. Consistent with previous work, women experience a sudden, large, and per-
sistent drop in earnings with the arrival of the first child, whereas men's earnings appear essentially
unchanged. Importantly, men and women's earnings evolve similarly in the years prior to par-
enthood, supporting the causal interpretation that the earnings losses experienced by women are
indeed the result of children. Strikingly, up to ten years after the birth of the first child, women's
earnings show little sign of recovery. The long-run child penalty in the earnings of women relative
to men five to ten years after the arrival of the first child is close to 40%.4


2.1.2    Dynamic Decomposition of Aggregate Gender Inequality

To decompose aggregate gender earnings gaps over time, the dynamic decomposition framework
extends the baseline event-study specification given by equation (1) to allow for period-specific
coefficients on event time. In particular, we focus on four ten-year time periods from 1975 to
1984 ("1980s"), 1985 to 1994 ("1990s"), 1995 to 2004 ("2000s"), and 2005 to 2016 ("2010s").5




   3
      To be precise, annual labor income is defined as total labor income before taxes and transfers, including bonuses,
overtime pay, tips, commissions, as well as income from professional practice, and extra job income. Farm income
and business income are not included in the measure. To account for inflation over time, we deflate earnings using
the Personal Consumption Expenditures (PCE) price index, taking 2010 as the base year.
    4
      The child penalty at event time  is defined as the percentage by which women are falling behind men due to
                                      ^m - ^w
children and is calculated as: Pt  E         
                                        ~ w | ] .
                                       [Y
                                       it
   5
      Unlike Kleven et al. (2019a) who use rich administrative data, the substantially smaller sample size afforded by
the PSID does not allow us to estimate separate event time coefficients for each year. We picked 10-year periods as
a compromise to allow the estimated child penalties to change over time, and at the same time ensure that they are
sufficiently precisely estimated.


                                                           6
Specifically, we estimate the following specification:

                                   =10
                       g
                     Yipt =              g
                                         y · 1[ = t - ei ] · 1[y = p] +         g g
                                                                                k        g
                                                                                  Xkit + ipt                     (2)
                              y  =-5                                        k


                                                                         g
where p  {1980, 1990, 2000, 2010} represents ten-year periods and Xkit      is a vector of covariates
indexed by k that vary across individuals and calendar year. These covariates include age and
calendar-year fixed effects, as well as other background characteristics such as race, census region,
and education dummies.

As explained in Kleven et al. (2019a), the mean gender gap in each time period p can be expressed
as a sum of the estimated child penalties (from equation (2)), the impact of different coefficients on
non-child covariates i.e. differences in the returns to background/human capital characteristics such
as race, region, and education), as well as the impact of mean differences in the levels of background
covariates. The first two components represent "unexplained" effects in standard decomposition
analyses, while the third component represents the "explained" effects.6 Note that the estimated
child-related inequality may not capture the full effects of children. To the extent that women may
already have made education and career choices in anticipation of motherhood, these effects would
load on background or residual inequality.

The results from the decomposition exercise are shown in Figure 2. The area in red corresponds to
child-related gender inequality, the area in blue shows background-related inequality (i.e. due to
differences in both the levels and returns to race, region, and education), while the grey-shared area
represents the remaining gender earnings gap. The aggregate gender earnings gap (defined as the
difference in average earnings between men and women as a percentage of men's average earnings)
has declined over this period. While men earned 57% more than women in the mid-1970s, their
earnings advantage declined to 45% by the mid-2010s.7

Background-related inequality accounted for about 13% of the overall gender gap in earnings in
the 1980s, but its contribution in absolute terms has declined over time, in line with the narrowing
of educational differences between men and women. By the end of the sample period, background-
related inequality was responsible for only a small proportion of total inequality (less than 5%).
On the other hand, child-related gender inequality accounted for a sizable proportion of aggregate
gender earnings gaps from the mid-1970s to the mid-2010s. The magnitude of child-related gender
inequality appears to have risen over time, both in absolute terms (from 26% in the 1980s to 29%

   6
       In the interest of space, we do not describe the full decomposition procedure in the paper. Interested readers
can refer to Section III of Kleven et al. (2019a)
     7
       These gaps are larger than those reported by Blau and Kahn (2017) since we do not restrict the sample to
full-time, year-round workers and assign zero earnings to individuals who are not employed. Therefore, our estimate
of the gender earnings gap also captures gender differences in the labor force participation.


                                                         7
in the 2010s) and as a proportion of total gender inequality. The modest increase in child-related
gender inequality coupled with the decline in overall gender earnings gap, implies that child-related
inequality accounts for an increasingly larger proportion of aggregate gender earnings gap over
time. By the 2010s, child-related inequality accounted for nearly two-thirds of the overall gender
pay gap in the U.S.

In sum, the similarity of the findings in the U.S. and Denmark underscores the important role that
children play in the persistence of gender disparities in labor market outcomes. Accordingly, a
clearer understanding of why and how children continue to have differential effects on women's and
men's career trajectories is of first order importance in attempting to address the remaining gaps.



3        Children and Gender Gaps: A Theoretical Framework

In this section, we discuss the theoretical underpinnings of the sources of the child penalty for
women in the context of a household decision-making model. In our simple model, the utility of
an individual depends on the consumption of a market good, their partner's consumption, and a
public good, namely children.8 For simplicity, we do not formally include leisure in this model.
Each individual is endowed with one unit of time, which can be allocated between working in the
market (hi ) and producing the household public good (1 - hi ). Work hours in the market are paid
at rate wi . Married individuals' time investment are used to produce the household public good
(e.g. quality of children) according to the household production function, f (.).

Formally, individual i  {f, m}'s utility when married to their spouse j  {f, m}, is given by:

                          Ui (wi , wj ) = max [i wi hi + wj hj + i f (1 - hi , 1 - hj )n]        (3)
                                         0hi 1


where each individual takes the labor supply decision of their partner, hj as given, n is the number
of children (which we assume to be fixed and exogenous), and i and i are preference parameters.
In this model, i can be interpreted as the relative weight that an individual places on one's own
consumption relative to their spouse's consumption.  = 1 implies that an individual places equal
weight on own relative to spouse consumption.  > 1 can be interpreted as the utility loss stemming
from potential disagreement over consumption bundles. It can also represent a higher weight being
placed on one's own career relative to their spouse's career. i represents the value each individual
places on the household good. For example, the quality of the household good (e.g. children or a
cleaner house) may generate more utility for some individuals relative to others.



    8
        This model is adapted from Bertrand et al. (2020) and Fernandez (2002).


                                                          8
Before Children In the simplified model without leisure, in the absence of children (i.e. n = 0),
both the husband and the wife will work full-time (hm = 1 and hf = 1). Differences in earnings
between spouses will be solely determined by differences in wages. If wm > wf , then we will observe
wives making less than their husbands, even before the birth of the child. In our model, there are
no returns to experience (i.e. wage profiles are flat), so it does not deliver the positive slope in
earnings before the birth of the child as observed in the data.


After Children The analysis becomes more interesting after the child is born. We model children
as an exogenous shock. We discuss the model predictions under both unitary and non-unitary
household assumptions.


3.1    Unitary Model of the Household

In the unitary model of the household, we assume that each spouse places the same weight on their
own consumption and their partner's consumption (i = j = 1) and on the household public good
(i = j ). For simplicity, we begin by assuming a log linear production function of child rearing:
ln(i (1 - hi ) + j (1 - hj )). This functional form implies that spouses are perfect substitutes in
childrearing, but differ in their marginal productivities.9

First, consider the case where workers can freely choose their hours and that males (m) and females
(f ) are equally productive in household production (i = j ). Given these assumptions, optimal
labor supplies of the husband and the wife will depend on who has a higher market wage. If
wm > wf , and assuming that wm >  , men will devote all their time to market work (hm = 1).
Wife's labor supply will depend on her wage relative to  . In the case where wf >  , the wife
                                                              
devotes some of her time to market work, with h     f = 1 - wf . If wf <  , the wife spends all her
time in childrearing activities.

In this case, the model predicts that after the birth of the first child, fathers' earnings are unaffected,
whereas mother's earnings drop either to zero (if her wage was low enough that it is better to stay
                                          
at home, i.e. wf <  ) or to wf 1 - w      f
                                             . The child penalty in this case can be explained fully
by men's higher wages. Analogously, we should observe the opposite child penalty, with men's
earnings decreasing and women's staying constant in households where mothers face higher wages
than fathers.10

We turn now to the situation in which mothers and fathers differ in terms of their productivity in

   9
     We discuss how the analysis changes if alternative functional forms are used later in Appendix A.
  10
     We do not consider the case of w <  for both members. In this case, if 2w <  , both members will choose
to stay at home full-time. If 2w >  , the member with lower wage will stay at home, and their partner will work
part-time in the market. Neither situation is commonly observed in the data.


                                                      9
child rearing (f = m ). Here, even if wf > wm , we might observe women reducing their hours
or dropping out of the labor force, and thus a decline in earnings, if women are more productive
                                                     wf    wm
in the production of quality children (f > m ) and f       m . Essentially, the partner who has a
comparative advantage in the labor market (relative to home production) will specialize in market
work.


3.2      Non-Cooperative Model of the Household

Next, we consider the case where men and women have different preferences and interact in a non-
cooperative way. Specifically, men and women women place different weights on children (i = j )
and on their own consumption (or earnings) relative to their spouse's consumption (i = j ).

Each spouse solves the following optimization problem (assuming m = f ), taking hj as given:

                        max Ui (hi , hj ) = i wi hi + wj hj + i ln((1 - hi ) + (1 - hj ))
                       0hi 1


Optimal labor supply within the household after the arrival of the child is determined by the ratio:
                                                                               11 Assuming that at
w . The spouse with the lower ratio will devote more time to market work.
least one spouse works full-time, the analysis is similar to that of the unitary model, where the
                        
spouse with the higher w    ratio will work in the market if wi >  i
                                                                  i , and his/her labor supply will
                      i
be given by hi = 1 - i wi .



3.3      Summary of Model Predictions

In sum, our model suggests that compared to men, women are more likely to work fewer hours
or exit the labor force, and see their earnings decline after the birth of a child if the following
conditions hold:

  1. Both husbands and wives have the same preferences and productivities at home, but the wife
     faces a lower wage than her husband.

  2. Wives face higher wages than their husbands, but they are either more productive at home
     (f > m ), value the household public good more than their husbands (f > m ), or suffer
     a utility penalty from working in the market (f < m ).

Why would women be more productive at child rearing, value children more than men, or suffer
a greater utility penalty from working in the market? One explanation is that mothers, at least

  11                                                  
       Throughout we assume that for both partners,   w
                                                          < 2, so that at least one of them will work in the market.


                                                          10
during the child's first year do have a biological comparative advantage. However, this advantage
should dissipate quite quickly after the first year and the model predicts that women should start
increasing their work hours again. If women face higher wages than their partners, the increase in
work hours would be steeper and we should observe their partners shifting away from market work
toward home production.

On the other hand, social norms regarding gender roles could generate gender differences in the
preference parameters ( and  ). In particular, men and women may place a lower value on women's
labor market earnings if a working wife or a female breadwinner challenges conventional gender
roles within the household (Akerlof and Kranton, 2000; Bertrand et al., 2015). Gender differences in
the value placed on the household public good (for example, in the form of `better" kids or a cleaner
house) could arise because society views home production as largely being a woman's domain. Men
may face a higher cost of engaging in household production because it goes against their identity as
breadwinners in the household, while women may place a higher value on household good if they
perceive that society judges them based on their performance in that domain. It is also possible
that women simply prefer spending more time with their children relative to men, either due to
intrinsic preferences or internalized norms.


3.4    Empirical Implications of the Model

To examine the empirical implications of the model, we use the PSID to study how the effects of
parenthood on husbands and wives vary by their relative earnings potential.12 To proxy for the
relative earnings potential within couples, we use the pre-child difference in the number of years
of schooling between spouses.13 For the analysis, we consider four distinct subgroups of couples,
namely those where: (1) the husband is more educated than the wife, (2) the husband is equally
educated as the wife, (3) the wife is more educated than the husband with a gap of one to two
years of schooling, and (4) the wife is more educated than the husband with a gap of more than
two years of schooling.

The sample of household heads and spouses is similar to that used for the event-study and dynamic
decomposition analyses in Section 2.1, but with further restrictions to those with non-missing
information on spousal pre-child education. We estimate a similar event-study specification as
outlined in equation (1) for each of the four subgroups of couples, separately for women and men,

  12
      We use the terms "husband" and "wife" to refer generically to the male or female spouse or live-in partner,
regardless of marital status.
   13
      While the model suggests the use of pre-child wages as a proxy for earnings potential, using wages will entail
a smaller and selected sample since not all men and women work prior to the arrival of the first child, and respon-
dents need to be married before their first births in order for us to observe spouses' wages. The latter is less of a
constraint when education is used since we can use the education information of spouses' in later waves (even if the
spouse/partner only enters the sample post-baby).


                                                         11
and include controls for own-age and spouse's age (as dummies) and year fixed effects. Figure 3
shows the effects of parenthood on the earnings trajectories of women and men for each of the four
subgroups. The overall patterns are remarkably similar across the four couple-types within gender.
Regardless of the education differences between spouses, women experience a large, sudden, and
persistent decline in earnings with the arrival of the first child. Although the earnings decline
appears to be somewhat smaller among women who are more educated than their spouses in the
short to medium term, child penalties for these women remain substantial. In fact, after ten years,
women's earnings show little recovery and the magnitude of the long-run child penalties are similar
across the four subgroups at around 50%. By contrast, men's earnings are essentially unaffected
by parenthood across the four couple-types.14

Within the context of the household model presented earlier, the fact that the child earnings penalty
is observed across all groups of women, even those that are much more educated (and likely to face
higher market wages) than their husbands, suggests that unless women are considerably more
productive in home production than men, comparative advantage alone cannot easily rationalize
the observed patterns. If comparative advantage were driving the differential impacts of children
on men and women, we should observe non-existent motherhood earnings penalties (or perhaps
even earnings premiums) for women who are considerably more skilled than their husbands. In
these couple types, men should also face some earnings penalty with parenthood. At least for
these couples, the observed motherhood penalties are likely to be driven by gender differences on
the relative weights placed on wives' vs. husbands' earnings and/or in the value of time spent on
children.15


3.4.1    Preferences or Discrimination?

In the household model presented above, the motherhood earnings penalty arises due to supply-side
decisions resulting from men's comparative advantage in the labor market or gender differences in
preferences and productivity at home. Another possibility is that a portion of the child penalty
experienced by women could be due to labor market discrimination. In the context of the model,
labor market discrimination against women could affect women's pre-birth wages, which would tend
to reinforce household specialization with the arrival of children. In addition, discrimination might
   14
     Similar patterns are observed when we examine employment as the outcome (results available on request).
   15
     Using data from Norway, Andresen and Nix (2019) examine child penalties among heterosexual, adopting, and
same-sex couples to disentangle the potential sources of the child penalty. They find that while women in heterosexual
and adopting couples experience similar motherhood penalties, the patterns differ for same-sex couples. In particular,
for same-sex couples, the birth mother experiences a larger income penalty relative to her partner, but catches up
within two years after the birth of the first child. The authors are able to rule out that costs associated with giving
birth (e.g. health effects, breastfeeding, time spent with child) ­ a factor that we do not include in our model
­ are driving the observed child penalties. Moreover, controlling for relative skill differences across spouses does
not eliminate the motherhood penalty for heterosexual and adopting couples. Overall, the authors reach a similar
conclusion that child penalties are likely driven by gender norms and gender differences in preferences for childcare.


                                                          12
also be directed especially toward working mothers, either in the form of taste-based discrimina-
tion possibly due to the violation of women's appropriate roles (e.g. Akerlof and Kranton, 2000) or
statistical discrimination due to employer expectations of more intermittent labor market attach-
ment. Such discrimination could generate a child penalty for women either by directly lowering the
post-birth wages of women, or by affecting mothers' relative career opportunities.16

While there are reasons to believe that part of the child earnings penalties experienced by women
are due to discrimination, it is not easy to empirically distinguish the role of discrimination. Earlier
papers often attributed unexplained gender wage gaps (i.e. wage differences that are not accounted
for by gender differences in measured characteristics) as estimates of discrimination; however, in
the presence of unobservable differences between men and women (e.g. unmeasured productivity
characteristics or preference parameters), such estimates are clearly not satisfactory.

More compelling evidence of discrimination have been found through the use of experiments. In
particular, Correll et al. (2007) examine whether mothers are more likely to face discrimination
when finding a job using a lab and field-based experiment. In the lab, when student evaluators
were asked to assess resumes of equally-qualified female or male job applicants who differed in terms
of parental status, mothers were perceived as less competent and less committed to paid work, and
were recommended lower starting salaries. Men, on the other hand, were not penalized for being
fathers, and were instead perceived to be more committed and recommended higher salaries. The
authors confirm their lab findings using a resume audit study where they submitted fictitious
resumes of same-sex applicants who were equally-qualified but differed in terms of parenthood.
Mothers were only called back for an interview about half as often as non-mothers, while fathers
were called back at similar rates as non-fathers. These findings are consistent with discrimination
on the basis of parental status.

Other audit and correspondence studies that examine gender biases in hiring yield findings that
are more mixed. While earlier resume audit studies of the U.S. restaurant industry by Neumark
(1996) and among young workers in the finance industry by Petit (2007) uncover evidence of hir-
ing discrimination against women, other studies find, perhaps not surprisingly, that the extent of
gender discrimination in hiring is likely to depend on the types of occupations considered. For
example, Riach and Rich (2006) conduct a resume audit study in four occupations in the UK (i.e.
accountants, computer programmers, engineers, and secretaries) and find evidence of discrimina-
tion against women in the male-dominated occupations, while men were discriminated against in
female-dominated and mixed occupations. Booth and Leigh (2010) examine four female-dominated
occupations (with female share ranging from 65 to 85 percent female) which include waitstaff, data-
entry, customer service, and sales jobs, and find that women in these jobs receive more callbacks

  16
     Women may also choose to differentially invest in skills in anticipation of such labor market discrimination,
which would show up as lower potential wages relative to men, and hence, promote household specialization.


                                                       13
than males.17 Carlsson (2011) consider positions in both female-dominated occupations (e.g. teach-
ers and nurses) and male-dominated occupations (e.g. IT professionals and drivers), and find that
while women received more callbacks in female-dominated occupations, applicants of both genders
received similar callback rates in male-dominated occupations.

While these experimental studies provide some evidence of discrimination on the basis of gender and
parental status in some settings, the implications for wage gaps and career progression are less clear.
A separate strand of literature has sought to infer the presence of taste discrimination on the part of
employers by testing a central prediction of Becker's (1957) model of taste-based discrimination that
suggests that because discrimination is unprofitable, competitive forces should reduce or eliminate
employer discrimination. These papers exploit differences or changes in competitive pressure due
to market structure, deregulation, international trade, and firm takeovers, and generally find that
an increase in competitive pressure tends to be associated with a reduction in the gender wage gap
(Hellerstein et al., 2002; Black and Strahan, 2001; Black and Brainerd, 2004; Heyman et al., 2013).

Finally, a recent working paper by Charles et al. (2018) proposes a direct test of the Becker's theory
by relating cross-state differences in women's relative labor market outcomes in the U.S. to different
points of the distribution of male and female sexism in a state (as measured using responses to
gender-related questions in the General Social Survey). Consistent with the idea that it should be
the prejudice of the marginal discriminator that determines women's relative wage and employment
outcomes, the authors show that the labor force participation gap and selection-corrected wage gap
in a state are strongly related to the attitudes of the median male in that state, but not the
attitudes of men at the tails of the distribution.18 Interestingly, percentiles of the distribution of
female sexism do not exhibit similar patterns.

While the above-mentioned studies suggest the potential role of labor market discrimination in
understanding the motherhood penalty and the remaining disparities in the labor market, it remains
difficult to distinguish the role of discrimination and preferences in most observational settings. In
what follows, we will consider potential explanations for the child penalty that focus on women's
supply-side considerations. That is, how gender pay gaps can arise even when employers practice
"equal pay for equal work."




    17
       Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004) also find that females in sales jobs receive more callbacks than males. However,
the difference is not statistically significant and much smaller than the racial gap.
    18
       In the U.S., women are about half the labor force. Assuming that the distribution of sexism among employers
is similar to the distribution of sexism among all adults in a state, the marginal discriminator is likely to be drawn
from the "middle" of the sexism distribution, whereas employers with sexist beliefs at the tails of the distributions
(i.e. the 10th and 90th percentile) are likely to be infra-marginal.


                                                          14
4        Why Children Are Key to Understanding Gender Inequality

The household model presented in the previous section suggests several reasons why children impose
a disproportionate effect on women's careers. In this section, we discuss recent research that
provides insights into these channels, namely gender differences in preferences for job attributes
(Section 4.1) and the role of gender norms and the division of household work (Section 4.2). We
then turn to a discussion of the determinants of the formation and evolution of gender norms for
the traditional division of labor within the household (Section 4.3).


4.1      Gender Differences in Preferences for Job Attributes

Regardless of the underlying sources, the household model suggests that both comparative advan-
tage and differences in preferences can generate the empirical observation that women are more
likely than men to make important career adjustments around childbirth and to take on the role
as the dominant provider of household work and childcare, even when they have careers.

Various studies have documented that women are more likely to sort into different occupations or
positions within occupations that are more compatible with their dual roles in the home and in
the labor market with the arrival of the first child. For example, using matched employer-employee
data from Sweden, Hotz et al. (2018) show parenthood is associated with a larger share of female
co-workers, share of part-time workers, and the share of female co-workers with young children
for women relative to men.19 They further construct an index of workplace "family friendliness"
and show a clear increase in the probability that mothers work at a family friendly workplace
relative to fathers, with the onset of parenthood.20 Relatedly, Pertold-Gebicka et al. (2016) examine
employment adjustments around motherhood in Denmark and find that women are more likely to
switch from private to public sector jobs after the birth of a child, and that these transitions are
related to pre-birth occupational characteristics such as time pressure and the convexity of pay (i.e.
earnings returns to working long hours).

Several recent studies have also shown that women make certain career choices in anticipation of
children.21 Adda et al. (2017) estimate a dynamic life cycle model of labor supply, fertility, and
occupational choice to study the trade-off between occupational choices and intended fertility. The

    19
      Similarly, Cha (2013) uses longitudinal data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) and
shows that mothers are more likely to exit male-dominated occupations when they work 50 hours or more per week,
but the same effect is not observed for men or childless women.
   20
      The index of family-friendliness is constructed from a model-based approach that aggregates the marginal will-
ingness to pay (MWP) for workplace attributes of mothers for each Swedish workplace in the data.
   21
      These studies build on the insights from earlier work such as Polachek (1981) and Gronau (1988) that argue
that traditional gender roles imply that women have a greater tendency to sort into occupations with lower degrees
of skill depreciation than men as they anticipate more work interruptions and shorter careers.


                                                        15
model allows different occupations to differ in terms of entry wages and rates of skill depreciation,
and amenity value with regard to children (i.e. "child-friendliness"). The model is estimated
using German data in the context of the German apprenticeship system (a 2-3 year vocational
training program in a specific occupation) which allows the authors to observe initial occupational
choices before fertility decisions are made, yet incorporates individual preferences for future fertility.
Comparing women with children to a no-child scenario,22 the authors find that about three-quarters
of the life cycle career costs associated with motherhood is due to intermittent/reduced labor
supply, and about one-quarter results from differences in wages, with selection into child-friendly
occupations at the beginning of the career accounting for close to 20% of the wage contribution.

Further evidence on this channel is provided by Wasserman (2019) who explores how workplace
time requirements affect women's occupational choice in the context of specialty decisions among
medical residents. Exploiting a 2003 policy that capped the average workweek for medical resi-
dents at 80 hours, she finds that women (but not men) increased their entry into specialties that
experienced larger reductions in residency hours due to the policy. These findings are consistent
with women choosing to enter certain occupations or positions within occupations early in their
career in anticipation of the time demands associated with future family formation.

Standard models of compensating differentials (e.g. Rosen, 1986) imply that gender differences
in preferences for workplace flexibility are likely to have important earnings consequences to the
extent that such job amenities are costly for employers to provide.23 Several studies have sought to
quantify gender differences in the preferences for workplace flexibility using hypothetical job choices
and its implications on the gender pay gap. Hypothetical job choice experiments are a popular way
of estimating individual preferences for workplace (and other non-market) attributes since they
allow researchers to sidestep thorny empirical issues in isolating compensating differentials from
observational data on actual job choices.24 In these experiments, respondents are presented with
a series of hypothetical job choice scenarios that are constructed to reflect a realistic menu of
potential job offers that vary in earnings, and other job characteristics (e.g. hours of work, work
hours flexibility, the option to work part-time, etc.). In each scenario, respondents are asked to
choose which job they prefer from a menu of two or three job offers and the scenarios are then
repeated and the job characteristics are varied randomly. Respondents' stated preferences for these
jobs allows researchers to construct a measure of individual preferences for each job attribute in
terms of earnings that respondents are willing to forego for a particular job attribute (i.e. willingness
   22
       In this scenario, the model is re-estimated assuming that the woman knows ex-ante that she cannot have children.
   23
       Family-friendly job amenities are costly for employers to provide because the provision of such amenities (e.g.
shorter work hours, allowing job interruptions, flexible work arrangement, on-site daycare and paid family leave, etc.)
can be thought of as reducing employers' profit from the productivity of workers.
    24
       The issue is that observed relationships between earnings and a particular job attribute tend to be confounded
with other unobserved job attributes and individual characteristics. In fact, previous work examining compensating
differentials or workers' valuation of job conditions using realized wage differentials and job choices tend to yield
mixed results, that often "go the wrong way" (Wiswall and Zafar, 2018).


                                                          16
to pay).

Using a hypothetical job choice experiment administered as part of an application process to hire
telephone interviewers to staff a national call center, Mas and Pallais (2017) find that the average
worker is willing to give up substantial pay for the option of working from home (8% of wages) and
to avoid a schedule set by an employer on short notice (20% of wages). Moreover, they find that
women, particularly those with young children, have a higher willingness to pay for the option of
working from home and to avoid on-call scheduling. Nevertheless, while they find that women are
indeed more likely to be in jobs that offer these amenities, the gender difference in representation
across jobs is not large enough for these workplace preferences to explain the observed gender wage
gap, even with sizable compensating differentials. In a closely related study, Wiswall and Zafar
(2018) utilize a survey of hypothetical job choices administered to undergraduate students from
NYU and find that women are willing to pay significantly more than men for jobs that offer greater
work flexibility in the form of the option to work part-time and lower work hours and job stability.
On the other hand, men have higher willingness to pay for jobs with high earnings growth. Overall,
they find that gender differences in preferences for these job attributes can explain as much as a
quarter of the early-career gender gap in earnings.25

While these studies indicate how sorting across occupations and jobs on the basis of family-friendly
job attributes can contribute to the gender pay gap, in her highly influential AEA presidential
address, Goldin (2014) highlights the need to look within occupations to examine how jobs are
organized and compensated to better understand the sources of the remaining pay disparities. In
particular, she argues that some occupations disproportionately reward individuals who are willing
to work long (and particular) hours, and that these same occupations are also those that tend to
have larger gender earnings gaps. Because women tend to place a higher value on temporal flexibility
and work fewer hours, they suffer greater earnings penalties relative to men in occupations where
the rewards for long work hours are particularly large. Occupations in the business sector and law
appear to exhibit among the greatest convexity of pay with respect to time worked, suggesting that
the large penalties for shorter work hours and job interruptions (which is more frequent among
women) in these occupations is likely to be a key factor in explaining the substantial divergence in
career trajectories of MBAs and lawyers over the lifecycle as documented in studies by Bertrand
et al. (2010), Noonan et al. (2005), and Azmat and Ferrer (2017).

C´ortes and Pan (2019) provide support for a causal interpretation of the relationship between the
returns to working long hours and the gender pay gap. Exploiting cross-city variation in the influx
of low-skilled migration, the authors show that increases in the supply of long hours by skilled

  25
      Using a similar experimental set-up, Maestas et al. (2018) find that women value the option to telecommute,
having paid time off, and avoiding heavy physical activity more than men. In this study, accounting for gender
differences in the value placed on certain working conditions (especially paid time off and avoiding heavy physical
activity) reduces the gender compensation gap by about a third.


                                                        17
women (generated by the greater access to household services provided by migrants) reduce gender
pay gaps among the highly skilled in occupations that disproportionately reward long hours of work.
Taken together, the studies by Goldin (2014) and C´ortes and Pan (2019) suggest that restructuring
work to reduce the penalties associated with working fewer hours or policies that reduce the gender
gap in work hours can help to address the remaining pay differentials.


4.2   Gender Norms and the Division of Household Work

Having shown that children have very different effects on the career choices and trajectories of
women and men, a question that naturally arises is ­ why are women still expected to be the main
providers of childcare within the household, despite the convergence in economic roles in society
today?

As alluded to in our discussion of the household model, gender norms are likely to be responsible for
the unequal division of non-market work within the household, especially in situations where women
have a comparative advantage in market work. Indeed, the notion that individuals are unwilling to
act in contravention of understood or agreed upon behaviors has a long-standing history in the social
sciences, dating back at least to Smith (1759). In their seminal paper, Akerlof and Kranton (2000)
incorporate insights about social identity from sociology and social psychology into economics
to provide a formal way for thinking about how identity considerations can influence individual
behaviors and choices in a variety of settings. Akerlof and Kranton (2000) define identity as one's
sense of self, or one's sense of belonging to a social category that is coupled with expectations about
how individuals in that category should behave. In their proposed model, identity directly enters
an individual's utility function, and influences behavior and outcomes because deviating from the
prescribed behavior associated with one's social category is costly. Applying the model to the
concept of gender identity norms, the relevant social categories are those of "man" and "woman,"
and both genders may (un)conciously adopt or adhere to these norms in social interactions so as
to avoid social sanctions or because they have internalized these norms.

Particularly relevant to the division of household work and women's labor supply choices, espe-
cially when children are present, is the set of norms regarding the appropriate role of women in
society. These identity norms include prescriptions such as "men should work in market, while
women manage the home." Earlier attempts to test the relevance of gender identity norms ex-
amine cross-country and within-country variation in gender role attitudes and its correlation with
women's (relative) labor market outcomes. For example, Fortin (2005) uses data from the World
Values Surveys in 25 OECD countries over a ten-year period and shows that countries with more
traditional views toward women as homemakers and men as breadwinners have lower female labor
force participation and larger gender pay gaps. Similar correlations are also observed across states


                                                  18
in the U.S. (Charles et al., 2018). Papers by Fortin (2015) and Cotter et al. (2011) use data from
the General Social Survey to examine trends in gender role attitudes within the U.S. from 1977
to the late 2000s. Strikingly, both papers find that the evolution of gender role attitudes appears
to closely mirror the evolution of female labor force participation over time ­ trends toward more
progressive gender roles appears to have stalled since the mid-1990s, precisely coinciding with the
plateauing of female labor force participation in the U.S. Nevertheless, while these correlations are
suggestive that gender identity norms matter for women's labor market outcomes, it is difficult to
attach a causal interpretation given that the associations could be driven by reverse causality or
unobserved differences (across countries or over time).

Another strand of papers seeks to isolate the causal effect of cultural norms regarding gender roles
on women's outcomes by focusing on international migrants and exploiting the feature that immi-
grants who reside in the same country face similar market forces and institutions, yet are exposed
to different cultural factors depending on their country of origin or ancestry. The idea is that by
comparing immigrants from different origin countries who are now residing in the same countries
and therefore face similar economic conditions and institutional environment, differences in behav-
iors and outcomes across immigrants from different source countries can be attributed to differences
in cultural exposure. Fernandez and Fogli (2009) show that second-generation American women
whose ancestors originate from countries with higher female labor force participation are more
likely to work, even after controlling for individual and spousal socio-demographic characteristics.
Interestingly, the authors find that husband's ancestry also matters, and appears to be more im-
portant than wives' ancestry in driving the work outcomes of married women. Studies by Antecol
(2000) and Blau et al. (2011) similarly find that home-country female labor participation rates are
predictive of the labor supply behavior of first-generation American immigrant women. Further,
Blau et al. (2011) show that when exposed to the labor market conditions and social norms in the
U.S., immigrant women from both high-female participating and low-female participating countries
eventually achieve similar participation rates as comparable natives, suggesting a relatively high
degree of cultural assimilation.

As a more direct test of the role of gender identity considerations in limiting the further convergence
in women's labor market outcomes, especially as women's position in the labor market improves
relative to men, Bertrand et al. (2015) examine the economic and social implications of the behav-
ioral prescription that "a man should earn more than his wife." Using administrative earnings data
from the U.S., the authors document that, among married couples in the U.S., the distribution of
the share of household income exhibits a sharp drop just to the right of 0.5, that is, at the point
where the wife starts to earn more than her husband. To the extent that these patterns reflect an
aversion to a situation where the wife earns more than the husband, the authors argue that such
norms should also matter for sorting in the marriage market and the evolution of relative income
within a couple. To test these implications, the authors use data from the U.S. Census to show

                                                  19
that within a marriage market over time, when a randomly chosen woman becomes more likely
to earn more than a randomly chosen man, the marriage rate declines. Within couples, when the
probability that a wife out-earns her husband increases, she is more likely to be out of the labor
force and, even if she does work, the gap between her realized and her potential income is greater
(in part due to lower hours of work). Further, the authors show that when wives earn more than
their husbands, thereby violating the identity norm, marital satisfaction is lower and these unions
are more likely to end up in a divorce. Finally, wives in such couples take on a greater share of
the housework, consistent with the idea that a "threatening" wife compensates by taking on more
housework to assuage their husband's unease with the situation (Hochschild and Machung, 1989).
The findings on women's labor supply and time-use are particularly hard to square with standard
household models based on comparative advantage (e.g. Becker, 1981) which would generally pre-
dict the opposite ­ that is, spouses with a comparative advantage in market work should spend
more time in the labor market and perform less housework.

More recent work by Bursztyn et al. (2017) show that traditional gender norms remain relevant
among highly-educated and career-oriented women. Using administrative and survey data on MBA
students at UCLA, the authors provide evidence suggesting that single women avoid actions that
may advance their careers during the MBA program as these actions are likely to signal professional
ambition to a potential future spouse and lower their marriage market value. Specifically, the
authors show that while married and unmarried female MBA students have similar grades on
exams and assignments (which are unobservable to other students), the latter have systematically
lower participation grades. This is consistent with unmarried female students not wanting to appear
too smart or ambitious in situations where they might meet their potential spouse. The authors
complement this descriptive evidence with a field experiment utilizing a real-stakes questionnaire
on job preferences and personality traits that newly admitted students are required to complete
to determine their internship placement. Students were randomly assigned to two conditions that
varied in terms of peer observability ­ in the "public" version, students were told that their answers
would be seen by a career counsellor and discussed in the career class while in the "private" version,
students were similarly told that their answers would be seen by a career counsellor but that
anonymized answers would be discussed in class. Strikingly, the authors find that single female
students report less ambitious career goals and leadership attributes in the public vs. private
condition. On the other hand, answers do not differ across the two conditions for non-single female
students or men (regardless of relationship status).

As Bertrand (2020) astutely points out in her 2020 AEA presidential address, that gender norms
and stereotypes affect women's (and men's) behavior suggest that these considerations are likely
to directly shape one's preferences when it comes to career considerations such as labor supply
decisions and occupational choice. This makes it difficult to infer whether the observed choices
that women make with regards to their caregiving role or desire for certain job attributes are due

                                                 20
to intrinsic preferences, or influenced in part by prevailing gender stereotypes and norms. This
is important as it suggests that the choices made by men and women may not reflect intrinsic
differences in preferences or skills, but may in fact, be a reflection of a broader set of constraints
imposed by society.


4.3   What Drives Gender Identity Norms?

The papers discussed above highlight the relevance of gender norms for the traditional division
of labor within the household and the disproportionate impact that children impose on women's
careers. An equally important question is what determines the formation and evolution of these
norms.

Several papers have emphasized the historical origins of gender norms, and demonstrate how cul-
tural persistence can lead to the stickiness of these norms over long periods of time. As one of
the earliest papers in this stream, Alesina et al. (2013) show that traditional agricultural practices
influenced historical gender roles and the evolution of gender norms. The authors exploit variation
in the historical geo-climatic suitability of the environment for growing crops using the plough and
show that ethnicities and countries whose ancestors practiced plough cultivation (which required
more physical strength, and hence favored male labor), rather than shifting cultivation, have lower
rates of female labor force participation even today. A related study by Hansen et al. (2015) finds
that societies with longer histories of agriculture have lower female labor force participation and
less-equal gender roles today, likely due to historically higher fertility and a reduced role for women
outside the home. Other papers in this stream have examined the long-run impacts of historical
male-biased sex ratios induced by the resettlement of convicts to Australia (Grosjean and Khattar,
2019) as well as increases in relative female income due to the cotton revolution (Xue, 2018) on
women's labor market outcomes and gender-role attitudes today.

While the historical origins of gender roles provide a possible rationalization for the persistence of
gender norms even as economic conditions change, the fact that past conditions matter does not
exclude the possibility that short-run factors can also lead to important shifts in gender norms.
Indeed, technological and medical innovations, economic development, and changes in the produc-
tion structure of the economy are likely to have contributed to the altering of women's identity
and changing gender roles in the later half of the 1990s (Goldin and Katz, 2002; Greenwood et
al., 2005; Goldin, 2006; Albanesi and Olivetti, 2016). Several studies have also used the division
of Germany into Eastern and Western blocs and the subsequent reunification to examine how po-
litical institutions such as socialism ­ which promoted women's economic inclusion ­ affect gender
roles within the household. These papers find that decades after reunification, exposure to state
socialism appears to have led to the adoption of more progressive gender-role attitudes, increased


                                                  21
women's preferences for work, and a shift away from the male breadwinner norm (Bauernschuster
and Rainer, 2012; Beblo and G¨orges, 2018; Campa and Serafinelli, 2019; Senik et al., 2020). Focus-
ing on German women on both sides of the Inner German border within the same commuting zone,
Boelmann et al. (2020) document that the motherhood penalty in terms of female labor supply is
also smaller among East German mothers relative to their West German counterparts.

The social environment has also been found to be important in the transmission of gender norms
and preference formation. Indeed, a growing body of work points toward a strong intergenerational
component in the transmission of gender-role attitudes and preferences for work. Fernandez et al.
(2004) exploit variation in the mobilization rates of men across U.S. states during WWII as a shock
to mothers' labor force participation and find that men whose mothers worked were more likely
to have working wives. Interestingly, the authors find little evidence that the work behavior of a
married woman's own mother has an effect on her labor supply. This finding suggests a potentially
important propagation mechanism for broader shifts in gender norms ­ with more of these "non-
traditional" men around, more women enter the labor market and, in turn, produce progressive
sons (Bertrand, 2011).

Using the 1979 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79), Farr´      e and Vella (2013) provide
direct evidence of the intergenerational transmission of gender-role attitudes. Further, they show
that mothers with less traditional gender-role attitudes are more likely to have working daughters
and daughter-in-laws.26 The gender socialization of children could also depend on the broader
family situation that they are exposed to. Also using the NLSY79, Bertrand (2019) shows that
exposure to non-traditional family arrangements where mothers have greater economic power in
the household is associated with more liberal gender-role attitudes among young adults. Several
papers have also explored the role of sibling sex composition and find that, for women, having a
brother relative to a sister results in them holding more traditional family attitudes and exhibiting
a greater degree of gender conformity as measured by occupational and partner choice (Rao and
Chatterjee, 2018; Brenøe, 2020; Healy and Malhotra, 2013). Possible mechanisms include sex-
typing in mixed-gender sibships or differential parental investments. Drawing on time-use data
from Denmark, Brenøe (2020) provides some suggestive evidence of "gendered parenting" among
children with an opposite-sex sibling, which she argues is likely to directly shape the interests and
behavior of their children along gender-specific lines.

Recent studies are also starting to look beyond the family environment to examine other gender
socialization channels involving an individual's broader social network. Olivetti et al. (2018) show
that women who were exposed to more peers with working mothers during adolescence were less
likely to believe that work conflicts with family responsibilities as adolescents and are more likely

   26
      Similar results have also been found in the developing country context among adolescents in India (Dhar et al.,
2019).


                                                         22
to work for pay when they have children. Maurin and Moschion (2009) document similar peer
effects on women's labor supply based on the work behavior of neighbors. A few papers provide
evidence of the cultural diffusion of gender norms through migration using large-scale migration
flows within Germany and the former USSR. These papers generally find that exposure to mi-
grants from countries of origin with more progressive gender norms prompted women in the local
population to adopt less traditional gender-role attitudes (Jarotschkin et al., 2020), and increased
women's labor market attachment in the local population and workplace (Schmitz and Weinhardt,
2019; Boelmann et al., 2020).



5     Are the Career-Family Trade-offs Widening?

Although women continue to shoulder the disproportionate burden of household work, due to gender
differences in comparative advantage and/or persistent gender norms, one might have expected
that shifts toward more progressive gender norms, changes in the economic role of women, and
technological innovations in the household sector should make it easier for modern cohorts of
women to combine career and family (Bertrand, 2018).

In this section, we consider potential countervailing forces, both on the home front and on the
work front that may have contributed (and further contribute) to widening the set of career-family
trade-offs that women face and the persistence of gender disparities in the labor market.


5.1   Increase in Parental Time Demands

The macroeconomics literature has emphasized the decline in the costs of motherhood as a key
driver of rising aggregate female labor force participation in the U.S. over much of the 20th century.
In the household sector, electrification and the widespread adoption of time-saving technologies in
the household (such as washing machines, vacuum cleaners, frozen foods, and ready-made clothes)
liberated women from household chores and contributed to the significant rise in married female
labor force participation over the last century (Greenwood et al., 2005). Further, beginning in the
1930s, there were significant declines in the health costs associated with motherhood as a result
of pharmaceutical and medical innovations which dramatically reduced mortality and morbidity
associated with childbirth. Improvements in the quality of infant formula also meant that women's
return to the labor market was less constrained by the need to breastfeed (Albanesi and Olivetti,
2016). Finally, as discussed in the previous section, stigma costs associated with a working mother
have also declined throughout much of the 20th century (Fernandez, 2013), thereby alleviating the
identity or psychic costs of being a working mother.

Yet, more recently, it appears that some of these gains may have played out or even reversed.

                                                 23
Several studies document a notable increase in parental time spent with children, even as women
spent more time in the workforce and the amount of time spent on housework declined significantly
(Aguiar and Hurst, 2007; Bianchi et al., 2006). Ramey and Ramey (2010) take a closer look
at trends in childcare in the U.S and find that the increase in parental time spent on childcare
occurred in the mid-1990s and was particularly large for college-educated parents. Indeed, they
document that in the mid-1990s, both college-educated and non-college educated mothers aged 25
to 34 spent roughly 11 hours a week on childcare activities. By the early 2000s, college-educated
mothers reported spending 20 to 22 hours, while their less educated counterparts reported spending
about 16 hours. Fathers have also increased their time spent with children, but they start from
a significantly lower base of about 4 hours per week. In the early 2000s, college-educated fathers
spend about 10 hours per week on childcare, while non-college educated fathers spend about 7
hours per week. Similar patterns have also been documented for the UK (Borra and Sevilla, 2019).

Besides time spent with children, another time-intensive aspect of childrearing that has increased in
importance is that of breastfeeding. In a striking reversal of the trends highlighted in Albanesi and
Olivetti (2016), mothers today are encouraged to breastfeed exclusively for at least six months and
infant formula, especially in the early months of a child's life, is seen as a second best option. In
line with the medical advice, rates of breastfeeding have increased significantly over the past several
decades in the U.S. and the UK. Such unexpected increases in parental time demands may explain
why recent cohorts of women appear to systematically underestimate the employment consequences
of motherhood and are "surprised" by how difficult it is to combine work and family (Kuziemko et
al., 2018).

While it remains unclear what is the driving force behind the observed increase in parental time
demands, several explanations have been proposed. Ramey and Ramey (2010) argue that the
increase in parental investments in childcare in the U.S., especially among the highly-educated,
could be due to growing competition for slots in top colleges due to the high returns associated
with selective colleges. As suggestive evidence in support of this view, they show that parental
time spent with children are less pronounced in Canada, where the hierarchy among colleges is less
steep. Providing additional support for this explanation, Borra and Sevilla (2019) show, using data
from UK, that increased competition for university places in the 1980s and early 1990s coincided
with a larger increase in the time spent on educational activities with children by highly-educated
parents relative to less-educated parents.

Doepke and Zilibotti (2017) propose a theory of parent-child relations to understand how parenting
styles are determined and argue that increases in inequality and the accompanying rise in the
returns to education and skills raises the returns to the investment in children's human capital and,
consequently, promotes authoritative and intensive parenting. The authors argue that when future
stakes are high, "helicopter parenting", which is more engaged and time-intrusive, is preferred as


                                                  24
it seeks to cultivate a sense of responsibility and accountability that will help children develop into
high-achievers. The authors show that the model predictions line up with cross-country variation in
inequality and parenting styles, as well as changes in parenting style over time and across education
groups within the U.S.

The apparent slowdown in the shift toward more egalitarian gender norms (as briefly discussed in
Section 4.2) may have also contributed to women's increasing challenges in combining work and
family. Fortin (2005) documents that while the share of men and women holding traditional gender-
role attitudes have been declining over time, there has been little progress in gender attitudes since
the post-1940 birth cohorts. This appears to be especially true for the set of views regarding
the potential conflict between maternal employment and children's wellbeing. Several sociologists
attribute the stalling of gender norms as reflecting "egalitarian essentialism," where women and men
should have equal opportunities at work, but are free to choose different roles based on beliefs about
the essential nature of men and women (e.g. men and women are more naturally suited to some
roles than others). This might explain why there has been greater progress toward gender-neutral
attitudes on aspects related to the public sphere (e.g employment opportunities and leadership
abilities), but a stalling, or perhaps even reversal in the upward trend toward more progressive
attitudes concerning the role of women within the family as a working mother or wife (Charles
and Grusky, 2004; Cotter et al., 2011; Pepin and Cotter, 2018). Indeed, there is speculation
that women's advances in education and the labor market may in fact serve to reinforce gender
essentialism in the family (Pepin and Cotter, 2018; England, 2010). Further, it is possible that
some "dormant" identity norms are becoming increasingly relevant as women's economic position
improves. In a world where women's human capital accumulation and labor market attachment
is low, norms such as "a man should earn more than his wife" have little practical relevance;
however, as women's earnings potential improves, such norms would start to gain traction and
create situations where women seeking to balance careers and families may spend even more time
at home to assuage their partners and their guilt (Bertrand, 2018; Bertrand et al., 2015).


5.2   Workplace Demands and Couple Equity

Turning to the market work side of things, changes in the structure of jobs that increased the
rewards for inflexible work is another countervailing force that is making it more challenging for
women to combine work and family. We previously discussed how women's lower willingness to
work long hours and greater demand for temporal flexibility can lead to greater earnings penalties
relative to men in occupations that disproportionately value such worker attributes (Goldin, 2014).
Several researchers have documented that the earnings premium for working long hours appears
to have increased considerably since the 1980s for most occupations, with college-educated workers
experiencing particularly large increases over time (Kuhn and Lozano, 2008; C´ortes and Pan, 2019).


                                                  25
In particular, Cha and Weeden (2014) show that rising returns to overwork, defined as working 50
or more hours per week, coupled with the gender gap in the propensity to work overtime, worked
to slow the convergence of the gender wage gap during the 1979 to 2009 period by an estimated 10
percent of the total wage gap. For professional and managerial occupations, the authors estimate
that the gender wage gap would have narrowed by an additional 30 and 20 percent, respectively,
in the absence of the rise in the returns to overwork during the sample period.

The precise sources of the increase over time in the rewards for working long (and inflexible) hours
remain unclear. Cha and Weeden (2014) discuss some of the possible drivers. These include the dif-
fusion of tournament compensation and promotion systems, where small differences in productivity
can result in large differences in pay (Lazear and Rosen, 1981). Lemieux et al. (2009) document
that an increasing fraction of jobs in the U.S. labor market utilize performance pay schemes. Com-
ponents of performance pay such as bonus pay and commissions are typically determined based
on the relative performance across workers and are likely to incentivize workers to work longer
hours to "win" the tournament and realize higher returns. Moreover, when actual productivity is
hard to observe, firms may rely on work hours as a proxy for productivity, leading to a "rat-race"
equilibrium where workers supply long hours of work to signal their productivity and commitment
to the job (Landers et al., 1996). The secular rise in inequality in the labor market and the rising
returns to skill is likely to increase the returns to signaling. Even absent signaling, rising wage
inequality could increase the returns to long work hours by incentivizing workers to obtain more
skill on the job in order to gain access to better, high-paying jobs (Michelacci and Pijoan-Mas,
2012). Finally, other structural shifts such as technological change and globalization may have
also increased the returns for high-ability individuals to increase their work hours to take greater
advantage of productivity-enhancing technologies and the access to larger markets. Indeed, future
work that can shed more light on the key drivers of the increase in the returns to working long
hours would be highly valuable.

Regardless of the underlying sources, rising returns to inflexible work arrangements not only imposes
greater penalties on the fewer hours that women already work, but also creates a situation where
striving for equity within couples becomes more costly (Goldin, 2019). From a household's financial
standpoint, in the face of rising returns to long work hours, it makes more sense for one partner
to specialize in household work so that the other partner can reap the sizable benefits from higher
work commitment, rather than for both partners to contribute equally to home production and
market work. Essentially, rising returns to job inflexibility would tend to increase the returns to
specialization within the household, making it more difficult for women (even the highly-educated
ones) to achieve gender parity. Bertrand (2018) further highlights that this phenomenon is likely
to be even more binding today for educated women in high-paying occupations as many more of
them are likely to be married and have children than before. For these couples, both husbands and
wives are likely to be in jobs with competing demands, making it more challenging for women to

                                                 26
achieve their full earnings potential.



6     Policies to Address the Remaining Gender Disparities

In this section, we discuss the impact of policies that seek to address the remaining gender dispari-
ties, focusing on policies that are particularly relevant for the set of work-family considerations that
are crucial for understanding the role of children in gender inequality. These include family-friendly
policies that (1) promote work-family balance for women such as maternity leave provisions and
flexible work arrangements, (2) target maternal labor supply by improving affordability and access
to childcare, and (3) attempt to equalize childcare by encouraging fathers to participate in childcare
through paternity leave policy. On the work front, we discuss changes in the structure of work as
a possible demand-side response.


6.1     Family-Friendly Policies

6.1.1    Maternity Leave Policies

To address the competing work and family considerations that many women face, many public poli-
cies and firm-level policies aim to facilitate women's participation in the labor market by augmenting
work-family amenities such as paid maternity leave entitlements, the option to work part-time, as
well as access to and subsidies for childcare. Many firms also try to make their workplaces more
attractive to women by offering women options to work remotely as well as greater flexibility over
the scheduling of their work day.

The vast majority of developed countries have in place some form of parental leave entitlement
at the national-level that provides workers (typically the mother) with time-off work to care for
newborn children. With the exception of the U.S., a substantial portion of maternity leave is
paid and accompanied by some period of job protection. Nevertheless, there is a wide variation in
maternity leave provisions across countries. Across OECD countries, most offer between 14 and
22 weeks of employment-protected maternity leave and between 16 to 60 weeks of paid maternity
leave (Olivetti and Petrongolo, 2017). Theoretically, the effects of maternity leave policies on
women's labor force attachment and the gender pay gap are ambiguous. On the one hand, these
policies encourage employment continuity since women have a job available when they are ready
to return back to work. Moreover, by enabling them to retain firm-specific or occupation-specific
human capital, maternity leave policies can help to increase women's wages and narrow the gender
pay gap. On the other hand, extended maternity leave could encourage women to take longer
leaves (especially during the benefit period) and make it difficult for them to effectively re-enter


                                                  27
employment or to remain on the same career track. Women may also develop a stronger attachment
to their children during long leave periods leading to a greater desire to spend even more time with
the child (Schonberg and Ludsteck, 2014). Besides these labor supply effects, on the demand side,
longer parental leaves likely raise the costs of hiring women and employers may also be less inclined
to assign women of child-bearing age to important jobs or clients (in anticipation of their future
time off from work).

Recent research has found mixed effects of maternity leave policies on women's labor market out-
comes. This is perhaps unsurprising given the wide variation in policy details across countries and
over time. Overall, cross-country evidence exploiting within country variation in maternity leave
policies over time suggests that moderate job-protected leave entitlements of up to about one year
tend to be associated with higher female employment and positive or zero effects on wages, while
longer leaves adversely affect the same outcomes. The positive effects of moderate job-protected
leave entitlements on female employment appear to be concentrated among low-skilled women,
while longer maternity leaves tend to widen the gender earnings gap among high-skilled women
(Olivetti and Petrongolo, 2017; Blau and Kahn, 2013; Ruhm, 1998). Micro-level studies that exploit
the staggered introduction of maternity leave policies and later reforms tend to find more muted
effects. Careful studies by Lalive et al. (2014) and Schonberg and Ludsteck (2014) examining ma-
jor expansions in maternity leave coverage in Austria and Germany, respectively, find that these
extensions lead to delays in mothers' return to work with virtually no effect on the employment
rates and earnings for women three to six years after childbirth. Schonberg and Ludsteck (2014)
further show that the extension of the maternity benefit period beyond the job protection period in
Germany had significant negative effects on women's long-run employment and earnings, suggesting
that policy details such as job protection are important in understanding the potential effects of
benefit extensions.

Studies of the U.S. experience has been more limited, largely due to the lack of policy changes.
Several studies have examined the effects of the introduction of the 1993 Family and Medical Leave
Act (FMLA) which provides 12 weeks of job-protected unpaid leave to qualifying workers. Most
of these studies find that while the FMLA increased leave-taking, it had little measurable impact
on the employment and wages of eligible women (Waldfogel, 1999; Han et al., 2009; Baum, 1999).
Recent work by Thomas (2016) finds that the while the FMLA resulted in modest gains in the
likelihood of employment for women hired after the introduction of the policy, these women were
less likely to be promoted relative to comparable women hired before the FMLA. Other studies
exploit the implementation of paid family leave policies at the state level in Rhode Island and
California. Studies using survey data and a difference-in-difference approach generally find that
the these policies improve mothers' employment and wage outcomes in the short-run (Rossin-Slater
et al., 2013; Baum and Ruhm, 2016). However, a more recent study by Bailey et al. (2019) using
universe of individual tax returns from California find little evidence that the California's 2004 Paid

                                                  28
Leave Act improved women's career outcomes in the short or longer-term. Moreover, the authors
find that access to paid leave does not appear to increase the likelihood that women remain with
their pre-birth employer, suggesting that the retention of firm-specific human capital may have
played a limited role in promoting employment continuity.


6.1.2   Childcare Provisions

Another set of public policies seek to support maternal employment by providing direct substitutes
for maternal time in childcare in the form of affordable and accessible childcare. Such policies
include childcare subsidies and improvements in the availability and quality of childcare, as well as
changes in the school schedule. In general, studies find that improving access to childcare increases
the labor force participation and earnings of mothers, especially among single or low-skilled women.
Focusing on the U.S. experience, Gelbach (2002) shows that kindergarten enrollment led to sub-
stantial increases in the labor supply of single mothers, but less so for married mothers. Cascio
(2009) find similar positive effects on the maternal labor supply of single mothers (with no chil-
dren under the age of five) resulting from the expansion of access to publicly-funded kindergarten
programs in the 1960s and 1970s. Evaluations of more recent universal pre-kindergarten programs,
however, yield more mixed findings. Fitzpatrick (2010) uses a regression discontinuity framework
and finds that access to universal pre-K in Georgia and Oklahoma in the 1990s increases statewide
preschool enrollment significantly, but has little effect on the labor supply of most women. Cascio
and Schanzenbach (2013) exploit the timing and age-targeting of the Georgia and Oklahoma pro-
grams (relative to the rest of the U.S.) within a difference-in-difference framework and find some
evidence of a modest increase in the employment rate of less-educated mothers. However, these
estimated effects, are somewhat sensitive to the choice of specification, and if anything, only during
the first few years after the program was in place.

A number of studies have examined the introduction of highly subsidized, universally accessible
childcare in the Canadian province of Quebec in 1997. These studies find that the "$5 per Day
Childcare" significantly increased maternal labor supply, with the labor force participation of moth-
ers rising by almost 8 percentage points (Baker et al., 2008; Lefebvre and Merrigan, 2008). These
effects continue to persist up to at least 10 years after the policy was introduced (Haeck et al.,
2015). One possible explanation for the larger effects observed in these studies relative to the U.S.
studies could be because the reforms studied in the U.S. had narrower coverage and are less com-
prehensive. For example, the universal Pre-K programs in the U.S. typically apply only to children
aged 4 years old and covers childcare of at most 6 hours per day, compared to 12 hours per day in
the case of the Quebec policy (Haeck et al., 2015).

Perhaps not surprisingly, in countries with relatively low childcare costs (and high female labor force


                                                  29
participation) at baseline such as Norway and France, expansions in subsidized public childcare
were found to have little impact on maternal employment (Havnes and Mogstad, 2011; Givord and
Marbot, 2015). By contrast, the effects of childcare subsidies on maternal labor supply tend to be
larger in countries like Spain and Germany where female labor force participation and the supply
of childcare spaces were low pre-reform (Nollenberger and Rodr´ iguez-Planas, 2015; Bauernschuster
and Schlotter, 2015).

Another set of papers study the effects of the increased availability of affordable and flexible child-
care, in the form of low-skilled immigrants in the domestic sector. In countries such as the U.S.
and Europe, many low-skilled immigrants tend to work disproportionately in service sectors that
substitute for household production. As such, increases in low-skilled immigration tend to lower
the prices of household services (Cortes, 2008) and potentially induce natives, especially those with
the highest opportunity cost of time, to outsource household production and potentially increase
labor supply. Other countries such as Singapore, Hong Kong, and the Middle East have explicit
programs that grant temporary visas to foreign domestic workers (FDW) to work in the countries'
household sector. FDWs are a source of affordable, live-in domestic help for a large number of
households in these countries ­ in Hong Kong, the proportion of households hiring at least one
FDW is close to 8% in 2006, and among household with young children, more than one in three
hired at least one FDW. Unlike government-provided childcare subsidies, these market-based alter-
natives to reducing childcare costs are more likely to alter the time-use decisions of skilled women
(i.e. those commanding higher wages in the market) as they face the greatest incentives to purchase
household services in the market.

Studies on the impacts of low-skilled immigration on women's labor supply typically find that
low-skilled immigration inflows into a country increases the hours worked and the likelihood of
working long hours, particularly among highly-skilled women. In particular, Cortes and Tessada
(2011) exploit historical cross-city variation in low-skilled immigrant concentration in 1970 to isolate
plausibly exogenous changes in low-skilled immigrant flows across US cities and over time. Their
estimates suggest that the low-skilled immigration wave from 1980 to 2000 increased the amount
of time that women in the top quartile of the wage distribution spent in market work by about
20 minutes per week. In addition, low-skilled immigration also increased the likelihood of highly-
skilled women working long hours at their job (i.e. more than 50 or 60 hours per week). Follow-up
studies find qualitatively similar patterns in countries such as Spain, Italy, and Germany (Farr´   e et
al., 2011; Barone and Mocetti, 2011; Forlani et al., 2020). In recent work, C´   ortes and Pan (2019)
further demonstrate that low-skilled immigration inflows to the U.S have decreased the gender pay
gap in occupations that disproportionately reward long work hours and induce young women to
enter occupations with higher returns to overwork.

Foreign domestic worker programs that allow for the systematic importation of low-skilled foreigners


                                                  30
into the domestic sector also appear to have large effects on encouraging the labor force participation
of mothers with young children in the host country. Using Taiwan as a control group, Cortes
and Pan (2013) find that the foreign worker program in Hong Kong led to a 8 to 12 percentage
point increase in employment of women with a young child, relative to females with a relatively
older child, from 1978 to 2006. Moreover, the observed increase is almost entirely driven by the
increase in employment rates of middle and highly-skilled females. The larger response of maternal
employment to the availability of FDWs relative to other policies that shift childcare costs such as
childcare subsidies or low-skilled immigration flows is likely due to the substantially more flexible
household services offered by live-in FDWs. Indeed, by providing essentially all-day childcare and
taking care of other household tasks such as cooking and cleaning, in many ways, FDWs represent
one of the most complete forms of outsourcing household production.


6.1.3    Paternity Leave

Many high-income countries have introduced legislation aimed at encouraging fathers to take up
parental leave by allocating a portion of parental leave for the exclusive use of fathers. OECD
data on parental leave policies in 41 countries around the world indicate that while maternity leave
still forms the majority of mandated paid parental leave in most countries, leave earmarked for
the exclusive use of fathers (e.g. "daddy months" or "daddy quotas") is now available in more
than 80% of the countries.27 In most cases, such paternity leave provisions are quite modest (e.g.
two weeks or less), though several European countries offer more generous provisions of about two
months of leave or more to new fathers. Interestingly, Japan and Korea offer among the most
generous parental leave allocations for fathers ­ 30 weeks and 15 weeks, respectively ­ however,
take-up remains exceedingly low in these countries.28

Paternity leave policies are particularly interesting from the point of view of trying to address the
key factors as to why children have disproportionate effects on the careers of women relative to
men. By incentivizing new fathers to take on a bigger role in their children's lives, such policies
can potentially help to accelerate the adjustment of social norms that ascribe women as dominant
providers of childcare and promote a more equitable division of childcare within the household
(Bertrand, 2018). Of course, the effectiveness of paternity leave in addressing the core of what
is holding women back in the labor market depends considerably on the extent to which father's
early involvement persists beyond the coverage of the policy, and in the longer term, whether such
policies result in a broader shift in social norms.

Given the relatively recent introduction of paternity leave policies in most countries, the evaluation
  27
     "Among 41 countries, only U.S. lacks paid parental leave," Pew Research Center, 16 December, 2019.
  28
     See, for example: "Why Icelandic Dads Take Parental Leave and Japanese Dads Don't," The Atlantic, January
23, 2020.


                                                     31
of their effects on women's outcomes is still at an early stage. Recent studies find that parental
leave quotas reserved for the exclusive use by fathers are indeed effective at increasing paternity
leave-taking in countries like Norway, Sweden, Canada, and Spain. Nevertheless, fathers rarely
extend their leave beyond the duration of the dedicated quota. These studies find mixed effects of
paternity leave provisions on women's outcomes and the division of labor within the household. An
early evaluation of the introduction of daddy quotas in Sweden in 1995, that reserved one month
of the total parental leave for fathers, presents little evidence that the reform induced fathers to
take on more childcare duties and improved women's longer-term career outcomes (Ekberg et al.,
2013). Similarly, Cools et al. (2015) find no evidence that the introduction of the daddy quota in
Norway improved women's earnings and labor supply, and if anything, the policy might even have
had negative impacts on women's labor market outcomes.

On the other hand, more recent studies of paternity leave policies in Germany, Quebec (Canada),
and Spain have pointed toward some persistent effects on father's involvement in childcare and the
division of household work (Schober, 2014; Patnaik, 2019; Farr´   e and Gonz´
                                                                            alez, 2014). In particular,
Patnaik (2019) finds that the introduction of the Quebec Parental Insurance Program (QPIP) in
2006 that reserved 5 weeks of leave for fathers reduced the gendered division of labor within couples
several years after the end of the leave period. In addition, the program yielded large positive effects
on mothers' labor market outcomes. Perhaps surprisingly, Farr´       e and Gonz´alez (2014) show that
modest paternity leave provisions of two weeks in Spain generated persistent positive effects on
father's childcare involvement and women's labor market attachment up to six years after the
introduction of the reform. Further, they document that the paternity leave provisions led to
delays in subsequent fertility, possibly due to increased awareness of childbearing costs among men
or shifts in preferences toward child quality (over quantity).

While it is not entirely clear what drives the differences in the effects of paternity leave policies
across the various studies, one possibility is that earlier papers tended to focus on the early adopters
of paternity leave reforms that were Scandinavian countries. In these countries, the division of
household labor is considerably more egalitarian than in most countries, and women have relatively
high labor force attachment; therefore, it is probably more difficult to move the needle in terms of
these outcomes. Nevertheless, more work needs to be done to evaluate paternity leave policies in
other country contexts to better understand when and how these policies work.

Overall, paternity leave policies have the potential to address the core set of challenges that women
face in achieving both career and family. However, it is worth pointing out that the effectiveness
of such policies is also likely to be constrained by the broader set of norms. For example, Dahl et
al. (2014) document considerable peer effects in paternity leave-taking, suggesting that take-up is a
function of fathers' identity and reputational concerns. Such concerns are likely to explain why, in
spite of generous policy provisions, paternity leave take-up remains very low in countries like Japan


                                                  32
and Korea where traditional gender norms continue to be deep-rooted. Moreover, a recent study
by Avdic and Karimi (2018) also points toward the possibility of unintended negative effects on
marital stability due to the emergence of role conflicts in the family in the short run, perhaps due to
deviations from initially agreed upon roles within the household. Finally, some work suggests that
fathers might, in fact, face higher penalties for taking parental leave or time-off than mothers. Such
differential penalties could arise due to the violation of "ideal worker" norms, which are applied
more strongly to men than women (Weisshaar, 2018).


6.2   Changing the Structure of Work

Most of the public policies aim to address gender disparities in the labor market by focusing on
constraints to women's labor supply by attempting to substitute for maternal time in childcare
by subsidizing childcare services, providing market-based alternatives, or encouraging fathers to
contribute. On the surface, other policies such as the provision of maternity leave and flexible work
arrangements provide women with more options to balance their family commitments while working;
however, because providing such flexibility and time away from work is generally costly from the
point of view of employers, such policies do little in terms of improving women's employability and
addressing gender pay gaps.

Apart from targeting women's labor supply, another policy approach is to focus on providing
employers and firms with incentives to reorganize work to reduce the penalties associated with
flexible work arrangements (e.g. shorter work hours or option to take time off work). To the extent
that jobs can be redesigned to enhance temporal flexibility with little to no productivity costs,
this would reduce the labor market penalties for time spent on childcare for both genders. Apart
from reducing the earnings penalties associated with women's stronger preferences for workplace
flexibility, such changes in the workplace will also help to promote couple equity by reducing the
added incentive for one spouse to specialize in market work in order to yield the higher returns
associated with fuller work commitment (Goldin, 2019).

Exactly how public policy can play a role in promoting the redesign and reorganization of work is
not entirely clear, however. Goldin and Katz (2011) and Goldin (2014) discuss several examples of
occupations and sectors that have moved toward greater hours flexibility such as physicians, phar-
macists, and veterinarians. The causes of these changes are varied, ranging from the reorganization
of work to achieve economies of scale, reductions in labor costs to changes possibly induced by
employee pressure. One possibility is for governments to ease coordination across competing firms
towards more family-friendly work organization through the provision of incentives and informa-
tion. Another indirect approach might be to adopt policies that attempt to push more women to
top organizational layers to accelerate job redesign. Nevertheless, a clearer understanding of the


                                                  33
sources of the returns to working long (and inflexible) hours, and how it varies across sectors and
occupations, would go a long way in helping with the design of effective policies to reorganize work.



7    Conclusion

As education gaps have closed and reversed in favor of women in recent decades, young women are
entering the labor force in larger numbers than ever before and are increasingly starting their careers
on similar footing as men. Yet, their labor market trajectories diverge sharply with the arrival of
the first child. The differential impact that children have on men and women's careers continues
to be a first-order explanation for the remaining gender gaps in the labor market. Applying the
dynamic decomposition framework proposed by Kleven et al. (2019a) to microdata from the PSID,
we document that the proportion of the gender earnings gap that can be attributed to children
versus other factors is substantial and has increased over the past four decades. By the mid-2010s,
child-related inequality accounted for nearly two-thirds of the pay gap.

To understand why parenthood might produce differential outcomes for men and women, we propose
a simple household decision-making model that incorporates a set of preference parameters over
own versus spousal consumption and the value placed on the household public good (e.g. children
or other home-related amenities). Treating fertility as exogenous in the model, we consider the
implications of the model for wives' and husbands' labor market choices before and after the arrival
of children in the case where they have similar preferences (i.e. unitary household) and where they
have different preferences (i.e. non-cooperative). The model suggests that child earnings penalties
for mothers (but not fathers) will arise in unitary households only if women face a lower wage
than their husbands. If women face higher wages than their husbands, then motherhood earnings
penalties can only be rationalized if women are more productive at home, value the household
good more, or households incur a utility penalty from women working in the market. Such gender
differences in preference parameters could be generated by long-standing social norms regarding
gender roles. We show, using the PSID data, that child earnings penalties are observed for all
groups of women, even those that are much more educated than their spouses (and are likely
to face higher market wages), suggesting that comparative advantage alone is unlikely to explain
women's relative underperformance in the labor market.

Building on the insights provided by the household model, our review of the recent literature
provides further insights into the various adjustments that women make in anticipation of and
after childbirth. Indeed, what the economics literature typically regards as gender differences in
the preferences for workplace attributes are likely to stem from the fact that women respond to
the arrival of children differently from men, and choose occupations and career-tracks that are
more compatible with their role as the dominant provider of childcare within the family. Indeed, as


                                                  34
suggested by the model, a growing body of research highlighting how gender identity considerations
and social norms influence a variety of economic and social outcomes can help to rationalize why
women continue to shoulder a disproportionate burden of childcare, despite the convergence in
economic roles in society.

In thinking about how to address the remaining gender disparities in the labor market, it is quite
clear that work-family trade-offs continue to be a key constraint for women in terms of achieving
their full labor market potential. Our review of the existing slate of public policies aimed at
addressing these trade-offs suggests that family-friendly policies that subsidize women's time out
of the labor market (e.g. extended maternity leave) have little positive (and sometimes negative)
impacts on women's longer-run employability and earnings. On the other hand, policies that enable
women to outsource childcare more effectively tend to yield positive effects on female labor force
participation, especially in societies with low rates of maternal employment. Another set of policies
that appear particularly promising are those that attempt to shift gender roles and gender norms
directly by encouraging fathers to take up more parental leave. Nevertheless, the effectiveness
of such policies may be constrained by the broader set of norms, and the challenge hinges on
ensuring that paternity leave-taking early in a child's life translates to more sustained involvement
in childcare in the years that follow.

Several countervailing forces, both on the home front and on the work front, raise concerns that
modern cohorts of women and men increasingly face a catch-22 with rising time-demands associated
with parenthood and work. Our view is that given binding time constraints, there is a need to look
beyond supply-side policies and encouraging women to close the hours gap. Policies and efforts to
weaken traditional gender norms and reorganize work in such a way so as to remove the penalties for
the kind of time-flexibility that modern parents require in order to meet the demands of parenthood
today are likely to be more effective in addressing the remaining gaps. Indeed, women and men
would benefit from the choice to pursue career and family aspirations. Only when such freedom of
choice prevails, will society be able to fully embrace the talents of both men and women.




                                                 35
References
Adda, Jerome, Christian Dustmann, and Katrien Stevens, "The Career Costs of Children,"
 Journal of Political Economy, 2017, 125 (2), 293­337.

Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst, "Measuring Trends in Leisure: The Allocation of Time over
 Five Decades," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007, 22 (3), 969­1006.

Akerlof, George A. and Rachel E. Kranton, "Economics and Identity," The Quarterly Journal
 of Economics, August 2000, 115 (3), 715­753.

Albanesi, Stefania and Claudia Olivetti, "Gender Roles and Medical Progress," Journal of
 Political Economy, 2016, 124 (3), 650­695.

Alesina, Alberto, Paola Giuliano, and Nathan Nunn, "On the Origins of Gender Roles:
 Women and the Plough," Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2013, 128 (2), 469­527.

Andresen, Martin E. and Emily Nix, "What Causes the Child Penalty? Evidence from Same
 Sex Couples and Policy Reforms," Technical Report, Discussion Papers 902, Statistics Norway,
 Research Department 2019.

Angelov, Nikolay, Per Johansson, and Erica Lindahl, "Parenthood and the Gender Gap in
 Pay," Journal of Labor Economics, 2016, 34 (3), 545­579.

Antecol, Heather, "An Examination of Cross-Country Differences in the Gender Gap in Labor
 Force Participation Rates," Labour Economics, 2000, 7 (4), 409­426.

Avdic, Daniel and Arizo Karimi, "Modern Family? Paternity Leave and Marital Stability,"
 American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2018, 10 (4), 283­307.

Azmat, Ghazala and Barbara Petrongolo, "Gender and the Labor Market: What Have We
 Learnt from Field and Lab Experiments?," Labour Economics, 2014, 30, 32­40.

   and Rosa Ferrer, "Gender Gaps in Performance: Evidence from Young Lawyers," Journal of
  Political Economy, 2017, 125 (5), 1306­1355.

Bailey, Martha J., Tanya S. Byker, Elena Patel, and Shanthi Ramnath, "The
 Long-Term Effects of California's 2004 Paid Family Leave Act on Women's Careers: Evi-
 dence from U.S. Tax Data," Technical Report 26416, National Bureau of Economic Research,
 https://www.nber.org/papers/w26416.pdf 2019.

Baker, Michael, Jonathan Gruber, and Kevin Milligan, "Universal Child Care, Maternal
 Labor Supply, and Family Well?Being," Journal of Political Economy, 2008, 116 (4), 709­745.

Barone, Guglielmo and Sauro Mocetti, "With a Little Help from Abroad: The Effect of Low-
 Skilled Immigration on the Female Labor Supply," Labour Economics, 2011, 18 (5), 664­675.

Bauernschuster, Stefan and Helmut Rainer, "Political Regimes and the Family: How Sex-
 Role Attitudes Continue to Differ in Reunified Germany," Journal of Population Economics,
 2012, 25, 5­27.


                                             36
   and Martin Schlotter, "Public Child Care and Mothers' Labor supply?Evidence from Two
  Quasi-Experiments," Journal of Public Economics, 2015, 123, 1­16.

Baum, Charles L., "The Effect of State Maternity Leave Legislation and the 1993 Family and
 Medical Leave Act on Employment and Wages," Labour Economics, 1999, 10 (5), 573­596.

Baum, Christopher and Christopher Ruhm, "The Effects of Paid Family Leave in California
 on Labor Market Outcomes," Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 2016, 35 (2), 333­356.

Beblo, Miriam and Luise G¨    orges, "On the Nature of Nurture. The Malleability of Gender
 Differences in Work Preferences," Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 2018, 151,
 19­41.

Becker, Gary, A Treatise on the Family, Harvard University Press, 1981.

Bertrand, Marianne, "New Perspectives on Gender," in Orley C. Ashenfelter and David Card,
 eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 4b, Amsterdam: Elsevier, Ltd., 2011, pp. 1545­1592.

  , "Coase Lecture: The Glass Ceiling," Economica, 2018, 85 (338), 205­231.

  , "The Gender Socialization of Children Growing Up in Nontraditional Families," AEA Papers
  and Proceedings, 2019, 109, 115­121.

  , "Gender in the Twenty-First Century," AEA Papers and Proceedings, 2020, 110, 1­24.

   and Sendhil Mullainathan, "Are Emily and Greg More Employable than Lakisha and Jamal?
  A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination," American Economic Review, 2004, 94 (4),
  991­1013.

  , Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence F. Katz, "Dynamics of the Gender Gap for Young Pro-
  fessionals in the Financial and Corporate Sectors," American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
  nomics, 2010, 2, 228­255.

  , Emir Kamenica, and Jessica Pan, "Gender Identity and Relative Income Within House-
  holds," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2015, 130 (2), 571­614.

Bianchi, Suzanne M., John P. Robinson, and Melissa A. Milkie, Changing Rhythms of
  American Family Life, New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2006.

Black, Sandra E. and Elizabeth Brainerd, "Importing Equality? The Effects of Globalization
  on Gender Discrimination," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 2004, 57 (4), 540­559.

   and Philip E. Strahan, "The Division of Spoils: Rent-Sharing and Discrimination in a
  Regulated Labor Market," American Economic Review, 2001, 91 (4), 814­831.

Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence Kahn, "The Gender Wage Gap: Extent, Trends, and Expla-
  nations," Journal of Economic Literature, 2017, 55 (3), 789­865.

   and Lawrence M. Kahn, "Wage Structure and Gender Earnings Differentials: An Interna-
  tional Comparison," Economica, 1996, pp. S29­S62.


                                              37
   and , "Understanding International Differences in the Gender Pay Gap," Journal of Labor
  Economics, 2003, 21 (1), 106­144.

  and , "Female Labor Supply: Why Is the United States Falling Behind?," American Economic
  Review, May 2013, 103 (3), 251­56.

  ,   , and Kerry L. Papps, "Gender, Source Country Characteristics, and Labor Market
  Assimilation Among Immigrants," Review of Economics and Statistics, 2011, 93 (1), 43­58.

Boelmann, Barbara, Anna Raute, and Uta Sch¨     onberg, "Wind of Change? Cultural Deter-
 minants of Maternal Labor Supply," Working Paper 2020.

Booth, Alison L. and Andrew Leigh, "Do Employers Discriminate by Gender? A Field Ex-
 periment in Female-Dominated Occupations," Economics Letters, 2010, 107 (2), 236­238.

Borra, Christina and Almudena Sevilla, "Competition for University Places and Parental
 Time Investments: Evidence from the United Kingdom," Economic Inquiry, 2019, 57 (3).

Brenøe, Anne A., "Brothers Increase Women's Gender Conformity," Working Paper 2020.

Budig, Michelle J and Paula England, "The Wage Penalty for Motherhood," American Soci-
 ological Review, 2001, pp. 204­225.

Bursztyn, Leonardo, Thomas Fujiwara, and Amanda Pallais, "'Acting Wife': Marriage
 Market Incentives and Labor Market Investments," American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (11),
 3288­3319.

Campa, Pamela and Michel Serafinelli, "Politico-Economic Regimes and Attitudes: Female
 Workers under State Socialism," Review of Economics and Statistics, 2019, 101, 233­248.

Carlsson, Magnus, "Does Hiring Discrimi- nation Cause Gender Segregation in the Swedish
 Labor Market?," Feminist Economics, 2011, 17 (3), 71­102.

Cascio, Elizabeth and Diane W. Schanzenbach, "The Impacts of Expanding Access to High-
 Quality Preschool Education," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Economic Studies Pro-
 gram, 2013, 47 (2), 127­192.

Cascio, Elizabeth U, "Maternal Labor Supply and the Introduction of Kindergartens into Amer-
 ican Public Schools," The Journal of Human Resources, 2009, 44 (1), 140­170.

Cha, Youngjoo, "Overwork and the Persistence of Gender Segregation in Occupations," Gender
 & Society, 2013, 27 (2), 158­184.

   and Kim A Weeden, "Overwork and the Slow Convergence in the Gender Gap in Wages,"
  American Sociological Review, 2014, 79 (3), 457­484.

Charles, Kerwin, Jonathan Guryan, and Jessica Pan, "The Effects of Sexism on American
 Women: The Role of Norms vs. Discrimination," Technical Report 24904, National Bureau of
 Economic Research, https://www.nber.org/papers/w24904.pdf August 2018.



                                            38
Charles, Maria and David B. Grusky, Occupational Ghettos: The Worldwide Segregation of
 Women and Men, Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 2004.

Chung, YoonKyung, Barbara Downs, Danielle H Sandler, Robert Sienkiewicz et al.,
 "The Parental Gender Earnings Gap in the United States," Technical Report 17-68, Center for
 Economic Studies Working Paper 2017.

Cools, Sara, Jon H Fiva, and Lars J Kirkebøen, "Causal Effects of Paternity Leave on
 Children and Parents," The Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 2015, 117 (3), 801­828.

Correll, Shelley J, Stephen Benard, and In Paik, "Getting a Job: Is there a Motherhood
 Penalty?," American Journal of Sociology, 2007, 112 (5), 1297­1338.

Cortes, Patricia, "The Effect of Low?Skilled Immigration on U.S. Prices: Evidence from CPI
 Data," Journal of Political Economy, 2008, 116 (3), 381­422.

   and Jessica Pan, "Outsourcing Household Production: Foreign Domestic Helpers and Native
  Labor Supply in Hong Kong," Journal of Labor Economics, 2013, 31 (2), 327­371.

C´
 ortes, Patricia and Jessica Pan, "When Time Binds: Substitutes for Household Produc-
 tion, Returns to Working Long Hours, and the Skilled Gender Wage Gap," Journal of Labor
 Economics, 2019, 37 (2), 351­398.

Cortes, Patricia and Jose Tessada, "Low-Skilled Immigration and the Labor Supply of Highly
 Skilled Women," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2011, 3 (3), 88­123.

Cotter, David, Joan M. Hermsen, and Reeve Vanneman, "The End of the Gender Revolu-
 tion? Gender Role Attitudes from 1977 to 2008," American Journal of Sociology, 2011, 117 (1),
 259­289.

Dahl, Gordon B, Katrine V Løken, and Magne Mogstad, "Peer Effects in Program Partic-
 ipation," American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (7), 2049­2074.

Dhar, Diva, Tarun Jain, and Seema Jayachandran, "Intergenerational Transmission of Gen-
 der Attitudes: Evidence from India," The Journal of Development Studies, 2019, 55 (12), 2572­
 2592.

Doepke, Matthias and Fabrizio Zilibotti, "Parenting with Style: Altruism and Paternalism
 in Intergenerational Preference Transmission," Econometrica, 2017, 85 (5), 1331­1371.

Ekberg, John, Rickard Eriksson, and Guido Friebel, "Parental Leave ­ A Policy Evaluation
 of the Swedish `Daddy-Month' Reform," Journal of Public Economics, 2013, 97, 131­143.

England, Paula, "The Gender Revolution: Uneven and Stalled," Gender & Society, 2010, 24 (2),
 149­166.

Farr´
    e, L´idia and Francis Vella, "The Intergenerational Transmission of Gender Role Attitudes
  and Its Implications for Female Labour Force Participation," Economica, 2013, 80 (318), 219­247.

   and Libertad Gonz´    alez, "Does Paternity Leave Reduce Fertility?," Journal of Public Eco-
  nomics, 2014, 32 (3), 469­505.

                                               39
  , Libertad Gonzalez, and Francesc Ortega, "Immigration, Family Responsibilities, and the
  Labor Supply of Skilled Women," B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy: Contributions,
  2011, 11 (1), Article 34.

Fernandez, Raquel, "Cultural Change as Learning: The Evolution of Female Labor Force Par-
  ticipation over a Century," American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (1), 472­500.

  , Alessandra Fogli, and Claudia Olivetti, "Mothers and Sons: Preference Formation and
  Female Labor Force Dynamics," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 11 2004, 119, 1249­1299.

   and , "Culture: An Empirical Investigation of Beliefs, Work, and Fertility," American Eco-
  nomic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2009, 1, 146­177.

Fitzenberger, Bernd, Katrin Sommerfeld, and Susanne Steffes, "Causal Effects on Em-
  ployment After First Birth ­ A Dynamic Treatment Approach," Labour Economics, 2013, 25,
  49­62.

Fitzpatrick, Maria D., "Preschoolers Enrolled and Mothers at Work? The Effects of Universal
  Prekindergarten," Journal of Labor Economics, 2010, 28 (1), 51­85.

Forlani, Emanuele, Elisabetta Lodigiani, and Concetta Mendolicchio, "Natives and Mi-
  grants in Home Production: The Case of Germany," Review of Economics of the Household,
  2020, forthcoming.

Fortin, Nicole, "Gender Role Attitudes and Women's Labour Market Outcomes Across OECD
  Countries," Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 2005, 21, 416­438.

  , "Gender Role Attitudes and Women's Labor Market Participation: Opting-Out, AIDS, and
  the Persistent Appeal of Housewifery," Annals of Economics and Statistics: Special Issue on the
  Economics of Gender, June 2015, (117/118).

Gelbach, Jonah B., "Public Schooling for Young Children and Maternal Labor Supply," Ameri-
 can Economic Review, 2002, 92 (1), 307­322.

Givord, Pauline and Claire Marbot, "Does the Cost of Child Care Affect Female Labor Market
 Participation? An Evaluation of a French Reform of Childcare Subsidies," Labor Economics,
 2015, 36, 99­111.

Goldin, Claudia, "The Quiet Revolution That Transformed Women's Employment, Education,
 and Family," American Economic Review, May 2006, 96 (2), 1­21.

  , "A Grand Gender Convergence: Its Last Chapter," American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (4),
  1091­1119.

  , "Tackle Gender Inequality at Home and at Work," Chicago Booth Review, 2019.

   and Joshua Mitchell, "The New Life Cycle of Women's Employment: Disappearing Humps,
  Sagging Middles, Expanding Tops," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2017, 31 (1), 161­82.

   and Lawrence F. Katz, "The Power of the Pill: Oral Contraceptives and Women's Career
  and Marriage Decisions," Journal of Political Economy, 2002, 110, 730­770.

                                               40
   and   , "The Cost of Workplace Flexibility for High-Powered Professionals," Annals of the
  American Academy of Political and Social Science, 2011, 638 (1), 45­67.

  , , and Ilyana Kuziemko, "The Homecoming of American College Women: The Reversal of
  the College Gender Gap," The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2006, 20 (4), 133­156.

Greenwood, Jeremy, Ananth Sheshadri, and Mehmet Yorukoglu, "Engines of Liberation,"
 Review of Economic Studies, 2005, 72, 109­133.

Gronau, Reuben, "Sex-Related Wage Differentials and Women?s Interrupted Labor Careers-the
 Chicken or the Egg," Journal of Labor Economics, 1988, 6 (3), 277­301.

Grosjean, Pauline and Rose Khattar, "It's Raining Men! Hallelujah? The Long-Run Conse-
 quences of Male-Biased Sex Ratios," Review of Economic Studies, 2019, 86 (2), 723­754.

Haeck, Catherine, Pierre Lefebvre, and Philip Merrigan, "Canadian Evidence on Ten Years
 of Universal Preschool Policies: The Good and the Bad," Labour Economics, 2015, 36, 137­157.

Han, Wen-Jui, Christopher Ruhm, and Jane Waldfogel, "Parental Leave Policies and
 Parents' Employment and Leave?Taking," Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 2009,
 28 (1), 29­54.

Hansen, Casper W., Peter S. Jensen, and Christian V. Skovsgaard, "Modern gender
 roles and agricultural history: the Neolithic inheritance," Journal of Economic Growth, 2015,
 20, 365­404.

Havnes, Tarjei and Magne Mogstad, "Money for Nothing? Universal Child Care and Maternal
 Employment," Journal of Public Economics, 2011, 95 (11-12), 1455­1465.

Healy, Andrew and Neil Malhotra, "Childhood Socialization and Political Attitudes: Evidence
 from A Natural Experiment," Journal of Politics, 2013, 75 (4), 1023­1037.

Hellerstein, Judith K., David Neumark, and Kenneth Troske, "Market Forces and Sex
 Discrimination," Journal of Human Resources, 2002, 37 (2), 353­380.

Heyman, Fredrik, Helena Svaleryd, and Jonas Vlachos, "Competition, Takeovers, and
 Gender Discrimination," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 2013, 66 (2), 409­432.

Hochschild, Arlie and Anne Machung, The Second Shift, New York: Viking, 1989.

Hotz, V Joseph, Per Johansson, and Arizo Karimi, "Parenthood, Family Friendly Work-
 places, and the Gender Gaps in Early Work Careers," Technical Report 24173, National Bureau
 of Economic Research 2018.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai., Erik Hurst, Charles I. Jones, and Peter J. Klenow, "The Allocation
 of Talent and U.S. Economic Growth," Econometrica, 2019, 87, 1439­1474.

Jarotschkin, Alexandra, Antonela Miho, and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya, "Diffusion of Gen-
  der Norms: Evidence from Stalin's Ethnic Deportations," Technical Report 13865, CEPR Work-
  ing Papers 2020.


                                             41
Kleven, Henrik, Camille Landais, and Jakob Egholt Søgaard, "Children and Gender In-
 equality: Evidence from Denmark," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2019, 11
 (4), 181­209.

  , , Johanna Posch, Andreas Steinhauer, and Josef Zweimuller, "Child Penalties across
  Countries: Evidence and Explanations," AEA Papers and Proceedings, 2019, 109, 122­126.

Korenman, Sanders and David Neumark, "Marriage, Motherhood, and Wages," Journal of
 Human Resources, 1992, 27 (2), 233­255.

Kuhn, Peter and Fernando Lozano, "The Expanding Workweek? Understanding Trends in
 Long Work Hours among U.S. Men, 1979?2006," Journal of Labor Economics, 2008, 26 (2),
 311­343.

Kuziemko, Ilyana, Jessica Pan, Jenny Shen, and Ebonya Washington, "The Mommy
 Effect: Do Women Anticipate the Employment Effects of Motherhood?," Technical Report 24740,
 National Bureau of Economic Research 2018.

Lalive, Rafael, Anal´ia Schlosser, Andreas Steinhauer, and Josef Zweim¨    uller, "Parental
  Leave and Mothers' Careers: The Relative Importance of Job Protection and Cash Benefits,"
  Review of Economic Studies, 2014, 81 (1), 219­265.

Landers, Renee M., James B. Rebitzer, and Lowell J. Taylor, "Human Resources Prac-
  tices and the Demographic Transformation of Professional Labor Markets," in "Broken Ladders:
  Manage- rial Careers in the New Economy," New York: Oxford University Press, 1996, pp. 215­
  246.

Lazear, Edward P. and Sherwin Rosen, "Rank-Order Tournaments as Optimum Labor Con-
  tracts," Journal of Political Economy, 1981, 89, 841­864.

Lefebvre, Pierre and Philip Merrigan, "Child-Care Policy and the Labor Supply of Mothers
  with Young Children: A Natural Experiment from Canada," Journal of Labor Economics, 2008,
  25 (3), 519­48.

Lemieux, Thomas, W. Bentley MacLeod, and Daniel Parent, "Performance Pay and Wage
  Inequality," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124 (1), 1­49.

Maestas, Nicole, Kathleen J. Mullen, David Poweel, Till von Wachter, and Jeffrey
 Wenger, "The Value of Working Conditions in the United States and Implications for the
 Structure of Wages," Technical Report 25204, National Bureau of Economic Research 2018.

Mas, Alexandre and Amanda Pallais, "Valuing Alternative Work Arrangements," American
 Economic Review, 2017, 107 (12), 3722­59.

Maurin, Eric and Julie Moschion, "The Social Multiplier and Labor Market Participation of
 Mothers," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2009, 1 (1), 251­272.

Michelacci, Claudio and Josep Pijoan-Mas, "Intertemporal Labour Supply with Search Fric-
 tions," Review of Economic Studies, 2012, 79 (3), 899­931.


                                             42
Neumark, David, "Sex Discrimination in Restaurant Hiring: An Audit Study," Quarterly Journal
 of Economics, 1996, 111, 915­941­391.

Nollenberger, Natalia and N´ uria Rodr´
                                      iguez-Planas, "Full-Time Universal Childcare in a
 Context of Low Maternal Employment: Quasi-Experimental Evidence from Spain," Labor Eco-
 nomics, 2015, 36, 124­136.

Noonan, Mary C., Mary E. Corcoran, and Paul N. Courant, "Pay Differences among the
 Highly Trained: Cohort Differences in the Sex Gap in Law- yer?s Earnings," Social Forces, 2005,
 84 (2), 853­872.

Olivetti, Claudia and Barbara Petrongolo, "The Economic Consequences of Family Poli-
 cies: Lessons from a Century of Legislation in High-Income Countries," Journal of Economic
 Perspectives, 2017, 31 (1), 205­230.

  , Eleonora Patacchini, and Yves Zenou, "Mothers, Peers, and Gender-Role Identity," Jour-
  nal of the European Economic Association, 2018, 18 (1), 266?301.

Patnaik, Ankita, "Reserving Time for Daddy: the Consequences of Fathers' Quotas," Journal of
 Labor Economics, 2019, 37 (4), 1009­1059.

Pepin, Joanna R. and David A. Cotter, "Separating Spheres? Diverging Trends in Youth's
 Gender Attitudes About Work and Family," Journal of Marriage and Family, 2018, 80 (1), 7­24.

Pertold-Gebicka, Barbara, Filip Pertold, and Nabanita Datta Gupta, "Employment Ad-
 justments around Childbirth," Technical Report 9685, IZA Discussion Papers 2016.

Petit, Pascale, "The Effects of Age and Family Constraints on Gender Hiring Discrimination: A
 Field Experiment in the French Financial Sector," Labour Economics, 2007, 14, 371­391.

Polachek, Soloman, "Occupational Self-selection: A Human Capital Approach to Sex Differences
 in Occupational Structure," Review of Economics and Statistics, 1981, 63 (1), 60­69.

Ramey, Garey and Valerie A. Ramey, "The Rug Rat Race," Brookings Papers on Economic
 Activity, 2010, 41 (1).

Rao, Neel and Twisha Chatterjee, "Sibling Gender and Wage Differences," Applied Economics,
 2018, 50 (15), 1725­1745.

Riach, Peter A. and Judith Rich, "An Experimental Investigation of Sexual Discrimination in
 Hiring in the English Labor Market," BE Press Advances in Economic Analysis & Policy, 2006,
 6 (2).

Rosen, Sherwin, "The Theory of Equalizing Differences," in Orley C. Ashenfelter and Richard
 Layard, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 1, Elsevier Science,, 1986, pp. 641­692.

Rossin-Slater, Maya, Christopher Ruhm, and Jane Waldfogel, "The Effects of Califor-
 nia?s Paid Family Leave Program on Mothers? Leave-Taking and Subsequent Labor Market
 Outcomes," Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 2013, 32 (2), 224­245.



                                              43
Ruhm, Christopher J., "The Economic Consequences of Parental Leave Mandates: Lessons
 from Europe," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1998, 113 (1), 285?317.

Schmitz, Sophia and Felix Weinhardt, "Immigration and the Evolution of Local Cultural
  Norms," Technical Report 12509, IZA Working Papers 2019.

Schober, Pia S., "Parental Leave and Domestic Work of Mothers and Fathers: A Longitudinal
  Study of Two Reforms in West Germany," Journal of Social Policy, 2014, 43 (2), 351­372.

Schonberg, Uta and Johannes Ludsteck, "Expansions in Maternity Leave Coverage and Moth-
  ers' Labor Market Outcomes after Childbirth," Journal of Labor Economics, 2014, 32 (3), 469­
  505.

Senik, Claudia, Quentin Lippmann, and Alexandre Georgieff, "Undoing Gender with
  Institutions: Lessons from the German Division and Reunification," Economic Journal, 2020,
  629, 1445­1470.

Smith, Adam, The Theory Of Moral Sentiments, A. Millar, 1759.

Thomas, Mallika, "The Impact of Mandated Maternity Benefits on the Gender Differential in
 Promotions: Examining the Role of Adverse Selection," Technical Report 2016.

Waldfogel, Jane, "The Effect of Children on Women's Wages," American Sociological Review,
 1997, 62 (2), 209­217.

  , "Understanding the "Family Gap" in Pay for Women with Children," Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 1998, 12 (1), 137­156.

  , "The Impact of the Family and Medical Leave Act," Journal of Policy Analysis and Manage-
  ment, 1999, 18 (2), 281­302.

Wasserman, Melanie, "Hours Constraints, Occupational Choice, and Gender: Evidence from
 Medical Residents," Technical Report 2019.

Weisshaar, Katherine, "From Opt Out to Blocked Out: The Challenges for Labor Market Re-
 entry after Family-Related Employment Lapses," American Sociological Review, 2018, 83 (1),
 34­60.

Wiswall, Matthew and Basit Zafar, "Preference for the Workplace, Investment in Human
 Capital, and Gender," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2018, 133 (1), 457­507.

Xue, Melanie M., "High-Value Work and the Rise of Women; The Cotton Revolution and Gender
 Equality in China," Working Paper 2018.




                                             44
                                                  Figure 1: Effect of Parenthood on Earnings by Gender
                       .2
   Earnings Relative to Year Before Birth
   -.6        -.4         -.2          0




                                                                                                               Long-Run Penalty = 39 %
                       -.8




                                            -5   -4   -3   -2   -1    0     1      2      3      4      5        6     7    8     9      10
                                                                     Years Before/After Birth of First Child

                                                                               Women                     Men


Note: The data is from the 1976 to 2017 waves of the PSID. The sample is restricted to household
heads and spouses/cohabitors who are 20 to 55 years old and who had their first child between 20
and 45. The sample is further restricted to parents who are observed at least once before and after
the birth of the first child and whose earnings outcomes are observed at least four times over the
fifteen-year window. This figure plots the estimated event-time coefficients from equation (1) with
annual labor earnings as the outcome variable (individuals who are not working are assigned zero
earnings). The event-time coefficients are expressed as a percentage of the no-child counterfactual,
for men and women separately. The 95% confidence bands around the estimates are based on
standard errors clustered at the individual level. The long-run child penalty in earnings for women
                                       ^m - ^w
relative to men is calculated as Pt  E   ~ w | ] , for event time 5    10.
                                        [Y
                                              
                                                                          it




                                                                                   45
Figure 2: Contribution of Child-Related Inequality to Gender Pay Gaps Over Time
                                           70
                Decomposition of Gender Inequality in Earnings (%)
                                                     50      60




                                                                               Residual Gender Inequality
                                  30       40




                                                                             Background-Related Inequality
                         20




                                                                             Child-Related Gender Inequality
                  10                       0




                                                                     1980s     1990s               2000s       2010s

                                                                                          Year

Note: See the notes to Figure 1 for a description of the data and sample. This figure shows
the dynamic decomposition of gender inequality in annual earnings, based on equation (2). The
specification allows for period-specific event time coefficients and controls for age and calendar-
year fixed effects. The child-related gender inequality captures the estimated child penalties, the
background-related inequality captures the differences in the levels and returns to race, census
region and education, while the residual gender inequality captures the remaining gender earnings
gap.




                                                                                       46
                                                        Figure 3: Child Earnings Penalties by Relative Skill

                                                                 Women                                                                                                Men
                                         .2




                                                                                                                                           .2
                                         0




                                                                                                                                           0
    Earnings Relative to Year of Birth




                                                                                                      Earnings Relative to Year of Birth
                                         -.2




                                                                                                                                           -.2
                                         -.4




                                                                                                                                           -.4
                                         -.6




                                                                                                                                           -.6
                                         -.8




                                                                                                                                           -.8




                                               -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                                                             -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
                                                      Years Before/After Birth of First Child                                                           Years Before/After Birth of First Child



                                                              Husb Edu > Wife Edu                                                                    Husb Edu = Wife Edu

                                                              Husb Edu < Wife Edu (Gap  2 Yrs)                                                       Husb Edu < Wife Edu (Gap > 2 Yrs)



Note: The data and sample are similar to that used to construct Figures 1 and 2 (see notes to Figure
1). The sample is further restricted to those with non-missing information on spousal education
pre-child. This figure plots the percentage effects of parenthood for husbands and wives separately,
using a similar specification as outlined in equation (1). For this exercise, we consider four distinct
subgroups of couples based on their relative earnings potential, proxied by the pre-child difference
in the number of years of schooling between spouses.




                                                                                                 47
A      Appendix: Model Extensions

A.1     Alternative Functional Forms for Child Rearing Production Function

We consider more general functional forms for the production function of quality children:

    1. Imperfect substitution between mother's and father's time, via a CES production function.
       In this case, fathers will also see a drop of their earnings after the birth of their child, as
       they will devote some of their time to child rearing. The higher the elasticity of substitution
       between mothers and fathers, the larger the relative drop in women's earnings after birth.

    2. Child-rearing market services. How this affects women's hours after birth will depend on the
       level of substitution between own time and market products, and naturally on wages and price
       of substitutes. Women with higher wages will work more and buy more market products.
       Unless there is perfect substitution between market products and own time, women's earnings
       will go down after birth. If we allow this function to change as children grow and the amount
       of parental time needed decreases whereas more market inputs are needed (or they become
       more substituitable), we should see women's earnings increase as their labor supply increases.


A.2     Returns to Experience/Human Capital Accumulation

We have assumed thus far that wages are flat. If there is human capital accumulation, via learning
by doing, a period's wage depends on past hours worked, and today's hours will affect future wages.
In terms of women's earnings profile after birth, these implications mean that (1) women will take
into consideration the additional market returns of working more hours today and thus the drop
in hours and earnings after birth will be smaller and (2) the divergence between women and men
will be larger, as it captures not only differences in hours, but in wage profiles as well.
Finally, if human capital accumulates instead via investment in (costly) education, women, knowing
that they will work fewer hours after the birth of a child, might invest less in education, or choose
careers with lower part-time penalties. Under this model, we would observe women earning less
than their husbands even before the birth of the child when both are working full time.




                                                  48
