                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 HOW SHOULD TAX PROGRESSIVITY RESPOND TO RISING INCOME INEQUALITY?

                                     Jonathan Heathcote
                                      Kjetil Storesletten
                                     Giovanni L. Violante

                                      Working Paper 28006
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28006


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Jonathan Heathcote, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L. Violante. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Should Tax Progressivity Respond to Rising Income Inequality?
Jonathan Heathcote, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L. Violante
NBER Working Paper No. 28006
October 2020
JEL No. E24,H21,J24,J3,J31

                                          ABSTRACT

We address this question in a heterogeneous-agent incomplete-markets model featuring
exogenous idiosyncratic risk, endogenous skill investment, and flexible labor supply. The tax and
transfer schedule is restricted to be log-linear in income, a good description of the US system.
Rising inequality is modeled as a combination of skill-biased technical change and growth in
residual wage dispersion. When facing shifts in the income distribution like those observed in the
US, a utilitarian planner chooses higher progressivity in response to larger residual inequality but
lower progressivity in response to widening skill price dispersion reflecting technical change.
Overall, optimal progressivity is approximately unchanged between 1980 and 2016. We
document that the progressivity of the actual US tax and transfer system has similarly changed
little since 1980, in line with the model prescription.

Jonathan Heathcote                               Giovanni L. Violante
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis              Department of Economics
Research Department                              Princeton University
90 Hennepin Ave.                                 Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Minneapolis, MN 55401                            Princeton, NJ 08540
heathcote@minneapolisfed.org                     and NBER
                                                 violante@princeton.edu
Kjetil Storesletten
Department of Economics
University of Oslo
P.O. Box 1095 Blindern
0317 Oslo
Norway
kjetil.storesletten@econ.uio.no
1   Introduction

Income inequality has risen sharply in the US over the last four decades. At the heart of
this trend is a marked widening of the wage distribution. Figure 1 shows that less than
half of the rise in wage inequality occurred between demographic groups based on age
and education. The bulk of this upward trend is within group, or residual. Income in-
equality rose across many developed economies over the same period. The magnitude of
this phenomenon, however, has been much more pronounced in Anglo-Saxon countries,
such as the US and the UK, than in Continental Europe, Japan, and the Nordic countries
(see, for example, Table 3 in Krueger et al., 2010).
    This paper asks two questions regarding the US experience. How has the government
responded to this widening of the income distribution? And how should the govern-
ment have responded? The natural tool for a government that wants to compress income
inequality is to rely on tax and transfer policies to achieve the desired amount of redis-
tribution. There are, of course, additional instruments that governments could employ,
including investment in education and training programs; labor market regulations such
as minimum wages and employment protection; and competition policies aimed at trade,
market power, and migration. While these additional interventions often complement
traditional government redistribution, the lion's share of redistribution in practice occurs
through taxes and transfers. This fiscal lever is the focus of our paper.
    One might conjecture that a utilitarian government would respond to rising inequal-
ity with more redistribution. In particular, to the extent that the government's objective
in designing the tax and transfer system is trading off equity and efficiency considera-
tions, one might expect that greater inequality would lead the government to put more
emphasis on equity and to therefore choose a more progressive tax system, even if that
would reduce efficiency somewhat. In contrast, the consensus view in the literature is
that the US tax system has become less progressive over the past 40 years. For example,
Piketty and Saez (2007), Saez and Zucman (2019), Ferriere and Navarro (2020), and Wu
(forthcoming) all find declines in various measures of progressivity over time.
    This apparent contradiction raises something of a puzzle and has left economists
searching for explanations. One possible explanation has been that social preferences
have changed over time, with the US government effectively becoming more willing to
tolerate inequality (Lockwood and Weinzierl, 2016). Similarly, Saez and Zucman (2019)
argue that changes in politics and ideology have led to reductions in capital taxation and
to acceptance of tax evasion. We think that such explanations are not fully satisfying


                                             1
                        0.5




                       0.45




                        0.4




                       0.35




                        0.3




                       0.25



                              1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010   2015
                                                            Year




Figure 1: The figure shows variance of log hourly wages for US male workers (solid red line) and
residual wage dispersion (dashed blue line). Residual inequality is the dispersion left over after
controlling for years of education and a quartic in age. Source: Current Population Survey (CPS).


absent a deeper theory of the drivers of shifts in social preferences.
    In this paper, we challenge on two levels the traditional narrative on inequality and
redistribution. First, we argue that the tax and transfer system has not in fact become
less progressive over time. On the contrary, we argue that the amount of redistribution
embedded in the tax and transfer system has been rather stable on net between 1980 and
2016. Second, we argue that the appropriate policy to address rising inequality depends
on why income inequality is going up. One needs a theory of inequality that can address
the empirical patterns documented in Figure 1. When we model both the rise in returns
to skills and the increase in residual wage dispersion, counteracting forces emerge in the
optimal taxation problem. We conclude that progressivity should have remained roughly
stable over time.

1.1   Our two key results in the context of the existing literature
Measurement. The literature has long recognized that measuring overall tax and trans-
fer progressivity and its change over time is challenging. Studies that abstract from the
role of transfers (e.g., Guner et al., 2014; Saez and Zucman, 2019) find the system has
become less redistributive over time. Studies that focus on the dynamics of statutory
marginal tax rates (e.g., Lockwood and Weinzierl, 2016; Ferriere and Navarro, 2020) also


                                                           2
tend to estimate declines in progressivity over time. Trends in progressivity also depend
on where in the household income distribution you focus: Saez and Zucman (2019) and
Hubmer et al. (forthcoming) emphasize declining marginal tax rates within the top 1% of
the income distribution.
    Our approach is to (i) include transfers alongside taxes; (ii) measure taxes actually paid
by households rather than measure statutory rates; and (iii) examine global progressivity
of the fiscal system across the distribution, not just at the top. Specifically, we estimate
progressivity from Congressional Budget Office (CBO) data, largely following the CBO's
own definitional choices. We include most transfers in our measure of post-government
income, with the exception of certain transfers in kind (Medicaid and Medicare). Our
measure of taxes follows the CBO practice and includes all federal taxes, but not state
and local ones, with estimates based on IRS-derived data on taxes actually paid.1
    As in much of our previous research, we summarize the US tax and transfer system
through a parsimonious log-linear relationship between gross income and disposable in-
come, in which progressivity is a function of one parameter only (Heathcote et al., 2014,
2017, 2020b). Through the lens of this tax function, the progressivity coefficient  is stable
at 0.186 (corresponding to an income-weighted average marginal tax rate of 0.34) between
the early 1980s and the mid 2010s.


Theory. On the theory side, we analyze optimal taxation within the analytical frame-
work developed in Heathcote et al. (2017). Our Ramsey-style normative analysis restricts
the search for optimal progressivity within a given parametric class of tax and transfer
schemes.2
    Our model incorporates a range of benefits of higher tax progressivity. Individuals are
born unequal and face additional shocks over the life cycle, some of which cannot be in-
sured privately. Thus a progressive tax and transfer system both provides redistribution
with respect to unequal initial conditions and substitutes for missing private insurance
against life-cycle shocks. The model also captures three key costs of higher tax progres-
sivity: a static distortion to labor supply, a dynamic distortion to skill investment, and
an effect on public good provision. Through our general equilibrium model, taxes and

   1 The  CBO has very recently started studying how to further improve its data by allocating state and
local taxes to households. See https://www.cbo.gov/publication/54685 for calculations. Preliminary
results suggest that state and local income taxes are progressive, whereas consumption taxes and property
taxes are regressive.
    2 We refer to Heathcote and Tsujiyama (2019) for a comparison between the solution of the optimal

taxation problem under our tax function and the solution of a full Mirrlees problem. See also the survey by
Stantcheva (2020).


                                                    3
transfers affect the level of output; the pre-tax income distribution; and, ultimately, the
equilibrium distributions of consumption, labor supply, and welfare.
    Most papers on progressive income taxation have focused exclusively on distortions
to labor supply with an exogenous wage distribution. They all conclude that the current
tax system appears to offer too little redistribution relative to what a utilitarian planner
would choose (see, e.g., Saez, 2001; Heathcote and Tsujiyama, 2019; Bakis et al., 2015;
Kindermann and Krueger, 2014). Rising uninsurable labor productivity dispersion in
these models always calls for more rather than less redistribution. We generalize this
channel, as in Heathcote et al. (2014), and argue that the data call for a share of the rise
in labor market risk to be privately insurable, a force that limits the increase in optimal
progressivity.
    Exogenous labor market risk is only one of the channels at work in our model. The
other one is endogenous skill investment. Guvenen et al. (2014), Krueger and Ludwig
(2016), Findeisen and Sachs (2016), Stantcheva (2017), and Badel et al. (2020) are recent
papers studying optimal taxation in models with human capital. Optimal taxation now
depends on the details of how skill investment is modeled, but because progressive taxa-
tion distorts choices along an additional margin, the efficiency costs of progressivity will
tend to be larger, and optimal progressivity will typically be reduced. We find that when
we add this margin to the model, the optimal system for a utilitarian planner is almost
identical to the system we observe for the US at the federal level in 1980.
    The main analysis in this paper is a comparative static exercise. We focus on two struc-
tural shifts that have widened cross-sectional inequality in wages and earnings in the last
four decades. First, we interpret the observed rise in residual wage dispersion as reflect-
ing an increase in the variance of idiosyncratic life-cycle labor productivity shocks. The
appropriate policy response here is well understood: if this extra exogenous wage dis-
persion is privately uninsurable, a more progressive tax system that offers more generous
social insurance is called for. Second, we interpret the rise in between-group wage dis-
persion as reflecting an increase in the return to skills. How should this phenomenon be
modeled? We consider two alternative hypotheses. The first is akin to conventional "skill-
biased technical change" according to which the relative production weights on high skill
labor inputs have increased over time, possibly capturing, in reduced form, increasing
complementarity of high skill workers with ICT capital (Krusell et al., 2000). The second
hypothesis, more novel in the literature, is that different skill types have potentially be-
come more complementary in production over time, which ­ holding the distribution of
skills fixed ­ will tend to increase the wage dispersion between worker skill types that


                                             4
are relatively scarce and those that are relatively abundant. One possible interpretation
is that workers have become more specialized in narrower skills sets over time (see, e.g.,
Alon, 2018). We label this force "specialization-biased technical change".
    A key message from the paper is that a utilitarian planner's optimal response to either
source of increasing skill price dispersion is to reduce tax progressivity. Why is this? On
the one hand, the more progressive taxation is, the lower equilibrium skill investment
is, which depresses aggregate output and consumption. On the other hand, more pro-
gressive taxation reduces inequality in consumption due to differences in skills. In our
baseline calibration, it turns out that the net contribution to social welfare from these two
strong, but countervailing, forces is maximized at a positive but modest level of tax pro-
gressivity. When we feed in our estimated shifts to all components of the wage structure,
the efficiency costs associated with distorted skill investment loom larger in the overall
welfare calculations, and the model thus calls for a modest decline in optimal tax progres-
sivity between 1980 and 2016.
    This result is closely related to three recent contributions in the optimal taxation liter-
ature. Ales et al. (2015) simulate widening income inequality in a skill-to-task assignment
model with an endogenous wage distribution and find that only moderate changes to the
tax system are optimal. In a similar vein, Scheuer and Werning (2017) argue that when
the rise of income inequality at the top of the distribution is generated through a stronger
Rosen-style superstar effect, optimal taxes remain unaltered. Through a Ben-Porath style
technology, Wu (forthcoming) incorporates human capital accumulation, and similarly
argues that rising inequality implies declining optimal progressivity.3
    In sum, recognizing that the wage distribution is an endogenous equilibrium object
that is affected by the tax structure is paramount when thinking about the optimal design
of government policy. This insight is also related to a result we obtained in previous work
(Heathcote et al., 2010b, 2013). There, we showed that allowing for an endogenous wage
structure when modeling the rise in US income inequality affects the quantification of its
welfare implications.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our measurement of
the historical changes in the progressivity of the US tax and transfer system over the past

   3 His  model also features two other changes over time that work against increasing optimal progressiv-
ity. The first, and most important, is increasing fiscal pressure on the government to raise revenue, which
he models as an aging population and a rising dependency ratio. Heathcote et al. (2017) and Heathcote and
Tsujiyama (2019) show that increasing the government revenue requirement lowers optimal tax progres-
sivity. The second force he points to is rising female labor force participation. If women's labor supply is
more elastic than men's, a rising share of women in the labor force increases the cost of high levels of tax
progressivity.


                                                     5
40 years. Section 3 outlines the model. Section 4 calibrates the model and explains the
key forces at work. Section 5 describes the results of our main comparative static exercise.
Section 6 concludes. An online appendix contains some technical derivations.


2   Measuring tax progressivity

The US system of taxes and transfers is complex, featuring a wide array of social insur-
ance programs and means-tested benefits and taxation at different levels of government
(federal, state, and local). This makes it challenging to concisely summarize how the tax-
and transfer system should respond to changes in inequality and what this response has
been empirically.
    Is there a way to summarize the tax and transfer system in a simplified way? In Heath-
cote et al. (2017), we illustrate the US tax and transfer system non-parametrically by divid-
ing households into percentiles of pre-government income. For each household, we cal-
culate a measure of disposable income, defined as pre-government income plus transfers
minus taxes. We then calculate average disposable income for each percentile. A scatter
plot of pre- versus post-government income shows that the log of post-government in-
come is approximately a linear function of the log of pre-government income, except at
the lowest income percentiles, where there is more redistribution. In sum, the following
log-linear tax and transfer function yields a remarkably good fit

                       log [y - T (y)] = log() + (1 -  ) log [y]
                                        
                             y - T ( y ) =  y 1-  ,                                       (1)

where y is pre-government income and T (y) is taxes minus transfers.
    Such a log-linear tax and transfer function has long been a tradition in public eco-
nomics, including in the work of Musgrave (1959); Jakobsson (1976); Kakwani (1977);
and, more recently, Bénabou (2000) and Heathcote et al. (2017). The parameter  captures
the level of taxation, while the parameter  can be interpreted as a measure of tax progres-
sivity. To see this, note that when 0 <  < 1, the tax system features progressivity in the
sense that the marginal tax rate T (y) is larger than the average tax rate T (y)/y for any
positive income level y > 0. Conversely, when  < 0, the marginal tax rate is lower than
the average tax rate, T (y) < T (y)/y, implying that taxes are regressive. When  = 0, the
tax system is flat, with a constant marginal tax rate, T (y) = T (y)/y = 1 - , and when


                                             6
 = 1, there is full redistribution (T (y) = y - ). This tax system has a break-even income
level y0 = 1/ at which point pre-government income equals post-government income
(zero average tax rate).
    This tax function imposes that marginal taxes are monotone in income. In reality,
at the bottom of the income distribution, marginal tax rates can be high in the region
where means-tested programs are phased out. Moreover, this system has no lump-sum
transfers or floor for disposable income (the post-government income of those with zero
pre-government income is also zero). In the US, there exist programs that guarantee a
floor. An example of such programs is the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
(SNAP), formerly known as food stamps. For these two reasons, the log-linear fit worsens
in the bottom decile of the distribution. However, for the rest of the income distribution,
it offers a very good fit.

2.1       Progressivity in the US, 1979-2016
We now set out to measure the progressivity of the US tax and transfer system in line with
eq. (1), and to explore how this has changed since 1979.
    We use data from the CBO.4 The CBO regularly produces reports on the distribution
of income, using various data sources including the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Statis-
tics of Income (SOI) sample of tax returns and the Annual Social and Economic (ASEC)
Supplement of the CPS. The CBO reports average pre- and post-government income for
various quantiles of the income distribution for several different income concepts. We
focus on their measurements where households are ranked by total income (adjusted for
household size) before means-tested transfers and taxes. Income rankings are reported
for various sub-groups of the US population. Given our interest in tax progressivity for
households of working age, we focus on the sample of households with children and
non-elderly childless households.5 Relative to the PSID or other micro data sets, a key
advantage of the CBO data is that they contain comprehensive estimates of taxes paid
and transfers received.
    The CBO breaks income into three broad components: (i) market income includes wage
income, business income, capital income, and other non-governmental sources of in-

   4 In Heathcote et al. (2017), we relied on the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) and focused on
households of working age with a strong connection to the labor market.
    5 These two groups are of similar size. In 2016, there were 38.5 million households with children, con-

taining 154.5 million individuals (of which 71.7 million were below the age of 18). In the same year, there
were 55.6 million non-elderly childless households, containing 103.3 million individuals (all over 18, with
a head or spouse below age 65).


                                                    7
come (e.g., private transfers); (ii) social insurance benefits include Social Security, Medi-
care, unemployment insurance, and workers' compensation; (iii) means-tested transfers
include Medicaid, SNAP (formerly food stamps), the Children's Health Insurance Pro-
gram (CHIP), TANF (formerly ADFC), and Supplemental Security Income. The CBO uses
ASEC data as the starting point for their transfer estimates but imputes transfer income to
non-reporters to address under-reporting in the survey. Taxes are broken down into indi-
vidual income taxes, payroll taxes, and corporate taxes, where 75% of corporate taxes are
allocated in proportion to household capital income, and 25% of them are in proportion
to labor income. The CBO tax measures exclude state and local taxes.
    To estimate tax progressivity using eq. (1), we need to take a stand on definitions for
pre-government income and post-government income. We are interested in redistribu-
tion and progressivity induced both through taxes and through transfers. Since transfers
are simply negative taxes, the level of transfers and how transfers vary with income are
just as important for skill investment and labor supply choices as the level and income
sensitivity of taxes. However, while it is straightforward to characterize how taxes con-
tribute to public redistribution, dealing with transfers is messier. One reason is that many
important transfers, such as Medicaid and SNAP, are transfers in kind. A second reason
is that the Social Security system mixes forced individual saving (simple intertemporal
reallocation of income within an individual life) with redistribution across households.
    The CBO's own current baseline income measure for measuring tax and transfer rates
­ what they label "income before taxes and transfers" ­ is market income plus social
insurance benefits (see Perese, 2017). We will use this as our starting point for defining
pre-government income and CBO "income after taxes and transfers" ­ which adds means-
tested transfers and subtracts taxes ­ as the basis for post-government income.
    We make two adjustments to the CBO measures of transfers by subtracting Medicare
transfers from social insurance benefits and Medicaid and CHIP benefits from means-
tested transfers. These are transfers in kind, which the CBO estimates based on the cost
to the government of providing the benefits. For low income households, the magnitudes
of these transfers are very large. For the bottom quintile of the sample of households with
children, the average value of Medicaid and CHIP was $14,400 in 2016. However, these
transfers do not constitute a standard notion of disposable income, and including them
would paint an overly rosy picture of income at the bottom of the distribution. Moreover,
if one were to include the value of free health care, one might also want to include the
value of public education and other public services.6

   6 Public   health care and public education provide benefits to their recipients, but there are also signifi-

                                                        8
                                              15
                                                       with children
                                              14
                                                       no children
                                                       45-degree line




                       log post govt income
                                              13


                                              12


                                              11


                                              10


                                              9
                                                   9    10         11           12        13   14   15
                                                                        log pre govt income

Figure 2: Pre- and post-government income for various quantiles of households with children
(blue line) and non-elderly households without children (red dashed line) in 2016. Source: Con-
gressional Budget Office (CBO).


    It is debatable whether other social insurance benefits should be included in pre-
government income. By far the most important component here is Social Security in-
come. One rationale for including Social Security in pre-government income (our base-
line choice) is that most of the Social Security benefits received by working-age house-
holds reflect returns to forced saving made earlier in life.7 But we will also report results
for a case in which we exclude from pre-government income all social insurance benefits
(while retaining them in post-government income).
    Figure 2 plots our baseline pre-government income measure against post-government
income in 2016 for our two samples. Each dot corresponds to the log of average pre-
and post-government income for the following eight quantiles of the income distribution,
which are the ones the CBO reports: [p0-p20], [p21-p40], [p41-p60], [p61-p80], [p81-p90],
[p91-95], [p96-p99], and [p100]. As is clear from the figure, the relationship between log
pre-government income and log post-government income is quite close to linear above


cant positive externalities to having a healthy and well-educated population. An interesting but ambitious
project would be to estimate the private value of all public services to households at different points in
the income distribution and to use these estimates to generate a comprehensive measure of government
redistribution.
     7 There is some redistribution embedded in the Social Security system, but it is more modest than one

might think. First, the system favors married couples at the expense of singles (Groneck and Wallenius,
2020). Second, while higher income households in principle receive lower replacement rates, some of the
associated redistribution is undone by the fact that higher income households tend to live and collect ben-
efits for longer.


                                                                               9
                        Table 1: Alternative Estimates for Progressivity 

        Specification                                             Estimates of 
                                                            1979-83 2012-16 Change
        Baseline
            With children                                    0.218       0.207       -0.011
            Without children                                 0.155       0.164       +0.009
        Average                                              0.186       0.186       -0.001
        Alternative income measures
            Pre-govt. inc. = market income                   0.236       0.216       -0.020
            Pre-govt. inc. = post-govt. + taxes              0.089       0.109       +0.019
        Alternative samples
            First quintile dropped                           0.083       0.112       +0.029
            Top 5% only                                      0.043       0.051       +0.008
Estimates based on CBO data of progressivity  for various samples and various periods. The
baseline pre-government income measure equals market income + social insurance benefits
(except for Medicare). The baseline post-government income equals pre-government income
plus means-tested transfers (except for Medicaid and CHIP) minus taxes.


the bottom quintile of the income distribution, consistent with the log-linear functional
form for the tax and transfer system. As discussed above, for low pre-government in-
come levels, post-government income is more generous than a linear relationship would
predict. Note, finally, that the tax and transfer system offers notably more support to low
income households with children than to similarly poor households without children.
    Based on the quantiles in Figure 2, we estimate the progressivity parameter  from
equation (1) year by year. We take the logarithm of the average pre- and post-government
income measures and estimate  by a simple least squares regression, using weights pro-
portional to the number of households in each quantile bin.8 Table 1 reports the average
estimated values for  over the 1979-1983 period and the 2012-2016 period. We report
estimates for the sample of households with children, the sample without children, and
the simple average across the two samples, which will serve as our baseline progressivity
estimate. The possibly surprising takeaway is that given our baseline income definitions,
overall progressivity in the United States has not changed over these 35 years. We find
that the average progressivity value is  = 0.186 in both periods.


   8 Strictly speaking, what matters for marginal household decisions is the progressivity of the statutory
tax and transfer system. In Heathcote et al. (2017) we estimate statutory progressivity by subtracting esti-
mates for tax deductions from pre- and post-government income measures when estimating  . We abstract
from that refinement in this paper.

                                                    10
Alternative specifications. The next row of Table 1 reports progressivity estimates when
pre-government income excludes social insurance benefits ­ in particular, Social Security
income. This specification delivers higher estimates for  . The reason is that Social Secu-
rity is an important income component for many low income households and excluding
it reduces pre-government income disproportionately at the bottom. Since our defini-
tion for post-government income is unchanged, the tax and transfer system now appears
more redistributive at the bottom, which in turn translates into higher estimates for  .
This measure of progressivity falls only very slightly over time.
    Next, we ask how much progressivity is embedded in taxes alone, by defining pre-
government income as market income plus social insurance benefits plus means-tested
transfers (we continue to exclude from these transfers the values of Medicaid and Medi-
care).9 Now, taxes are the only difference between pre- and post-government income. The
estimates for  are now around 0.10, with a modest increase in progressivity over time.
The fact that the progressivity estimate substantially falls relative to the baseline value of
0.186 indicates that much of the effective progressivity in the US system operates through
transfers rather than taxes.
    The next row of Table 1 reports progressivity estimates using our baseline pre-government
income definition, but excluding from the regression the bottom quintile of the income
distribution. Individuals with strong attachment to the labor force, for whom tax progres-
sivity mediates skill investment and labor supply choices (as in our model), are mostly
above the bottom quintile of the income distribution. As can be expected from Figure
2, these estimates for  are notably lower. Thus, the estimates for progressivity reported
in the baseline specification of Table 1 reflect a compromise between trying to match the
high degree of redistribution at the bottom of the US tax and transfer system and the
lower degree of redistribution everywhere else. Note that the progressivity estimate in-
creases somewhat over time when the bottom quintile is excluded.10
    Finally, the last row of the table shows estimates for  using only the top two quantiles
reported by the CBO, involving pre and post-government income for households in the
top 1% and the next 4% of the income distribution. These estimates are lower, but still
positive, indicating that marginal tax rates are increasing in income even at the top of the
distribution.
   9 Many    papers in the public finance literature focus on progressivity from taxes alone. For example,
Guner et al. (2014) report estimates for  in 2000 of around 0.05 using IRS data. Ferriere and Navarro (2020)
estimate  to be around 0.1 after 1986.
   10 This finding is robust to the alternative measure of pre-government income: when pre-government

income is defined as market income, the average estimated  , excluding the bottom quintile, increases from
0.121 in 1979-83 to 0.148 in 2013-2017.


                                                    11
                           Households without Children                                     Households with Children
            40                                                                40
                    1980                                                            1980
            30      2016                                                      30    2016

            20                                                                20


            10                                                                10
  percent




                                                                    percent
             0                                                                 0
                    10         11          12        13   14                        10       11          12        13   14

            -10                                                               -10


            -20                                                               -20


            -30                                                               -30
                                    log pre govt income                                           log pre govt income




                  Figure 3: Average tax rates by income, 1980 and 2016. Data source: CBO.


    To summarize, Table 1 indicates that the degree of progressivity has remained ap-
proximately constant since 1979. Indeed, for none of the different income measures or
samples we have considered do we find evidence of economically significant changes in
progressivity over time. However, one must be cautious in characterizing the extent of
progressivity of the US tax and transfer system. The treatment of different components
of transfers matters, and different types of households face different mixes of taxes and
transfers.
    Note that the estimates we have reported are for tax progressivity, not for tax rates.
Figure 3 plots average net tax rates by income in 1980 and 2016, to give a feeling for
the mapping between our estimates for  and actual redistribution across the income
distribution. In particular, for each income bin reported by the CBO, we report pre-
government income minus post-government income (i.e., taxes net of transfers) divided
by pre-government income, given our baseline income definitions.11 The picture clearly
illustrates that the US tax and transfer system is progressive. Federal taxes net of transfers
are lower in 2016 relative to 1980, across the entire income distribution. Note that the dots
for 2016 are generally to the right of those for 1980, indicating real income growth over
this 36 year period, especially at the top of the distribution.
    Net average tax rates are below 30% for all quantiles except for the very top of the
income distribution. One reason is that we are measuring taxes net of transfers, which
are necessarily a smaller share of income than taxes alone. In addition, recall that our
calculations exclude taxes at the state and local levels. Including those would push up
average tax rates. Finally, note that because the tax and transfer system is progressive,

   11 Income        here is inflation-adjusted using the PCE deflator and is in 2016 dollars.

                                                               12
                     0.4
                                                   households with children
                    0.35
                                                   households without children
                     0.3

                    0.25

                     0.2

                    0.15

                     0.1

                    0.05

                      0
                       79
                       81
                       83
                       85
                       87
                       89
                       91
                       93
                       95
                       97
                       99
                       01
                       03
                       05
                       07
                       09
                       11
                       13
                       15
                     19
                     19
                     19
                     19
                     19
                     19
                     19
                     19
                     19
                     19
                     19
                     20
                     20
                     20
                     20
                     20
                     20
                     20
                     20
                                            Year

Figure 4: Estimates of progressivity ( ) of the US tax and transfer system, 1979­2016.
NBER recessions are shaded. Data source: CBO.


marginal tax rates are larger than average tax rates. Given our log-linear parametric tax
and transfer schedule, the average income-weighted marginal-tax rate is given by 1 - (1 -
 )(1 - g), where g is the ratio of government purchases (consumption plus investment)
relative to GDP. For 1980 and 2016, the average value for this ratio was g = 0.192 (for
federal, state, and local levels combined). Given that value and our baseline estimate for
 of 0.186, the implied (income-weighted) average marginal tax rate is 34.2%.


Low-frequency changes in progressivity. Figure 4 further explores time changes in tax
progressivity, by plotting the time paths of our baseline  estimates for every year from
1979 through 2016. The plot reinforces the message from Table 1: the overall progressivity
of the tax and transfer system has been remarkably stable over time. One might expect
to see more of an imprint of some of the tax reforms that occurred over this period. For
example, the Tax Reform Act of 1986 lowered the top individual income tax rate from 50%
in 1986 to 38.5% in 1987 and to 28% in 1988. Our estimates for progressivity, however,
barely move in those years. Zooming in on the top 1% of households ranked by pre-
government income, the share of income this group paid in taxes in fact changed little
over these years. This share was actually higher in 1988 than in 1986, for example. The
reason is that the tax reform package also modified many other provisions for deductions
and exemptions, and relatively few households ever faced the top marginal rate.




                                           13
High-frequency changes in progressivity. While estimated tax progressivity does not
appear to have changed much over time in response to explicit tax reforms, it clearly
does vary over the business cycle. In particular, measured progressivity rises in all but
one recession over this period: in 1980, in 1990-91, in 2001, and in the Great Recession of
2007-09. During expansions, and especially during the late 1990s, estimated progressiv-
ity declines.12 This cyclical variation reflects the fact that the US tax and transfer system
is especially progressive at low income levels. During recessions, income declines for
households experiencing unemployment, causing inequality to widen sharply at the bot-
tom of the distribution (see Heathcote et al., 2020a). Thus, more households come to
benefit from the extensive redistribution the US system delivers ­ primarily via transfers
­ to low income households, raising the estimate for  . Between 2007 and 2010, for ex-
ample, average household income before means-tested transfers and taxes for the bottom
quintile of households with children fell from $26,800 to $24,500, while over the same
period receipt of SNAP benefits for the same group rose from $2,000 to $3,400. During
expansions, income growth at the bottom undoes this effect.

2.2    Comparison with other studies
Our finding that overall tax and transfer progressivity has changed little over the last
40 years is consistent with the narrative in Slemrod and Bakija (2017). See, for example,
their Figure 3.2. In contrast, other studies in the literature have found more evidence of
declining progressivity over time.
    Wu (forthcoming) uses different sources than we use to estimate the progressivity pa-
rameter  . In particular, he applies ASEC data for income and transfers and the TAXSIM
model to estimate taxes. His pre-government income measure excludes all government
transfers, so his estimates should be compared to our specification in which pre-government
income is equal to market income. He finds a decline in  from 0.19 in 1978-80 to 0.14 in
2014-16. Thus, while his estimate for the level for progressivity is similar to ours, he finds
a decline over time, while we do not.13
    Piketty and Saez (2007) argue that between 1960 and 2004, the US tax system became
less progressive. The main distinction between their IRS-based analysis and our CBO-
based one is that their interest is primarily in the very top of the income distribution
(the top 0.1% and above). They also incorporate estate taxes (which are significant at

   12 The Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996, which profoundly re-
formed the welfare system, may also have contributed to lower measured progressivity in this period.
   13 Cyclical fluctuations in Wu's estimated path for  (his Figure A.1) are similar to those in our Figure 4.



                                                     14
the very top of the income distribution) and make different assumptions than the CBO
on the incidence of corporate taxes. Similarly, Saez and Zucman (forthcoming) estimate
that tax rates have declined for households within the top 1% of the income distribution
(their Figure 5). But at the same time, they find (as we do) that taxes net of transfers have
declined for households at the bottom of the income distribution (their Figure 6).
    Ferriere and Navarro (2020) find a sharp drop in tax progressivity in 1986 (their Fig-
ure 12), with stable progressivity thereafter. Their approach is based on the idea that
the progressivity parameter  can be estimated given two inputs: an estimate for the
economy-wide average tax rate and one for the average marginal tax rate. They exploit
the following result. Suppose the tax and transfer function is log-linear given by equation
(1). Then, the progressivity parameter  can be estimated as

                      (Average Marginal Tax Rate) - (Average Tax Rate)
                 =                                                     .                   (2)
                                  1 - (Average tax rate)

The more different these two rates are, the more progressive the tax system is. If the
Average Tax Rate (ATR) is zero, then  equals the Average Marginal Tax Rate (AMTR).
If the average tax is positive, then  is smaller than the AMTR. This lemma is useful
because it provides a simple strategy for estimating  , provided one has estimates of
the AMTR and the ATR. Ferriere and Navarro (2020) do not include transfers in their
measurements and rely on estimates of the average statutory marginal rates from Mertens
and Olea (2018). It is the compression of statutory marginal rates in the 1986 reform
that lowers estimated progressivity at that time. But recall that we found ­ based on the
CBO data ­ that this change did not materially affect the distribution of actual taxes paid
(see line 5 in Table 1). This suggests a disconnect between the profiles for statutory and
effective marginal tax rates. More work is clearly required to fully reconcile these different
approaches and estimates.

2.3   Progressivity across states, countries, and age groups
The measurement of tax progressivity above focuses on taxes and transfers at the federal
level in the US. Fleck et al. (2020) apply the same methodology to state and local taxation
across US states. Taking into account all taxes at state and local levels, they document
marked differences in tax progressivity across states. Moreover, they find that Democrat-
leaning states tend to have higher tax progressivity than Republican-leaning states.
   Measuring tax progressivity across countries by modeling the detailed tax and transfer
programs for the entire population is beyond the scope of this paper. Instead, we pursue

                                             15
                          Table 2: Estimates for  across countries


                            Country Tax progressivity in 2005
                            USA              = 0.09
                            France           = 0.13
                            Japan            = 0.14
                            UK               = 0.16
                            Germany          = 0.16
                            Denmark          = 0.23

Estimates for progressivity  of tax systems across countries in 2005, based on equation (2) and
tax rate estimates from the World Tax Indicator database.

an exercise along the line of Ferriere and Navarro (2020) and focus on taxes only. Using
data on the AMTR and ATR for 2005 from World Tax Indicator database, we estimate tax
progressivity based on equation (2) for a handful of countries.
   Table 2 shows that tax progressivity is similar across Continental European countries,
Japan, and the United Kingdom. However, the United States has lower progressivity, and
Scandinavia (represented by Denmark) has higher progressivity. Note that the estimate
of  for the United States is in line with what we estimated using CBO data when we
excluded transfers from disposable income (row 5 in Table 1).
   Finally, in Heathcote et al. (2020b), we document that the degree of progressivity is
stable over the life cycle. To reach this conclusion, we use PSID data on married house-
holds and estimated a for each age group a following the procedure in Heathcote et al.
(2017). The result is that a is very close to the average  for all age groups of working
age.


3   A tractable macro model

We established that tax progressivity in the US has not changed much over time. But
how should the tax system have responded to rising inequality? To address this question,
we lay out a tractable macroeconomic model with heterogeneous households and partial
consumption insurance which builds closely on Heathcote et al. (2014, 2017). The model
incorporates the key drivers of the observed rise in inequality in the United States.

    Demographics and preferences. Demographics follow a perpetual youth model where
all individuals have a constant survival rate  and 1 -  new individuals are born every
period. Households have preferences over consumption, c; hours, h; publicly-provided

                                               16
goods, G; and a skill investment effort, s. Preferences are time-additive with discount
factor ,
                                                     
                             Ui = -vi (si ) + E0     ( )t ui (cit , hit , G),                         (3)
                                                    t =0

where the period utility function ui is given by

                                                               +
                                                           h1it
                    ui (ci , hit , G ) = log cit - exp [(1 +  ) i ]
                                                                 +  log G.
                                                           1+
The individual-specific parameter i captures cross-sectional heterogeneity in the trade-
off between consumption and labor supply. This heterogeneity could reflect differences in
diligence, sickness, disability, and the like.14 We assume that i is drawn from a normal
distribution with variance v  , that is, i  N -v  /2, v  . This choice simplifies the
analytical expressions. Log-utility delivers balanced growth. Households also value a
government-provided good G that enters separable in preferences.15
    Consider now the term vi (si ), which captures the cost (expressed in utility terms) of
individual i's skill choice si . We assume a power disutility with a skill elasticity :

                                                             1+1/
                                                    1    si
                                     vi ( si ) =       ·       .                                      (4)
                                                 (i )1/ 1 + 1/

The parameter i captures individual heterogeneity in this disutility. We interpret  as an
index of learning ability. We assume that  is exponentially distributed with parameter
 . This assumption is important in order to preserve tractability. As we shall see, this
assumption ensures that (log of) the return to skill is linear in skill s, as in a standard
Mincerian model. We assume that i and i are independent.

    Technology. Following a long line of work in macroeconomics, we assume that dif-
ferent skills are imperfect substitutes in production. In particular, we assume there is a
continuum of skills s  (0, ) with a constant elasticity of substitution across skills, as
assumed by, for example, Katz and Murphy (1992) and Abbott et al. (2019). In particular,
the production function is given by


   14 For individual choices of consumption and labor supply, it does not matter whether we model this
preference heterogeneity as a weight on consumption or labor supply in the utility function. However, this
choice matters when formulating the social welfare function.
   15 It would be interesting to study an extension of this model in which a share of public goods (e.g.,

public parks and infrastructure) are partial substitutes to private consumption. This would make public
good provision an alternative tool for redistribution.


                                                    17
                             ^     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    -1
                                                                         -1
                       Y=             exp ( s) · [ N (s) · m (s)]             ds         ,   (5)
                               0

where N (s) is the number of aggregate effective hours supplied by skill s and m (s) is the
density of workers with skill s. The parameter  > 1 is the elasticity of substitution be-
tween skills. The parameter determines the relative importance of different skill types
in production. When = 0, all skill types are intrinsically equally important in produc-
tion, while > 0 (< 0) corresponds to a case in which technology is high-skill (low-skill)
biased.
    Competitive firms all have access to this technology and the equilibrium wage for skill
s, p(s), is the marginal product of the skill, that is,

                                        1           Y                1
                        log p (s) =       log                + s-      log [m (s)] .         (6)
                                                    N                

The price (per efficiency unit) of skill s increases more swiftly in s the larger is and the
more swiftly the density m (s) declines with s. This scarcity effect is stronger the lower 
is ­ that is, the more complementary in production are different skill types.
    This model nests two different views of skill prices. When = 0 (no inherent skill
bias in technology), the return to skill is driven entirely by relative scarcity, as in Abbott
et al. (2019) and Heathcote et al. (2017). When   , skills are perfect substitutes in
production, and skill price differentials are driven entirely by a skill-biased technology,
as in Guvenen et al. (2014). To ensure existence of equilibrium and finite output, we need
to impose an upper bound on and a lower bound on  .

Assumption 1. Assume that  > 1 (skills are more substitutable than Cobb-Douglas) and
 < 2 (  - 1) /  .

   The number of aggregate effective hours worked by skill type s is given by
                                                ^   1
                                      N (s) =           I{si =s} zi hi di,
                                                0

where hi is hours worked and zi , described below, is exogenous productivity per hour
worked.
   Because there is no capital and thus no capital accumulation in the model, the aggre-
gate resource constraint implies that output is spent either on consumption or on public



                                                        18
goods,
                                                      ^   1
                                             Y=               ci di + G.
                                                      0
   Individual efficiency units of labor. These efficiency units are exogenous to individ-
ual choices and reflect two components,  and :

                                             log zit = it +  it .

The  component follows a random walk, it = i,t-1 + it . Both it and  it are i.i.d. over
time and across households.16 For analytical tractability, we assume that both innovations
are normally distributed, it  N (-v /2, v ) and  it  N (-v /2, v ).
   Pre-government earnings are then determined by the product of skill price times effi-
ciency units times hours worked,

                                yit =     p(si ) × exp(it +  it ) × hit                                  (7)
                                        skill price            efficiency   hours


This formulation determines earnings as a result of human capital investment (captured
by p(si )), luck (captured by the exogenous efficiency units zit ), and work effort (captured
by hours worked).

    Market structure. Financial markets are incomplete. Individuals can save in terms of
a risk-free bond that is in zero net supply, subject to a natural borrowing limit. There is
no explicit insurance against the (permanent)  shocks while individuals can trade state-
contingent claims offering perfect insurance against the (transitory)  shocks. We refer to
 as insurable risk and to  as uninsurable risk. This market structure is simple but flexible.
When both var ( ) > 0 and var () > 0, the economy features partial insurance. When
var () = 0, the model is a standard incomplete markets model à la Huggett (1993). When
var ( ) = 0, the economy features complete markets with ex-ante heterogeneity. Finally,
when there is no cross-sectional dispersion (var ( ) = var () = var ( ) = 0) and skills
are perfect substitutes (  ), the economy is a standard representative-agent economy.
    Finally, we assume competitive markets for labor and for the final goods and allow
standard annuity markets against survival risk.

    Government. The tax and transfer system is assumed to be of the log-linear form
   16 The assumption that  is i.i.d. over time is for expositional simplicity, and none of the results depend
on it. As we show in Heathcote et al. (2014), the model allows for any stochastic process for this component.
However, the assumption that  is a unit-root process is important.

                                                          19
described in equation 1. The government chooses the fiscal parameters  and  and also
chooses the level of expenditure G on public goods. The budget must be balanced period
by period.

3.1   Equilibrium allocations
Consumption and hours. During working life, individuals choose consumption, savings,
and hours, given their taste for work effort  and their skill level s. All agents start with
zero financial wealth. As we show in Heathcote et al. (2014), the equilibrium allocation
of consumption and hours worked are log-linear in the (latent) factors , , , and s.
Moreover, in equilibrium all households choose to hold zero risk-free bonds. This result
builds on Constantinides and Duffie (1996) and hinges on our assumptions about market
structure, preferences, and wealth's being in zero net supply. The equilibrium allocations
can be derived analytically as

                         log(1 -  )    1-
           log hit =                +          it - i - H,                                 (8)
                           1+          +
                                        log(1 -  )
            log cit   = log  + (1 -  )             + log p(si ) + it - i + C ,             (9)
                                          1+

where  and  are policy variables and H and C are constants common for all households.
Note that C and H depend on policy  and will be fully incorporated in the welfare anal-
ysis.
    Hours worked are increasing in  and falling in  and . It is optimal for the house-
hold to work harder in states when the wage rate is higher ­ the household wants to make
hay when the sun shines. This effect is stronger the larger the tax-modified Frisch elasticity
(1 -  ) / ( +  ) is. Note that this elasticity is falling in  . The larger tax progressivity
is, the less strongly the individual wants to react to variation in , because changes in
hours affect the marginal tax rate more when  is large. Since the utility function is of
the balanced-growth preference form and households in equilibrium hold zero wealth,
the income effect of wage differentials exactly offsets the substitution effect for the unin-
surable components of wages. Permanent heterogeneity through p(s) and permanent
uninsurable risk (through ) therefore have no effect on labor supply.
    Consumption is increasing in  and p (s) and falling in . Note that tax progressivity 
mitigates the pass-through of shocks and inequality to consumption. For example, if taxes
were proportional ( = 0), the heterogeneity  and p (s) would have full pass through
to consumption since hours worked are unaffected by this heterogeneity. This illustrates


                                             20
that tax progressivity provides the insurance against life-cycle risk  that missing markets
fail to deliver. It also provides redistribution of inequality at birth ­ that is, dispersion in
 and  . Naturally, insurable risk  has no effect on equilibrium consumption because
households can fully hedge this risk.

   Skill prices. At birth (i.e., before entering the labor market) individuals choose a skill
level, given their initial draw of (i , i ). Taking the first-order condition of the objective
function (3) with respect to skill s implies

                                          1
                                                      
                        vi ( s )      s                      ui (cia , hia , G )
                         s
                                 =
                                      i
                                              = E0    ( )a         s
                                                                                 .         (10)
                                                     a =0

Thus, the marginal disutility of skill investment for an individual with learning ability i
must equal the discounted present value of the corresponding higher expected lifetime
wages.
    We now solve for the market price of skills p(s). We guess (and will verify) that the
equilibrium density m(s) is exponential. Under this guess, equation (6) implies that the
skill price has a standard Mincerian form ­ namely, that there exist coefficients 0 and 1
so that for any s, the skill price is

                                        log p(s) = 0 + 1 s.                                (11)

The coefficient 1 is the marginal return to an additional unit of skills. Combining the
first-order condition (10) and the skill price function (11) yields the optimal skill choice

                                     s ( ;  ) = [(1 -  ) 1 ] ·  .                          (12)

The optimal skill investment s ( ;  ) therefore has elasticity  to the after-tax return and
is linear in learning ability  . Since  is an exponential random variable, the equilibrium
distribution of skills m(s) will also be exponential, which confirms our guess. It follows
from equation (11) that the skill price p(s) follows a Pareto distribution and earnings in
(7) follow a mixture between a log-normal and a Pareto distribution. In particular, the
upper tail of the earnings distribution will be Pareto.
     Solving for 0 and 1 boils down to equating coefficients using equations (6) and (11).
We show in the Online Appendix that the equilibrium return to skills is the solution to




                                                 21
the following equation:
                                              1      
                                  1 =     +                 .                               (13)
                                               ((1 -  ) 1 )
   By implicitly differentiating equation (13), one can show that the return to skill 1 is
increasing in and falling in  . Thus, the return to skills is larger the more skill-biased
technology is, and the less substitutable different skill types are (recall higher skill types
are always scarcer than lower ones).
   Equation (13) has analytical solutions for the equilibrium return to skill in three special
cases: (i) = 0, (ii)  = 1, and (iii)   .
   In the first case, which we analyzed in Heathcote et al. (2017),

                                               1                 
                                              1+               - 1+ 
                                  1 =               (1 -  )            .                    (14)
                                          

   In the second case, which is our focus in this paper,

                                                     2
                                  ~            ~                
                               1 = +                     +            .                     (15)
                                  2            2              (1 -  )

   In the third case,
                                             1 = .

    How do changes in tax progressivity affect equilibrium skill investment? The elasticity
of skill investment to (1 -  ) is given by

                            s     (1 -  )        1 (1 -  )
                                          =  +             .
                          (1 -  )    s          (1 -  ) 1
    The first term here, , is the partial equilibrium elasticity of skill investment with re-
spect to (1 -  ), holding constant the pre-tax return to skill 1 ; this partial equilibrium
elasticity follows directly from the skill investment rule (12). The second term is the elas-
ticity of the pre-tax return to skill 1 to (1 -  ). It captures the fact that in general equilib-
rium, changing progressivity changes the skill price. Because increasing (1 -  ) (reducing
 ) increases skill investment, it reduces the relative scarcity of high skill types, which in
turn depresses the pre-tax skill return 1 . We label this the Stiglitz effect, after Stiglitz
(1985).
    The general equilibrium Stiglitz effect dampens the direct partial skill investment re-
sponse to an increase in (1 -  ). The magnitude of this dampening effect depends on the
nature of the production technology. Implicitly differentiating equation (13) to evaluate

                                               22
1 /(1 -  ), the full general equilibrium elasticity of skill investment to (1 -  ) can be
written as

                                  s     (1 -  )       1
                                                =                      .
                                (1 -  )    s      1 - 1 +          1
                                                                   

     Note first that the general equilibrium elasticity is increasing in , as is the partial one.
It is instructive to consider the three special cases described above.
     First, when = 0, the general equilibrium elasticity simplifies to /(1 + ). Thus, if
   = 0 and  = 1, the general equilibrium elasticity is 1/2, so that the Stiglitz effect cuts
the partial equilibrium elasticity in half.
     Second, if  = 1 (the case we study in this paper), then the elasticity is 1/(2 - /1 ).
In this case, holding fixed 1 , the elasticity is increasing in . The logic is that the model
can generate a given return to skill via a range of combinations of  and (see equation
13). Holding fixed 1 , a higher value for (a more skill-biased technology) implies lower
skill complementarity (a higher  ). This in turn implies a weaker Stiglitz effect (i.e., a
smaller general equilibrium response of 1 ) when progressivity is modified and thus a
larger general equilibrium elasticity.
     Third, in the limiting case when   , 1  . Thus, the Stiglitz effect vanishes and
the general equilibrium elasticity collapses to the partial equilibrium elasticity .
     The cross-sectional variance of equilibrium log skill prices is given by the variance of
1 s. We can solve for this in closed form when  = 1, using the expression for 1 in
equation (15) and the skill investment rule (12).
     We show below that the parameters and  affect welfare only through their impact
on the parameter , which is defined by

                                               1
                                                .
                                                2
Thus, from now on, we use use as our indicator of skill bias in technology. Given  = 1,
dispersion in skill prices is given by

                                                                                         4
                                           2   4               2           2+
                                                                                 1
          v p  var (log p (s)) = (1 -  )       1   = (1 -  )       +                         .   (16)
                                                                               (1 -  )

    Equation (16) shows that dispersion in log skill prices is falling in the elasticity of sub-
stitution  and increasing in . How does skill price dispersion vary with progressivity,
 ? If we differentiate the expression for v p with respect to (1 -  ), it is straightforward to


                                                   23
show that skill price dispersion is decreasing in progressivity when > 0 and is increas-
ing in progressivity when < 0. In the knife-edge case when = 0, v p = 1/ 2 and is
thus independent of  . In the case of perfect substitutability (  ), v p = (1 -  )2 (2 )4 .
    The logic for these results is that when = 0, an increase in  does reduce dispersion
in skills, s = (1 -  )1  . But the Stiglitz effect increasing 1 is just large enough that
there is no change in dispersion in log( p(s)) = 0 + 1 s. When > 0 the Stiglitz effect
is weaker (see above), 1 increases less when progressivity goes up, and skill price dis-
persion therefore goes down. When < 0, the Stiglitz effect is stronger, and skill price
dispersion goes up.

3.2        Planner and aggregate allocations
Given a balanced budget requirement, the government budget constraint is
                                              ^    1
                                        G=             T (yi | ,  ) di.                                (17)
                                               0

Given equation (17), the government can freely choose two of the instruments ( G,  , ).
We focus on the government's choosing ( G,  ), with  determined residually through the
budget constraint. Without loss of generality, we define g = G /Y and let the government
choose the share of output g devoted to public goods.
    For convenience, we assume that human capital investments are fully reversible. The
economy will then immediately transition to the new steady state after a tax reform. It is
therefore appropriate to focus on steady-state comparisons and a once-and-for-all choice
of taxes, transfers, and spending on public goods.17
    To study optimal public policy, it is necessary to take an explicit stand on the planner
weights for different households. In line with a long literature, we focus on a planner
who puts equal weight on all individuals belonging to the same cohort. In our context,
in which agents attach different relative weights to consumption versus work effort, we
take equal weight to mean that the planner cares equally about the utility from consump-
tion of all agents.18 Moreover, we assume that the utilitarian planner discounts future

   17 In Heathcote et al. (2020b) we assume that skill investments are irreversible and allow the parameters
 and  to vary across age and time. We study the transition from an initial steady state to a future one.
Allowing  and  to vary across time and age yields welfare gains, part of which are due to being able to
tax the irreversible pre-existing human capital stock without distorting the accumulation of new human
capital (see also Hassler et al., 2008).
   18 This is not an obvious choice as the planner's taste for redistribution across people with different

disutility weight  could in principle differ from taste for redistribution against uninsurable risk . See
Lockwood and Weinzierl (2015) and Piacquadio (2017) for thorough analyses of the welfare criterion and


                                                        24
generations by the same discount factor  that households use to discount utility over the
life cycle. In our model with perpetual-youth demography, this implies that the planner
puts equal weight on all individuals who are alive at any point in time.
    The contribution to the social welfare function from any cohort is the average dis-
counted future utility of the cohort members, where equation (3) defines expected lifetime
utility at age zero. Social welfare evaluated as of date 0 is then given by

                                                      
                              W ( g,  ; -1 )               j Uj0 ( g,  ; -1 ) ,                         (18)
                                                    j=-


where Uj,0 ( g,  ; -1 ) is remaining expected lifetime utility (discounted back to date of
birth) as of date 0 for the cohort that entered the economy at date j, and  is a constant.19
When investments are reversible, social welfare W ( g,  ) is equal (up to an additive con-
stant) to average period utility in the cross section,

                                       
      W ( g,  ; -1 ) = (1 - )          a E [u (c ( , a , s(;  ); g,  ) , h ( , ;  ) , G ( g,  ))]
                                      a =0
                             -E [v (s( ;  ),  )] +  (-1 ) ,

where c, h, and s are individuals' optimal policy rules in equilibrium and G is the equilib-
rium public good provision.20
   The first expectation is taken with respect to the equilibrium cross-sectional distri-
bution of ( a , ,  ) and the second expectation with respect to the distribution of  .21 The
value for -1 enters only via the additive term (-1 ). Because this term does not interact
with the choices for g and  , we can ignore it when computing optimal policy.22
   Substituting the expressions for equilibrium allocations into equation (19) and eval-
uating the expectations yields social welfare as a function of the two policy instruments




choice of planning weights in the presence of preference heterogeneity.
   19 Remaining lifetime utility depends on the lagged value for progressivity 
                                                                                    -1 because the difference
between -1 and  will determine (the cost of) net new investment in skills for cohorts who entered the
economy before date 0.
   20 G is written as a function of  because the government chooses g, the output share, and aggregate

output Y depends on  .
   21 We index the uninsurable component of the log wage  by age a to reflect the fact that the presence of

permanent shocks implies an age-varying distribution for .
   22 This property relies on the assumption that skill investments are reversible.



                                                     25
( g,  ). In the special case when  = 1, social welfare can be expressed analytically as
                
                                                                         log(1- )           1
                
                 (1)               log(1 - g) +  log g + (1 + ) (1+^ )(1- )
                                                                            -              1+ ^
                                                                                           1
                
                            +(1 + ) - 1                                   -1
                                                                               [ f ( )]- 2 - 2
                
                                      2 log [ f (  )] -
                                                              
                
                 (2)                                          -1   log    
                
                                                        -1
                
                 (3)                                      2 f ( )
                
    W ( g,  ) =  (4)                            + log [1 - f ( )] + f ( )                            (19)
                                                                  v
                
                                                     - (1 -  )2 2
                
                 (5)
                
                
                                                     - (1 -  )2 v2
                 (6)
                                                             1       1 v
                 (7)                           +(1 + )       ^ v
                                                                   - ^2 2
                                                                          ,

where  ^ = ( +  )/(1 -  ) is the inverse of the tax-modified Frisch elasticity, and the
term f ( ) is given by23

                                                                                       2
                                   2                                      1
                   f (  )  (1 -  ) 1 = (1 -  )2
                                     2
                                                            +       2+                     .
                                                                        (1 -  )

As for earnings, the cross-sectional distribution for consumption is a mixture of a log-
normal and a Pareto distribution. The term 1/ f ( ) is the Pareto parameter for the com-
ponent of consumption that is driven by skill prices.
    In the next section, we calibrate the model, solve for optimal policy, and give an ex-
plicit interpretation of each term in the welfare expression (19).


4     Quantitative results

4.1     Calibration
To quantify the optimal tax policy, we must set values for all those parameters that appear
in the social welfare function above. The preference parameters , , v  ,  are assumed to
be time invariant, whereas we let the technology and risk parameters  , , v , v vary over
time. For our numerical experiment, we pick 1980 as our initial point, because this is the
first year when household-level consumption data are available from the CEX, and 2016
as our final point.



    23 Notealso that the sixth line is an approximation. The exact expression is -(1 -  )/(1 - ) · v /2 +
log [1 -  exp (- (1 -  )v /2)] - log(1 - ). Given realistic values for  and v , this term is approximately
equal to - (1 -  )2 v where v = v · /(1 - ).

                                                   26
4.1.1   Preference parameters held constant over time

We set the curvature parameter on hours worked to  = 2. This value is in line with
our previous estimates in Heathcote et al. (2014) and implies a modified Frisch elastic-
ity of around 0.4, given our estimate of the empirical US = 0.186. We set the survival
probability to  = 0.971, which ensures an average duration of 35 years for a working life.
    To calibrate the weight on the (government-provided) public good , we assume that
the empirical fraction of output devoted to publicly provided goods g is efficient ­ that is,
welfare maximizing. From (19), it is immediate that the efficient level is g = /(1 + ).
Note that g depends only on households' relative taste for the public good . The intu-
ition for this result is that all individuals have the same logarithmic preferences over pri-
vate and public consumption and hence the same trade-off between the goods. Therefore,
there is no disagreement about how much of output should be allocated to G, irrespective
of the level of inequality and risk. The ratio of government consumption and investment
to GDP was g = 0.192 on average for the years 1980 and 2016, which implies  = 2.37. In
Section 5.2, we allow  to change over time.
    The variance of preference heterogeneity, v  , can be identified from the cross-sectional
covariance between consumption and hours worked according to the allocations in (9):

                                   cov (log h, log c) = (1 -  ) v  .                                (20)

Using data from the CEX, we find that cov (log h, log c) is very stable over time, with an
average value of 0.034.24 Given  = 0.186, equation (20) implies v  = 0.0425.
    We set the elasticity of skill investment parameter  to one, as this allows us to study
the case with = 0 and different types of technological change. At the same time, we now
argue that  = 1 is broadly consistent with estimates of how aggregate skill investment
in the United States has evolved in response to observed changes in the rate of return to
skill. From equation (12), the average skill choice is E[s] = [(1 -  )1 ] E[ ]. This implies
that  can be estimated from aggregate changes in s and 1 ,

                                E[s2016 ]               (1 - 2016 )1,2016
                         log                =  log                            .                     (21)
                                E[s1980 ]               (1 - 1980 )1,1980

To measure the change in skills and the return to skills over time we must take a stand
   24 Following Heathcote et al. (2010a), we drop households that work fewer than 260 hours per year,
measure consumption as nondurable consumption equivalized using the OECD scale, and measure hours
as hours for the head of household. We use this selection criterion because our theory focuses on working
households.

                                                   27
on how to measure skills. Given our focus on discretionary schooling and how skill in-
vestment choices respond to changes in tax progressivity, we will measure s as years of
education over and above mandatory schooling. In most US states, school is mandatory
up to age 16. With mandatory schooling starting at age six, anything above 10 years of
schooling reflects an active investment choice. Using data from the CPS, we find that
average years of education for individuals between the ages of 26 and 30 were 12.6 and
14.0 in 1980 and 2016, respectively. A standard Mincer regression on this CPS sample that
controls for gender and a quartic in age implies that the return to an additional year of
schooling increased from 8.2% in 1980 to 11.7% in 2016.
   Since progressivity has remained constant over this period, the implied elasticity is
then
                            14.0 - 10          (1 - 0.186)0.117
                   = log                 / log                   = 1.21.
                            12.6 - 10          (1 - 0.186)0.082
We conclude that if the entire change in aggregate skill attainment were driven by the
observed increase in the return to skill, the implied elasticity  would be close to our
assumed value of unity. In Section 5.2, we perform a sensitivity analysis on the value for
.


4.1.2   Technology and risk parameters changing over time

We take the view that differences in wages by education and by age reflect differences
in skill investments as reflected in p(s), while residual wage dispersion in log wages
within age-education groups reflects exogenous labor market risk ( and ). The logic for
including age as well as education as a proxy for skills is that standard theories of life-
cycle wage growth emphasize skill acquisition via human capital investment on the job
and via learning by doing. Heathcote et al. (2010a) show that the variance of log wages
explained by education and age in a standard Mincerian regression was 0.051 in 1980.
Extending their methodology to 2016, we find that this dispersion increases to 0.110.25
    We set 1980 = 3.3 in line with the estimate in Abbott et al. (2019) who use longitudinal
US survey data to estimate the elasticity of substitution between three education groups.
We then calibrate 1980 so that the variance of log p(s) as defined in (16) matches between-
group inequality. With 1980 = 2016 = 0.186 and 1980 = 3.3, equation (16) implies
 1980 = -0.0891.


   25 Education and age are coarse proxies for skill investment. For example, investment likely varies sig-
nificantly by choice of college, choice of major, and by grades achieved. Thus, our estimates potentially
understate the share of wage dispersion reflecting differential skill investment.

                                                    28
     We will consider two alternative ways to model the increase in between-group in-
equality (skill price dispersion) between 1980 and 2016. First, we consider the case in
which the entire increase is due to skill-biased technical change caused by an increase in
  , while  is held constant at  = 3.3. This is our baseline assumption. From equation (16),
this implies that the skill-bias parameter increases to 2016 = 0.0276. Second, we consider
the other extreme case, in which the growth in between-group inequality entirely reflects
a rise in  , with held constant at its 1980 value. This alternative view of technical change
implies that 2016 = 2.357, indicating that skill types have become more complementary
over time.26
     Consider now the change in residual wage dispersion. Blundell and Preston (1998)
and Heathcote et al. (2014) show that the variance of uninsurable risk can be identified
from the cross-sectional consumption dispersion. From equation (22),

                             var (log c) = (1 -  )2 v  + v p + v .                                (22)

Using the CEX data for consumption described above, we find that the variance of log
consumption (nondurables plus services), var (log c), increased from 0.215 to 0.275 be-
tween 1980 and 2016. This measurement assumes that empirical log consumption has
time-invariant classical measurement error with a variance of 0.041, in line with our es-
timates in Heathcote et al. (2014). Given our assumption that the variance of between-
group wage inequality is v p and our calibration of v  , equation (22) then identifies v
and implies that v increased from 0.231 to 0.263 between 1980 and 2016. The variance of
uninsurable innovations, v , is then determined by the relation v = v × /(1 - ).
    The magnitude of insurable risk can then be identified from the variance of log wages
as residual wage dispersion (v + v ) minus uninsurable risk v . This approach implies
that v increased from 0.025 to 0.114 between 1980 and 2016. All parameter values are
summarized in Table 3.
    It is useful to take a short detour on the interpretation of v and v . We have modeled
and interpreted them as labor market uncertainty, and our calculations imply that this
source of wage volatility has increased in the last 40 years. Early work from survey data
(see, for example, the discussion in Heathcote et al., 2010b) is consistent with this view.
However, more recent research relying on administrative data (Guvenen et al., 2017), and
comparing survey and administrative data (Moffitt, 2020), has disputed these findings
and suggested that the rise in residual wage inequality is mostly due to larger dispersion
  26 Recallthat increased complementarity can be interpreted as workers having specialized in acquiring
narrower sets of skills, so that workers have become effectively less substitutable.

                                                  29
                                     Table 3: Parameterization

                                           Time-invariant parameters
                                                                                   v
                                           2     0.971 0.237      1              0.0425

                                           Time-varying parameters
                          Year                           v      v    v
                          1980         -0.0891 3.3 0.2307 0.0068 0.0245
                  changes 2016         0.0276    3.3 0.2625 0.0078 0.1135
                  changes 2016         -0.0891 2.357 0.2625 0.0078 0.1135
Calibration of model parameters. See the main text for details.


in initial conditions at labor market entry (which cannot be explained by demographics)
as opposed to higher wage volatility. This viewpoint is supported by evidence from ad-
ministrative data in (Guvenen et al., 2017). This alternative view poses no challenge for
our welfare exercise, since what enters in the welfare expression (19) is the cross-sectional
variance; whether this is generated by longitudinal volatility or initial dispersion makes
no difference.
    To illustrate the magnitudes of the parameter estimates in Table 3, we do a variance de-
composition of wages, consumption, and hours in our model. Table 4 lists the results. We
find that (i) the uninsurable component  accounts for more than half the cross-sectional
variance of wages, while skill prices account for about one-fifth; (ii) cross-sectional dis-
persion in the disutility of work effort explains at least three-quarters of model hours
variation, while insurable shocks explain the rest;27 (iii) the dispersion in the disutility of
work accounts for around one-tenth of model consumption inequality, uninsurable wage
shocks account for about two-thirds, and skill price dispersion accounts for around one-
fifth.
    It is also useful to illustrate the drivers of the rise in labor income inequality in the US
according to the model. The parameters in Table 3 imply that (i) the insurable component
accounts for about half the increase in the variance of log wages, while skill prices and
the uninsurable component account for 30% and 20% of the increase, respectively; (ii)
the increase in skill price dispersion accounts for two thirds of the growth in consump-
tion inequality, while uninsurable wage risk accounts for the residual third. Finally, a
   27 A key reason for modeling heterogeneity in  is to be able to account for the empirical dispersion in
hours worked. Note that the dispersion in model hours is smaller than the dispersion in empirical hours.
In Heathcote et al. (2014), we allow for measurement error and target the dispersion in empirical hours.
There, the estimates of preference heterogeneity are slightly larger than in Table 3.

                                                   30
                                  Table 4: Variance decomposition

                                          1980                             2016
                                  vp   v      v    v    vp              v      v       v
                  var (log w)    0.17 0.75 0.08     0  0.23            0.54 0.23        0
                  var (log c)    0.16 0.71     0  0.13 0.27            0.63     0     0.10
                  var (log h)      0    0    0.07 0.93   0               0    0.27    0.73
Variance decomposition for wages, consumption, and hours in the model in 1980 and 2016. v p :
skill prices; v : uninsurable labor market risk; v : insurable labor market risk; v  : preference
heterogeneity.


change in tax progessivity could have affected consumption inequality. However, with
an approximately constant  , this contribution is zero.

4.2    Optimal tax progressivity in 1980
We begin by analyzing optimal progressivity in the economy calibrated to 1980.28 To start
with, we assume that all skills are perfect substitutes (  ) and abstract from all other
sources of heterogeneity (v = v = v  = 0). This case corresponds to a representative-
agent economy. The social welfare function W then simplifies to the first line in equation
(19). The first three terms on this line reflect the value of private and public consumption.
The last term is the average disutility of hours worked. Maximizing the objective (19) for
this case yields a regressive tax, RA  = -  = -0.237. An appropriately regressive tax

system delivers a zero marginal tax rate at the equilibrium hours choice for the represen-
tative agent, while at the same time, the average tax rate is positive and delivers sufficient
revenue to finance the optimal level of government purchases.
    The second, third, and fourth lines in equation (19) capture the welfare contributions
of skill investment choices and equilibrium skill price dispersion. The second line cap-
tures the efficiency aspect of skill accumulation. To see this, note that the term on this line
is equal to 1 +  times aggregate productivity, measured as output per efficiency unit,
plus a constant. Productivity is falling in  , since progressivity discourages skill accu-
mulation. The third line captures the utility cost of skill accumulation and is increasing
in  (discouraging skill investment saves on investment costs). Finally, the fourth line is
the utility cost of the consumption dispersion caused by skill price dispersion. Naturally,
this term is increasing in  , since more compressed after-tax wages mitigate consumption

   28 Heathcote  et al. (2017) discuss conditions under which W is globally concave in g and  , in which case
the first-order approach is sufficient to derive optimality conditions.

                                                     31
dispersion (see equation 9). In summary, skill choice introduces a trade-off in the choice
of  between incentives to accumulate skills (a force for lower  ) and the redistribution
toward individuals with low learning ability  (a force for larger  ). Setting  and to
their 1980 values implies that once we add the skill investment dimension to the repre-
sentative agent model, optimal progressivity increases to   = -0.15 for our utilitarian
planner.
    The fifth line captures the welfare cost of preference heterogeneity. This term is the
familiar Lucas expression for the welfare cost of consumption dispersion when shocks
are log-normal: one-half of the variance of log consumption due to  times the relative
risk aversion, which is equal to unity. The fact that preference heterogeneity is a force for
a larger  is related to our assumption that equal planning weights mean equal weights
on the consumption term across individuals in the social welfare function. Adding pref-
erence heterogeneity to the model increases optimal progressivity to   = -0.061.
    The sixth line in (19) captures another key source of consumption dispersion: unin-
surable shocks. Again, this corresponds to one-half of the variance of log consumption
attributable to this source of heterogeneity. Naturally, this is unambiguously a force for
higher progressivity, since this source of dispersion in consumption is falling in  . The
optimal value for progressivity increases to   = 0.185 when uninsurable risk is added to
the model.
    Finally, the last line in equation (19) captures the welfare effect of incorporating in-
surable risk. As illustrated by the allocations in (9), insurable risk has no impact on con-
sumption but influences labor supply. The sum of these two terms is maximized at  = 0,
which is the value at which hours respond efficiently to insurable shocks. Insurable wage
risk therefore pushes   toward zero. Adding insurable risk to the calibrated economy
lowers   slightly to 0.181. This implies an average income-weighted marginal tax rate of
33.8%.
    In sum, when all model features are incorporated, optimal progressivity for the equal-
weights planner is very close to the empirical estimate for 1980 of  = 0.186. We take
this as evidence that our choice of a utilitarian equal-weights objective function for the
planner offers a reasonable description of US society's taste for redistribution in 1980. In
what follows we maintain this specification of the welfare objective.29
   29 Toensure that the optimal progressivity in the model is exactly equal to its empirical counterpart in
1980, we could introduce inequality aversion along the lines of Bénabou (2002). Pursuing this exercise un-
der our calibration would imply that the planner has a degree of inequality aversion (equivalent to the
planner's relative risk aversion for consumption inequality) of approximately 1.025, only slightly larger
than the risk aversion of the individuals in the economy. See Heathcote et al. (2017) for details on how in-
equality aversion can be introduced in this model while retaining tractability and a closed-form expression


                                                    32
                                Table 5: Comparative statics on 
                                   
                                  1980   
                                        2016               AMTR1980          AMTR2016
               Change only        0.181 0.155       -0.026  0.338             0.317
               Change only v      0.181 0.201       +0.033  0.338             0.354
               Change only v      0.181 0.167       -0.014  0.338             0.327

               All combined       0.181    0.161    -0.020       0.338          0.322
The table shows the optimal   in 1980 and 2016. In the first three lines, only one parameter
changes to its 2016 level, while the others remain at their 1980 calibration values. In the last line,
all parameters change to their 2016 levels. AMTR refers to the income-weighted average
marginal tax rate, calculated using the formula AMTR = 1 - (1 - g)(1 -  ).


5    The optimal tax response to rising income inequality

We now address the main question of the paper: How should taxes respond to the widen-
ing of the income distribution observed since 1980? To answer this question, we introduce
one mechanism at the time. The parameter shifts we consider are those estimated in Table
3.
    The first exercise we consider is skill-biased technical change ­ that is, an increase
in the skill-bias parameter to its 2016 value. The qualitative effect of increasing on
the optimal   is theoretically ambiguous and reflects the planner's trade-off between
equality and efficiency. On the one hand, a larger increases the value of human capital
accumulation in terms of aggregate output. This efficiency channel is a force for a lower
  . On the other hand, a larger increases the dispersion of skill prices and hence of
consumption. This redistribution channel pushes the equal-weights planner to choose a
higher   . Imposing the estimated increase in while leaving the other parameters at
their 1980 values induces the planner to lower tax progessivity:   = -0.026 (first row
in Table 5). Thus, in our calibration, the efficiency effect dominates the redistribution
effect. To illustrate the magnitude of this change in  , the table also reports the average
(income-weighted) marginal tax rate associated with each value for  .
    Consider now the drivers of residual (within-group) wage inequality. In response to
the increase in v , the planner wants to increase progressivity by 0.033 (second row in
Table 5) in order to provide more social insurance against uninsurable income risk. In
contrast, the planner would lower the progressivity by   = -0.014 in response to the
estimated rise in the insurable component of risk. Note that the quantitative effect on  

for social welfare.

                                                   33
is small compared with the effect of changes in uninsurable risk, even though the rise in
insurable risk is almost three times larger than the rise in uninsurable risk.
    Combining together all sources of rising income inequality implies slightly less pro-
                                        
gressive taxes in 2016 than in 1980, 2016    = 0.161 (last row in Table 5). This implies a
(modest) fall in the average marginal tax rate of about one percentage point. This some-
what surprising result is mainly the consequence of two forces. First, skill-biased tech-
nical change increases the return to human capital investment, and raising progressivity
would excessively distort this margin. Second, the rise in consumption inequality in the
data is lower than that of earnings inequality, implying that a large part of the latter was
privately insurable and that additional social insurance through stronger progressivity
would be redundant. The next section evaluates the robustness of this result and digs
deeper into how an increase in the return to skill impacts optimal progressivity.

5.1   Skill price dispersion and optimal progressivity
To better understand the mechanisms, consider first an economy with no motives for
redistribution other than skill price dispersion and no distortions besides skill investment.
In particular, we make labor supply inelastic (  ) and abstract from all heterogeneity
beyond the dispersion in learning ability  (i.e., we set v = v = v  = 0). We retain
valued government purchases by keeping  at its baseline value. In this stripped-down
model, the planner trades off the benefit of more progressivity in terms of reduced skill
price inequality against the efficiency loss in terms of less skill investment and lower
output. The optimal  given the 1980 values for  and is  = -0.01 (second row in Table
6). Increasing to its 2016 value leads the planner to raise progressivity, contrary to what
we found when running the same experiment in the baseline model (first row in Table 6).
    The left panel of Figure 5 illustrates social welfare in this stripped-down economy as
a function of  for the 1980 calibration (solid blue line) and the 2016 calibration (dashed
red line). In each case, welfare at each value for  is measured in units of equivalent
percentage decline in consumption at the welfare-maximizing value   .
    When increases (moving from blue to red), two things happen to the profile for
welfare. First, the maximum shifts to the right, indicating that increasing raises the
marginal distributional gains from higher progressivity more than it raises the marginal
cost of lower productivity. Second, the welfare function becomes more concave in  .
The logic for this is that with a higher , changes in skill investment that arise when the
planner alters  have larger effects on efficiency and inequality.
    Now consider the baseline version of the model with all model ingredients switched

                                             34
                                       Table 6: Robustness analysis

                                                                                      AMTR        AMTR
                                                            1980   2016       
                                                                                       1980        2016
(1)    Benchmark calibration (see Table 3)                 0.181   0.161   -0.020     0.338       0.322

(2)   changes, only skill motives present                 -0.010   0.043   +0.053      0.183       0.226
(3) Technological change driven by                         0.181   0.169   -0.012      0.338       0.328
(4)  changes, only skill motives present                  -0.010   0.040   +0.050      0.183       0.224
(5) Exogenous skills (no distortion to skill inv.)         0.275   0.317   +0.042      0.414       0.448
(6) Low elasticity of skill investment ( = 0.5)            0.204   0.207   +0.003      0.356       0.359
(7) Larger cons. inequality increase                       0.181   0.188   +0.007      0.338       0.344
(8) Taste for public good  changes over time               0.171   0.172   +0.001      0.342       0.318
      The table shows the optimal   in 1980 and 2016 under various alternative calibrations. Row (1)
      is the baseline model in which technical change is driven by with 2016 = 1980 . Row (2) is an
      economy where v = v = v  = 0 and    and technical change is driven by . Row (3) is the
      baseline model in which technical change is driven by  with 2016 = 1980 . Row (4) is an
      economy where v = v = v  = 0 and    and technical change is driven by  . Row (5)
      assumes that the skill distribution is exogenous (no distortion to human capital). Row (6)
      assumes a lower  with technical change driven by  . Row (7) assumes a larger increase in
      consumption dispersion, in line with Attanasio et al. (2007); var (log c) = 0.09. Row (8) allows 
      to change over time alongside . AMTR refers to the income-weighted average marginal tax rate,
      calculated using the formula AMTR = 1 - (1 - g)(1 -  ).


      on. This case is plotted in the right panel of Figure 5. The first thing to note here is
      that while adding these new model elements activates additional terms in the welfare
      expression (equation 19), the terms that have to do with skill investment and skill price
      inequality--lines (2), (3) and (4)--are exactly the same as in the left panel. The second im-
      portant observation is that introducing additional sources of heterogeneity now implies
      a higher optimal value for  , given the 1980 values for and  . So now the social wel-
      fare terms involving skills­those plotted in the left panel­are pulling progressivity down.
      Moreover, these terms pull the optimal  down further when increases to its 2016 value,
      because the terms involving skills in social welfare are more concave in  in 2016 than in
      1980. Put differently, in 1980, skill investment considerations alone call for a lower  rela-
      tive to other model ingredients, but because the blue welfare expression in the left panel
      is quite flat, skill considerations have a relatively minor impact on the optimal policy. In
      contrast, in 2016, skill considerations matter more, and the optimal policy is pulled closer
      to the one that would be dictated by skill considerations alone ­ that is, the maximum in
      the left panel.


                                                     35
             Social Welfare Functions: Only Skill Motives Present                          Social Welfare Functions: All Motives Present
    0                                                                         0



-0.005                                                                    -0.005



 -0.01                                                                     -0.01



-0.015                                                                    -0.015



 -0.02                                                                     -0.02



-0.025        1980 Baseline                                               -0.025                                                     1980 Baseline
              2016 change                                                                                                            2016 change
              2016 change                                                                                                            2016 change
 -0.03                                                                     -0.03
     -0.05    0        0.05     0.1      0.15       0.2      0.25   0.3        -0.05   0         0.05      0.1      0.15      0.2      0.25          0.3




Figure 5: The figure illustrates social welfare functions (SWF) for various cases. The left
panel abstracts from all motives for progressivity except skill price dispersion (  
and v = v = v  = 0). The right panel is the benchmark case when all motives for
redistribution are present. The solid blue lines are SWF in 1980. The dashed red lines are
SWF when = 2016 and other parameters are as in 1980. The dotted black lines are SWF
when  = 2016 and other parameters are as in 1980.


Specialization-biased technical change . The alternative model of technical change we
discussed is one in which is constant but  falls over time, implying greater complemen-
tarity between skill types. This version is plotted in the dotted black lines in Figure 5. Re-
call that given the empirically estimated value for  (0.186), the red and black economies
deliver identical equilibrium skill premium (1 ) and identical skill price dispersion. The
left-hand panel of Figure 5 indicates that welfare is more concave in  in the red, high
economy than in the black, low  economy. The reason is that the general equilibrium
elasticity of skill investment to progressivity is larger in the high economy (see the dis-
cussion in Section 3.1). Because skill investment is less sensitive to  in the low  economy,
from a skill investment perspective, the welfare costs of choosing the wrong  are smaller.
Thus, in this version of the model, skill investment considerations are a slightly weaker
force pulling progressivity down, translating into a optimal  of 0.169 in 2016 under the
specialization-biased model for increased skill price dispersion, compared with 0.161 in
the baseline economy.




                                                                      36
5.2        Robustness analysis
Elasticity of skill investment . Our conclusion that progressivity should have remained
approximately constant, or even declined slightly, in response to the substantial rise in
inequality since 1980 is driven primarily by the fact that an increase in the return to skill
increases the welfare cost of distorting skill investment through progressive taxation. To
further illustrate this result, we now consider economies with less elastic skill choices.
    Consider first an economy with a fully exogenous skill distribution, where all indi-
viduals' skills are exogenous and thus cannot be affected by progressivity. In this case,
dispersion in p(s) has exactly the same welfare consequences as dispersion in uninsurable
risk , and rising skill price dispersion is isomorphic to additional exogenous uninsurable
income risk.30 In this version of the model, progressivity changes from 1980      = 0.275 to
  
2016   = 0.317 (row [5] of the table). This experiment confirms that if the observed rise
in consumption inequality were caused entirely by the uninsurable and exogenous wage
component , the optimal policy response would be to make the tax and transfer system
substantially more progressive over time.
    Consider now a version of the economy in which the skill investment elasticity is set
to  = 0.5 ­ that is, half of its benchmark value.31 We focus here on the case with no skill
bias in technology ( = 0) and assume that the observed increase in skill price dispersion
is driven by a decline in  .32 The return to skill is now given by equation (14) and, as a
consequence, the parts of the social welfare function (19) that involve skill investments
(lines 2-4) are now modified in line with the model with  = 1 and = 0 (see Heathcote
et al., 2017, for details). Implementing these changes implies that optimal progressivity
now increases very slightly over time (row [6] in the table). Overall, our conclusion of
roughly unchanged optimal progressivity over time appears robust to plausible variation
in the elasticity of skill investment to the after-tax return to skill.


   30 In  this special case, skill prices enter the social welfare function (19) in the same way as uninsurable
risk. Namely, lines two and three in equation (19) are equal to zero, and the only effect of skill prices
is through the cost of consumption inequality. This is still given by line four in equation (19). All other
aspects of the calibration are unchanged. Note in particular that this alternative economy has the same
changes in cross-sectional inequality in wages and consumption as the benchmark economy.
    31 To put this alternative value for  in context,  = 0.5 implies that following the observed increase in

the return to education, average years of education would have increased from 12.6 to just 13.1, instead of
the observed 14.0 between 1980 and 2016.
    32 The     = 0 assumption allows us to solve equation (13) analytically with  = 1. This exercise also
requires a different calibration of  . The implied variance of log skill prices is 1/ 2 (cf. equation [16]).
Setting  to match between-group inequality in 1980 and 2016 then implies 1980 = 4.42 and 2016 = 3.04.
The rest of the calibration is unchanged.

                                                      37
Rise in consumption inequality . There is some disagreement in the literature as to
the size of the increase in consumption inequality in recent decades. Some authors have
argued that consumption inequality has likely increased by more than the estimates in
Heathcote et al. (2010a). For example, Attanasio et al. (2007) combine data from both the
Diary Sample and the Interview Sample in CEX and find that the variance of log con-
sumption increased by 0.09 over the 1980-2005 period. Recall that the benchmark econ-
omy targets an increase of 0.06. This alternative estimate would imply a different calibra-
tion with a stronger increase in uninsurable risk (v,2016 = 0.308) and a more moderate
increase in insurable risk (v,2016 = 0.068). Under this alternative view of the data (row
                                                               
(7) in Table 6), optimal progressivity increases slightly to 2016 = 0.188 in 2016. Thus,
an accurate assessment of the true increase in uninsurable risk­which is manifested in
higher consumption inequality­is an important input for computing how to optimally
adjust progressivity in response to widening inequality.


Public expenditure . Finally, we also allow  to change over time, together with the
other parameters. Government spending as a share of GDP fell from 20.6% in 1980 to
17.6% in 2016. This implies 1980 = 0.259 and 2016 = 0.214. Holding the other param-
eters constant at their 1980 levels, this implies an increase in optimal progressivity from
0.17 to 0.19. As explained in Section 4.2, public good provision is a force for less pro-
gressive taxes, and a lower  weakens this force. When implementing the change in 
alongside all other changes in parameters between 1980 and 2016, optimal progressivity
is approximately constant, as in the data (row [8] in Table 6).


6   Conclusion

This paper asks how a utilitarian government that puts equal weight on all households in
the economy should modify the tax and transfer system in response to rising income in-
equality. Answering this question within the log-linear class of tax and transfer systems­a
specification that matches the data well­yields a closed-form and transparent solution to
an otherwise computationally complex problem.
    Our main finding is that the appropriate policy prescription hinges on the nature of
the rise in inequality. If larger wage dispersion is caused by rising uninsurable labor mar-
ket risk or ex-ante heterogeneity exogenous to individuals' choices, the recommendation
is unambiguous: progressivity should increase in order to provide more social insurance.
Conversely, progressivity should fall if the rise in risk is privately insurable. The opti-


                                            38
mal response to a higher skill premium depends on the magnitude of the human capital
distortion. In our baseline calibration, skill-biased technical change that increases equi-
librium skill price dispersion calls for lower optimal progressivity. Overall, the optimal
response to the combination of factors shaping changes in wage, earnings, and consump-
tion inequality in the United States is to keep progressivity approximately constant. This
prescription is consistent with the empirical evolution of the US tax and transfer system
over the last four decades.
    Going forward, our analysis could be refined in a number of dimensions. We let the
government use a limited set of policy instruments: income taxes and transfers only.33
Some results in the existing literature (Bénabou, 2002; Krueger and Ludwig, 2013; Stantcheva,
2017) suggest that education subsidies could be an important component of the optimal
policy. For example, in a model where most of human capital accumulation occurs before
entering the labor market, the optimal policy response to rising inequality might combine
an increase in tax progressivity with more generous subsidies to formal education. In a
model where skills are mainly accumulated through on-the-job learning, however, such a
policy mix would be less useful.34
    We took the view that "biased" technological change is the driving force of the change
in the wage structure. Within this view, we abstracted from two aspects. First, when
technology is embodied in capital, another tool the government can employ to control
the wage structure is a tax on capital or on "robots," machines that replace certain types
of labor services, as in Guerreiro et al. (2017), Costinot and Werning (2018), Thuemmel
(2019), and Moll et al. (2019). Second, when technological change reduces the return to
work for a range of occupations (e.g., routine jobs in the manufacturing sector), it can end
up pushing these workers out of the labor force altogether (Heathcote et al., 2020a). In
this scenario, well designed active labor-market programs can be useful (Blundell, 2002;
Pavoni and Violante, 2007; Pavoni et al., 2016).
    Other forces have contributed to shape the wage structure beyond technology in the
US. For example, increased trade exposure and the "China shock" are often heralded
as drivers of wage inequality (see Autor et al., 2013). As we insisted throughout the
paper, different sources of changes in inequality call for different prescriptions: a full
normative analysis of taxation within a model where inequality is trade induced, with

   33 The introduction of progressive consumption taxes would not affect our results. In Heathcote et al.
(2017), we show an isomorphism to income taxes within our framework.
   34 Kapi cka (2020) explores an alternative generalization of government policy by analyzing optimal taxa-
tion in a model where after-tax income is a log-linear weighted average of the entire history of past earnings
instead of just current earnings, as in our paper.


                                                     39
heterogeneous gains and losses across the income distribution stemming from the free
flow of goods and ideas would represent a welcome contribution to this literature. See
Antrás et al. (2017) for an analysis incorporating inequality and progressive taxation in
the context of international trade.
   Finally, we specialized our analysis to the US. But what is valid for one country may
not be valid for another. Different cultures, social norms, and institutions mean that tech-
nology and trade affect the wage structure differently across countries. A cross-country
comparative normative analysis is yet another avenue that should be explored further.




                                            40
References
Abbott, Brant, Giovanni Gallipoli, Costas Meghir, and Giovanni L. Violante (2019). "Education
  Policy and Intergenerational Transfers in Equilibrium." Journal of Political Economy, 127(6), 2569­
  2624.
Ales, Laurence, Musab Kurnaz, and Christopher Sleet (2015). "Technical Change, Wage Inequality,
  and Taxes." American Economic Review, 105(10), 3061­3101.
Alon, Titan (2018). "Earning More by Doing Less: Human Capital Specialization and the College
  Wage Premium." Mimeo, University of California, San Diego.
Antrás, Pol, Alonso De Gortari, and Oleg Itskhoki (2017). "Globalization, Inequality and Welfare."
  Journal of International Economics, 108(9), 387­412.
Attanasio, Orazio, Erich Battistin, and Hidehiko Ichimura (2007). "What Really Happened to Con-
  sumption Inequality in the United States?" In Hard-to-Measure Goods and Services: Essays in
  Honor of Zvi Griliches, edited by Ernst R. Berndt and Charles R. Hulten, pp. 515­543. University
  of Chicago Press.
Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson (2013). "The China Syndrome: Local Labor
  Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States." American Economic Review, 103(6),
  2121­2168.
Badel, Alejandro, Mark Huggett, and Wenlan Luo (2020). "Taxing Top Earners: A Human Capital
  Perspective." Economic Journal, 130(629), 1200­1225.
Bakis, Ozan, Bari¸s Kaymak, and Markus Poschke (2015). "Transitional Dynamics and the Optimal
  Progressivity of Income Redistribution." Review of Economic Dynamics, 18(3), 679­693.
Bénabou, Roland (2000). "Unequal Societies: Income Distribution and the Social Contract." Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 90(1), 96­129.
Bénabou, Roland (2002). "Tax and Education Policy in a Heterogeneous-Agent Economy: What
  Levels of Redistribution Maximize Growth and Efficiency?" Econometrica, 70(2), 481­517.
Blundell, Richard (2002). "Welfare-to-Work: Which Policies Work and Why?" Proceedings of the
  British Academy, 117, 477­524.
Blundell, Richard and Ian Preston (1998). "Consumption Inequality and Income Uncertainty."
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(2), 603­640.
Constantinides, George M. and Darrell Duffie (1996). "Asset Pricing with Heterogeneous Con-
  sumers." Journal of Political Economy, 104(2), 219­240.
Costinot, Arnaud and Iván Werning (2018). "Robots, Trade, and Luddism: A Sufficient Statistic
  Approach to Optimal Technology Regulation." NBER Working Paper No. 27622.
Ferriere, Axelle and Gaston Navarro (2020). "The Heterogeneous Effects of Government Spending:
  It's All About Taxes." Mimeo, Paris School of Economics.
Findeisen, Sebastian and Dominik Sachs (2016). "Education and Optimal Dynamic Taxation: The
  Role of Income-Contingent Student Loans." Journal of Public Economics, 138, 1­21.



                                                 41
Fleck, Johannes, Jonathan Heathcote, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L. Violante (2020). "Tax
  progressivity at state and local level." Mimeo, University of Oslo.
Groneck, Max and Johanna Wallenius (2020). "It Sucks to Be Single! Marital Status and Redistri-
  bution of Social Security." Mimeo, Stockholm School of Economics.
Guerreiro, Joao, Sergio Rebelo, and Pedro Teles (2017). "Should Robots be Taxed?" NBER Working
  Paper No. 23806.
Guner, Nezih, Remzi Kaygusuz, and Gustavo Ventura (2014). "Income Taxation of U.S. House-
  holds: Facts and Parametric Estimates." Review of Economic Dynamics, 17(4), 559­581.
Guvenen, Fatih, Greg Kaplan, Jae Song, and Justin Weidner (2017). "Lifetime Incomes in the
  United States over Six Decades." NBER Working Paper No. 23371.
Guvenen, Fatih, Burhanettin Kuruscu, and Serdar Ozkan (2014). "Taxation of Human Capital and
  Wage Inequality: A Cross-Country Analysis." Review of Economic Studies, 81(2), 818­850.
Hassler, John, Per Krusell, Kjetil Storesletten, and Fabrizio Zilibotti (2008). "On the Optimal Tim-
  ing of Capital Taxes." Journal of Monetary Economics, 55(4), 692­709.
Heathcote, Jonathan, Fabrizio Perri, and Giovanni L. Violante (2010a). "Unequal We Stand: An
  Empirical Analysis of Economic Inequality in the United States, 1967-2006." Review of Economic
  Dynamics, 13(1), 15­51.
Heathcote, Jonathan, Fabrizio Perri, and Giovanni L. Violante (2020a). "The Rise of US Earnings
  Inequality: Does the Cycle Drive the Trend? ." Review of Economic Dynamics, 37, 181­204.
Heathcote, Jonathan, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L. Violante (2010b). "The Macroeconomic
  Implications of Rising Wage Inequality in the United States." Journal of Political Economy, 118(4),
  681­722.
Heathcote, Jonathan, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L. Violante (2013). "From Wages to Welfare:
  Decomposing Gains and Losses from Rising Inequality." In Advances in Economics and Econo-
  metrics: Tenth World Congress, vol. 2, edited by Daron Acemoglu, Manuel Arellano, and Eddie
  Dekel, pp. 235­280. Cambridge University Press.
Heathcote, Jonathan, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L. Violante (2014). "Consumption and
  Labor Supply with Partial Insurance: An Analytical Framework." American Economic Review,
  104(7), 2075­2126.
Heathcote, Jonathan, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L. Violante (2017). "Optimal Tax Progres-
  sivity: An Analytical Framework." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(4), 1693­1754.
Heathcote, Jonathan, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L. Violante (2020b). "Optimal Progressivity
  with Age-Dependent Taxation." Journal of Public Economics, 189, 104074.
Heathcote, Jonathan and Hitoshi Tsujiyama (2019). "Optimal Income Taxation: Mirrlees Meets
  Ramsey." Mimeo, Göthe University Frankfurt.
Hubmer, Joachim, Per Krusell, and Anthony A. Smith Jr. (forthcoming). "Sources of U.S. Wealth
  Inequality: Past, Present, and Future." In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2020, vol. 35, edited by
  Martin Eichenbaum and Erik Hurst. University of Chicago Press.



                                                 42
Huggett, Mark (1993). "The Risk-Free Rate in Heterogeneous-Agent Incomplete-Insurance
  Economies." Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 17(5-6), 953­969.
Jakobsson, Ulf (1976). "On the Measurement of the Degree of Progression." Journal of Public Eco-
  nomics, 5(1-2), 161­168.
Kakwani, Nanok C. (1977). "Measurement of Tax Progressivity: An International Comparison."
  Economic Journal, 87(345), 71­80.
Kapi cka, Marek (2020). "Quantifying the Welfare Gains from History Dependent Income Taxa-
  tion." Mimeo.
Katz, Lawrence F. and Kevin M. Murphy (1992). "Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply
  and Demand Factors." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(1), 35­78.
Kindermann, Fabian and Dirk Krueger (2014). "High Marginal Tax Rates on the Top 1%? Lessons
  from a Life Cycle Model with Idiosyncratic Income Risk." NBER Working Paper No. 20601.
Krueger, Dirk and Alexander Ludwig (2013). "Optimal Progressive Labor Income Taxation and
  Education Subsidies When Education Decisions and Intergenerational Transfers Are Endoge-
  nous." American Economic Review, 103(3), 496­501.
Krueger, Dirk and Alexander Ludwig (2016). "On the Optimal Provision of Social Insurance: Pro-
  gressive Taxation versus Education Subsidies in General Equilibrium." Journal of Monetary Eco-
  nomics, 77, 72­98.
Krueger, Dirk, Fabrizio Perri, Luigi Pistaferri, and Giovanni L. Violante (2010). "Cross Sectional
  Facts for Macroeconomists." Review of Economic Dynamics, 13(1), 1­14.
Krusell, Per, Lee E. Ohanian, José-Víctor Ríos-Rull, and Giovanni L. Violante (2000). "Capital-Skill
  Complementarity and Inequality: A Macroeconomic Analysis." Econometrica, 68(5), 1029­1053.
Lockwood, Benjamin B. and Matthew Weinzierl (2015). "De Gustibus non est Taxandum: Hetero-
  geneity in Preferences and Optimal Redistribution." Journal of Public Economics, 124, 74­80.
Lockwood, Benjamin B. and Matthew Weinzierl (2016). "Positive and Normative Judgments Im-
  plicit in U.S. Tax Policy, and the Costs of Unequal Growth and Recessions." Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 77, 30­47.
Mertens, Karel and José Luis Montiel Olea (2018). "Marginal Tax Rates and Income: New Time
  Series Evidence." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(4), 1803­1884.
Moffitt, Robert A (2020). "Reconciling Trends in US Male Earnings Volatility: Results from a Four
  Data Set Project." NBER Working Paper No. 27664.
Moll, Benjamin, Lukasz Rachel, and Pascual Restrepo (2019). "Uneven Growth: Automation's
  Impact on Income and Wealth Inequality." Mimeo, Princeton University.
Musgrave, Richard A. (1959). The Theory of Public Finance: A Study in Public Economy. New York:
  McGraw-Hill.
Pavoni, Nicola, Ofer Setty, and Giovanni L. Violante (2016). "The Design of `Soft' Welfare-to-Work
  Programs." Review of Economic Dynamics, 20, 160­180.
Pavoni, Nicola and Giovanni L. Violante (2007). "Optimal Welfare-to-Work Programs." Review of
  Economic Studies, 74(1), 283­318.


                                                43
Perese, Kevin (2017). "CBO's New Framework for Analyzing the Effects of Means-Tested Trans-
   fers and Federal Taxes on the Distribution of Household Income." Congressional Budget Office
   Working Paper 2017-09.
Piacquadio, Paolo Giovanni (2017). "A Fairness Justification of Utilitarianism." Econometrica, 85(4),
   1261­1276.
Piketty, Thomas and Emmanuel Saez (2007). "How Progressive is the U.S. Federal Tax System? A
   Historical and International Perspective." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(1), 3­24.
Saez, Emmanuel (2001). "Using Elasticities to Derive Optimal Income Tax Rates." Review of Eco-
   nomic Studies, 68(1), 205­229.
Saez, Emmanuel and Gabriel Zucman (2019). The Triumph of Injustice: How the Rich Dodge Taxes and
   How to Make Them Pay. W.W. Norton & Company.
Saez, Emmanuel and Gabriel Zucman (forthcoming). "The Rise of Income and Wealth Inequal-
   ity in America: Evidence from Distributional Macroeconomic Accounts." Journal of Economic
   Perspectives.
Scheuer, Florian and Iván Werning (2017). "The Taxation of Superstars." Quarterly Journal of Eco-
   nomics, 132(1), 211­270.
Slemrod, Joel and Jon Bakija (2017). Taxing Ourselves: A Citizen's Guide to the Debate over Taxes. 5th
   Edition, MIT Press.
Stantcheva, Stefanie (2017). "Optimal Taxation and Human Capital Policies over the Life Cycle."
   Journal of Political Economy, 125(6), 1931­1990.
Stantcheva, Stefanie (2020). "Dynamic Taxation." Annual Review of Economics, 12, 801­831.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1985). "Equilibrium Wage Distributions." Economic Journal, 95(379), 595­618.
Thuemmel, Uwe (2019). "Optimal Taxation of Robots." CESifo Working Paper No. 7317.
Wu, Chunzan (forthcoming). "More Unequal Income but Less Progressive Taxation." Journal of
   Monetary Economics.




                                                 44
