                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  MEASURING TFP: THE ROLE OF PROFITS, ADJUSTMENT COSTS, AND CAPACITY
                              UTILIZATION

                                         Diego A. Comin
                                    Javier Quintana Gonzalez
                                         Tom G. Schmitz
                                        Antonella Trigari

                                       Working Paper 28008
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28008


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2020




Lorenzo Arcà provided outstanding research assistance. We are grateful to Germán Gutiérrez for
sharing his estimates of profit shares, to Klaas de Vries and Robert Stehrer for their help with the
EU KLEMS data, and to Kimberly Bayard, Aaron Flaaen, Norman Morin and Justin Pierce for
their help with US capacity utilization data. We also thank John Earle, Simon Goerlach,
Christoph Hedtrich, Pete Klenow, Kenneth Judd, Thomas Le Barbanchon, Pau Roldan-Blanco,
Luca Sala, Fabiano Schivardi and seminar participants at Bocconi, Pavia and Konstanz for useful
comments. This project has received funding from the European Union's Horizon 2020 research
and innovation programme under grant agreement No 72073. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Diego A. Comin, Javier Quintana Gonzalez, Tom G. Schmitz, and Antonella Trigari.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Measuring TFP: The Role of Profits, Adjustment Costs, and Capacity Utilization
Diego A. Comin, Javier Quintana Gonzalez, Tom G. Schmitz, and Antonella Trigari
NBER Working Paper No. 28008
October 2020
JEL No. E01,E30,O30,O40

                                         ABSTRACT

Standard methods for estimating total factor productivity (TFP) growth assume that economic
profits are zero and adjustment costs are negligible. Moreover, following the seminal contribution
of Basu, Fernald and Kimball (2006), they use changes in hours per worker as a proxy for
unobserved changes in capacity utilization. In this paper, we propose a new estimation method
that accounts for non-zero profits, structurally estimates adjustment costs, and relies on a
utilization proxy from firm surveys. We then compute industry-level and aggregate TFP growth
rates for the United States and five European countries, for the period 1995-2016. In the United
States, our results suggest that the recent slowdown of TFP growth was more gradual than
previously thought. In Europe, we find that TFP was essentially flat during the Great Recession,
while standard methods suggest a substantial decrease. These differences are driven by profits in
the United States, and by profits and our new utilization proxy in Europe.

Diego A. Comin                                  Tom G. Schmitz
Dartmouth College                               Bocconi University
Economics Department                            Via Roentgen 1
6106 Rockefeller Hall, Room 327                 20136 Milano
Hanover, NH 03755                               Italy
and CEPR                                        tom.schmitz@unibocconi.it
and also NBER
diego.comin@dartmouth.edu                       Antonella Trigari
                                                Bocconi University
Javier Quintana Gonzalez                        Via Roentgen 1
Bank of Spain                                   20136 Milano
Calle Alcalá, 48                                Italy
8014 Madrid                                     and CEPR
Spain                                           antonella.trigari@unibocconi.it
javier.quintana@bde.es
1    Introduction

Total Factor Productivity (TFP) growth is among the most important variables in macroeconomics,

playing a crucial role for both short and long-run phenomena. The concept is due to Solow (1957), who

defined TFP growth as the change in output that cannot be attributed to changes in factor inputs. Despite

this clear definition, computing actual TFP growth rates is subject to several measurement challenges,

regarding inputs, outputs and the production functions relating inputs to outputs.

    To overcome these issues, Solow (1957) proposed a simple method. Solow noted that if firms minimize

costs and do not make profits, the output elasticity of the production function with respect to a given

input equals that input's factor share. Thus, one can compute TFP growth as the difference between

output growth and a weighted average of input growth rates, weighting each input by its factor share. This

simple way of computing "Solow residuals" is still widely used in the literature. In the 2000s, the state

of the art for TFP estimation was further advanced by a series of papers by Basu, Fernald and Kimball

(Basu and Fernald, 2001; Basu, Fernald and Kimball, 2006). Basu, Fernald and Kimball (henceforth,

BFK) extended Solow's method in order to account for unobserved fluctuations in capacity utilization.

Using a dynamic model, they showed that under some assumptions, fluctuations in hours per worker are

one-to-one related to fluctuations in capacity utilization, and can therefore be used as a proxy for the

latter. This method underlies the widely used series for capacity-adjusted quarterly TFP growth in the

United States introduced by Fernald (2014b).

    These methods have greatly enhanced our understanding of TFP dynamics. However, they also rely

on strong assumptions, which may not always hold. To relax these assumptions, we develop a more

general model-based estimation method that does not rely on first order approximations, and allows us

to accommodate non-zero profits and non-negligible adjustment costs. Moreover, we show that hours per

worker may be a problematic utilization proxy in some cases. Thus, we instead rely on a new model-based

proxy with more attractive properties. We use our method to compute industry-level and aggregate TFP

growth rates for the United States and the five largest European economies over the period 1995-2016,

and show that our estimates suggest substantially different TFP dynamics than the standard methods.

    Following the Solow-BFK tradition, our analysis is based on a simple dynamic model which assumes

that firms minimize costs and take input prices as given. The first new element in our paper regards

profits. While Solow and BFK assume that long-run economic profits are zero, recent studies present



                                                    1
mounting evidence for positive profits (Gutierrez and Philippon, 2017; Gutierrez, 2018; Grullon et al.,

2019; Barkai, 2020). Positive profits create a wedge between output elasticities and factor shares. We use

industry-level profit shares estimated by Gutierrez (2018) to compute this wedge, and find that in most

countries and industries, the zero-profit assumption underestimates the output elasticity of labour and

materials, and overestimates the output elasticity of capital. This is important, as capital tends to grow

faster than other inputs in the long run, and is less volatile over the business cycle. Thus, the zero-profit

assumption underestimates TFP growth in the long run, and overestimates its volatility and cyclicality.

       The second new element in our paper regards adjustment costs. Adjustment costs for capital and

employment are important in many business cycle models, and constitute the leading explanation for why

firms change their level of capacity utilization over time. Furthermore, adjustment costs matter for TFP

measurement, as they change the effective growth rate of capital or labour inputs in periods with large

changes in investment or hiring (e.g., during the recovery from a deep recession, or in the early years

of a new industry). Nevertheless, Solow and BFK assume that adjustment costs are either inexistent or

negligible.1 In our paper, we instead structurally estimate adjustment cost functions. Precisely, we use

our dynamic cost minimization model, and rely on the observed volatility of capital and employment to

identify the parameters of the adjustment cost functions for these inputs.

       Finally, the third new element in our paper regards unobserved fluctuations in capacity utilization.

Researchers have long acknowledged that capital stocks and hours worked do not fully reflect actual inputs

into production. For instance, firms typically use their capital equipment less and workers perform less

tasks per hour of work during a recession. As these changes are not reflected in standard input measures,

Solow residuals have a pro-cyclical bias.2 To account for this, BFK use changes in hours per worker

as a utilization proxy, arguing that - under some assumptions - cost-minimizing firms adjust hours per

worker proportionally to other unobserved production factors. However, we show that this proxy may

be problematic if there are shocks to the relative cost of hours per worker with respect to unobserved

production factors, or if average hours per worker fluctuate because of composition effects. We therefore

propose an alternative proxy: capacity utilization rates measured by firm surveys. These surveys ask
   1
    Precisely, BFK assume that industries are close to a Balanced Growth Path on which marginal adjustment costs are zero.
   2
    Solow was well aware of this issue. To correct for it, he assumed that the fraction of capital not used in production
was equal to the unemployment rate: "What belongs in a production function is capital in use, not capital in place. [...]
Lacking any reliable year-by-year measure of the utilization of capital I have simply reduced [the capital stock] by the fraction
of the labor force unemployed in each year, thus assuming that labor and capital always suffer unemployment to the same
percentage. This is undoubtedly wrong, but probably gets closer to the truth than making no correction at all" (Solow, 1957).




                                                               2
firms to report the ratio between their actual output and their full capacity output. We show that in

our model - under some assumptions - this measure is proportional to changes in unobserved production

factors, making it an ideal proxy. Furthermore, it does not require assumptions on relative factor prices.3

      To implement our new proxy and obtain our final industry-level estimates of TFP growth, we run

an instrumental variable (IV) regression of a modified Solow residual (taking into account profits and

adjustment costs) on changes in the capacity utilization survey. The residual term of this regression is

our estimate of TFP growth. This estimation approach follows the one proposed by BFK, but as explained

above, both the Solow residual and the utilization proxy are computed differently. Using data from the

BLS and from EU KLEMS, we then estimate industry-level and aggregate TFP growth rates for the

United States and the five largest European economies.

      For the United States, our method implies that aggregate TFP increased by 26.8% between 1995

and 2018, a substantially higher number than the 23.0% suggested by the BFK method. This change

is entirely due to our assumption on profits: positive profits lower our estimate for the output elasticity

of capital, but capital grew substantially faster than other inputs during the period. We also find that

the widely noted slowdown in US TFP growth (Fernald, 2014a; Gordon, 2016) has been more gradual

than suggested by standard methods. Again, this is due to the fact that we revise the output elasticity

of capital downwards, and capital fell less than other inputs around the Great Recession. Thus, while

the Solow residual or the BFK measure suggest an abrupt slowdown around the year 2005, we find that

annual TFP growth decreased from 1.9% per year between 1995 and 2005 to 0.9% between 2005 and

2010, and 0.0% between 2010 and 2018. This suggests that there has been a further drop in US TFP

growth after the Great Recession. While profits are crucial, we find that adjustment costs have only a

small effect on our estimates. Finally, relying on our survey proxy or the BFK hours per worker proxy

for the utilization adjustment delivers very similar results for the United States.

      In Europe, we find that TFP was essentially flat during the Great Recession and Euro crisis, while the

Solow and BFK methods suggest a substantial decrease. These results are in part driven by our assump-

tions on profits, in line with our results for the United States during the Great Recession. Adjustment

costs, in turn, only have small effects on aggregate outcomes. The main difference with respect to the

United States is that the utilization proxy now also plays a crucial role. In several countries (e.g., Spain,

France and the United Kingdom), changes in labour composition or shocks to labour market institutions
  3
      This is a potential advantage over hours per worker, but also over other possible proxies (e.g., electricity use).


                                                                 3
generate fluctuations in hours per worker that are unrelated to utilization. Therefore, the BFK utilization

adjustment regressions deliver insignificant or problematic results in these countries. Our survey measure

is more robust, and delivers TFP series that are less volatile and less cyclical. For instance, our series for

aggregate TFP growth in Eurozone countries has a standard deviation that is only half as large as the one

of the BFK measure, and its correlation with real value added growth is 0.13, against 0.57 for the BFK

measure. Thus, while hours per worker may be a good utilization proxy in the United States, our survey

measure appears more suitable for measuring changes in unobserved capacity utilization in Europe.


Related literature Our paper is related to a large literature on productivity measurement. Following

Solow (1957), researchers have assembled large industry-level growth accounting datasets with many

production factors, and used these to compute Solow residuals. Leading examples for this approach are

the KLEMS project (O'Mahony and Timmer, 2009) or the studies of Jorgenson et al. (2012) for the

United States. These detailed and high-quality datasets are the basis for our empirical work. However,

their Solow residual measures do not consider profits, adjustment costs, or changes in factor utilization.4

       There is a large literature on each of these aspects. As noted above, the need to adjust TFP growth

for changes in capacity utilization was already recognized in Solow (1957). In later research, Costello

(1993) and Burnside et al. (1995) propose electricity consumption (and, in the latter case, also hours per

worker) as a proxy for capital services.5 Imbs (1999) develops a alternative model-based methodology,

and Field (2012) proposes to rely on the unemployment rate. Currently, the BFK method is the leading

approach on this issue. Its application has been largely limited to US data, with only two exceptions that

we are aware of. Inklaar (2007) uses the BFK method for European countries and finds that the resulting

TFP measures remain strongly procyclical. He interprets these results as showing that hours per worker

are not a relevant utilization proxy in Europe, but does not propose an alternative.6 Huo et al. (2020) use

the BFK method to calculate utilization-adjusted TFP series for a large panel of countries (imposing that

the relation between hours per worker and utilization is the same in all countries). Our main contribution
   4
     TFP measurement obviously faces many other challenges that we do not deal with in this paper. For instance, we abstract
from issues relating to the measurement of output growth in the presence of quality improvements and new products (Boskin
et al., 1996; Aghion et al., 2017). We also do not directly deal with intangible capital (Corrado et al., 2012). However, we
do use the latest release of the EU KLEMS dataset, which makes some efforts to deal with this latter issue.
   5
     The major difference between their approach and BFK is that Burnside et al. (1995) assume a unit elasticity between
changes in hours per worker and capital utilization, while BFK estimate this elasticity.
   6
     Planas et al. (2013) propose a statistical filtering method to extract trend TFP growth for European countries (also
relying on capacity utilization surveys). This approach differs from BFK and from our paper by the fact that it uses a
statistical model instead of the economic structure imposed by a cost minimization model.



                                                             4
with respect to these studies is to propose a new model-based proxy, taken from firm surveys. Our proxy

does not require assumptions on relative factor prices, is robust to changes in labour composition and

labour market institutions, and appears to be relevant across a large range of countries.

    Adjustment costs have also received some attention in the literature, especially regarding the issue

of TFP measurement in new industries (Berndt and Fuss, 1986; Brynjolfsson et al., 2018). For instance,

Basu et al. (2001) compute a TFP series for the United States which takes capital adjustment costs into

account. While they calibrate a capital adjustment function using external evidence and assume that there

are no adjustment costs for labour, we structurally estimate capital and labour adjustment costs by using

information on factor prices and input volatility. Finally, several recent papers have noted that positive

profits affect TFP measurement (Karabarbounis and Neiman, 2019; Meier and Reinelt, 2020). These

approaches are limited to aggregate data. To the best of our knowledge, we are to first to use detailed

industry-level estimates, and to point out that doing so has major implications for the chronology of TFP

growth around the Great Recession. Furthermore, we develop TFP measures that jointly account for

profits, adjustment costs and utilization, instead of dealing with each of these issues separately.

    The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 lays out the dynamic cost minimization

model that is the basis of our analysis. Section 3 describes our method of TFP estimation, and explains

how it differs from standard methods. Section 4 presents the data that we use for our analysis. Section 5

presents our estimates for output elasticities, adjustment costs and utilization adjustments, and Section 6

analyses our final results for TFP growth rates. Section 7 concludes.



2     A workhorse model

2.1   Assumptions

Production technology We assume that in each industry, a representative firm produces output Yt

by using capital Kt , quasi-fixed labour LF,t , variable labour LV,t , and materials Mt . Inputs are combined

with the production function

                                       Yt = Zt F Kt , LF,t , LV,t , Mt ,                                 (1)

where Zt is a Hicks-neutral production shifter to which we refer as TFP. Note that accounting for two

types of labour will become important when we discuss the potential limitations underlying the use of



                                                      5
hours per worker as a utilization proxy.7

      Capital and quasi-fixed labour are subject to internal adjustment costs. The capital input holds

                                                                It
                                                Kt = Kt             - ,                                   (2)
                                                               Kt-1

where Kt is the book value of the capital stock, It is investment, and  is a positive parameter.  is an

inverse-U shaped function with a maximum at 0, implying that if the firm chooses an investment rate

different from , its effective capital input is lower than the book value of its capital stock. Similarly, the

quasi-fixed labour input is given by

                                                                     AF,t
                                         LF,t = EF,t HF,t NF,t             - .                            (3)
                                                                    NF,t-1

We define quasi-fixed labour as the labour input provided by workers with permanent and full-time

contracts. NF,t stands for the number of such workers, HF,t for the number of hours worked by each of

them, and EF,t for the number of tasks each worker undertakes in one hour ("worker effort"). Just as for

capital, there are internal adjustment costs, captured by the function , which is also inverse-U shaped

and has a maximum at 0. Adjustment costs depend on the difference between the hiring rate (defined as

the ratio of new hires AF,t to last period's employment) and the parameter  .

      Finally, the variable labour input is defined as the labour provided by workers with either temporary

or part-time contracts, and given by

                                                   LV,t = EV,t HV,t NV,t ,                                (4)

where NV,t , HV,t and EV,t stand for the employment, hours and effort of these workers. Note that there

are no adjustment costs for variable labour, reflecting the fact that it is easier for firms to adjust their

temporary or part-time workforce than their full-time, permanent workforce.

      Note that our specification of the production technology does not have an independent role for the

utilization rate of capital. This captures the idea that capital goods (machines, buildings, patents...) do

not produce by themselves. Thus, their utilization rate depends on all other inputs. For example, the

utilization rate of a machine depends on how often workers use it, how much electricity it consumes, and

how many material inputs it receives. The utilization rate of a bank office depends on how many clerks
  7
      To simplify notation, we drop industry subscripts whenever this does not cause confusion.



                                                              6
work in the office, and on how many customers they serve within an hour. As the utilization rate of

capital is a function of all other inputs, it does not appear in the reduced-form production function shown

in Equation (1).

    If production and adjustment cost functions were known, and output and all inputs were observable,

one could immediately read off TFP growth from Equation (1). In reality, however, production and

adjustment cost functions are unknown, and some inputs such as worker effort are not observable.8

    The classical approach to TFP measurement, pioneered by Solow (1957) and extended by Hall (1988)

and Basu et al. (2006), overcomes these issues by imposing additional assumptions. Most importantly, it

assumes that firms minimize costs and are price-takers in input markets. We follow this general framework,

and thus start by laying out a dynamic cost minimization problem that will be at the heart of our analysis.

This allows us to discuss both standard methods and our deviations from them.


Cost minimization We assume that the firm minimizes the discounted sum of production costs for

any possible sequence of production (Yt )tN , subject to stochastic shocks to TFP and to input prices. Its

cost minimization problem is then

            +              t
                    1
   min E0                        wF,t F (HF,t ) NF,t + wV,t V (HV,t ) NV,t + qF,t F (EF,t ) HF,t NF,t
             t=0
                   1+r

                               +qV,t V (EV,t ) HV,t NV,t + PM,t Mt + PI,t It

                                                     It                                AF,t
   such that                   Yt = Zt F Kt         Kt-1   -  , EF,t HF,t NF,t        NF,t-1   -  , EV,t HV,t NV,t , Mt ,

                               NF,t = (1 - NF ) NF,t-1 + At ,

                               Kt = (1 - K ) Kt-1 + It .
                                                                                                                            (5)

    Firms discount profits at the constant real interest rate r, and all input prices are stated in real terms.

The total cost in period t is composed by the cost of materials, PM,t Mt (where PM,t stands for the price

of materials), the cost of investment, PI,t It (where PI,t stands for the price of investment goods), and

labour costs. The firm owns the capital stock, which depreciates at an exogenous rate K . It also faces

an exogenous separation rate NF for its quasi-fixed workforce.

    For each type of labour  {F, V }, costs have two components. The first component, w ,t  (H ,t ) N ,t ,
   8
     Again, as we assume that the utilization rate of capital is a function of all inputs, changes in capital utilization do not
create measurement problems as such. Problems only arise because some inputs, such as worker effort, are not observable.



                                                               7
depends on employment and hours per worker.  is an increasing and convex function, capturing the

fact that workers need to be paid more when they work longer hours (because of overtime premia, etc.).

w   ,t   is a stochastic shifter of this cost function, capturing changes in hourly wages which are not due to

changes in hours per worker. The second component is an additional cost for increasing effort per hour

worked, q ,t  (E ,t ) H ,t N ,t . We stay as agnostic as possible with respect to this cost. We just assume

that it is proportional to total hours worked, and increasing and convex in effort (i.e.,  is increasing

and convex). Effort costs are also subject to a stochastic cost shifter q ,t .


Functional forms In order to explicitly solve the model, we need to assume functional forms for the

production function F and the cost functions  ,  ,  and . We assume that the production function

is Cobb-Douglas with constant returns to scale:

                                                            K             F          V
                            F Kt , LF,t , LV,t , Mt = Kt        (LF,t )L (LV,t )L (Mt )M ,


          F + V + 
where K + L   L   M = 1. While this is obviously a strong assumption, it follows most of the

literature, as we discuss in Section 3.

         The cost functions for hours and effort are given by


                                             (H ,t ) = 1 + b (H ,t )c ,


                                                (E ,t ) = b (E ,t )c .

The intercept in the function  implies that firms need to pay workers even if they work zero hours, and

is needed for the choice of hours per worker and employment to be well defined on the Balanced Growth

Path (BGP).9 Note also that we assume the curvature of the two cost functions to be the same for the

quasi-fixed and the variable part of labour input.

         Finally, we assume that the adjustment cost function for capital is

                                                 
                                                                          2
                                                 1 - a-         It
                                                                      -       if    It
                                                                                          
                                                 
                                 It                            Kt-1                Kt-1
                                     - =                                                      ,
                                Kt-1     1 - a+
                                         
                                                                It
                                                                          2
                                                                                    It
                                                                      -       if          >
                                         
                                                               Kt-1                Kt-1

   9
     We define our model's BGP solution as the solution obtained when output, TFP and factor prices grow at a constant
rate. Appendix A.1 provides further details, and shows that hours per worker and effort per hour are constant on the BGP.


                                                           8
where we set  to be equal to the BGP investment rate. Accordingly, marginal adjustment costs are zero

on the BGP. The adjustment cost function for quasi-fixed employment  is specified exactly analogously

to . These quadratic adjustment cost functions are in line with the typical specifications used in the

literature (see, e.g., David and Venkateswaran, 2019).


2.2     Optimal input choices

Given our functional form assumptions, we can now write down the first-order optimality conditions for

the cost minimization problem specified in Equation (5). The first-order condition for materials is

                                                                  Yt
                                              PM,t = t M             ,                                           (6)
                                                                  Mt

where t is the Lagrange multiplier on the output constraint (which is equal, by definition, to the marginal

cost of output in period t). Equation (6) states that the firm equalizes the marginal cost of materials,

PM,t , to their marginal benefit. The marginal benefit of buying materials is that this relaxes the output
                Yt
constraint by M M t
                    units, which is valued at the marginal cost t .

      We get analogous expressions for hours and effort of both types of workers:

                                                                                   Yt
                                 w ,t  (H ,t ) + q ,t  (E ,t ) N     ,t   = t L         ,                        (7)
                                                                                   H ,t

                                                                          Yt
                                      q ,t  (E ,t ) H ,t N   ,t   = t L        ,                                 (8)
                                                                          E ,t

for     {F, V }. Finally, variable employment is pinned down by


                                                                        V           Yt
                               wV,t V (HV,t ) + qV,t V (EV,t ) HV,t = t L               .
                                                                                   NV,t

      As shown in greater detail in Appendix A.1, capital and quasi-fixed employment choices are pinned

down by two Euler Equations. The Euler equation for capital is

                                                                                            2   t+1 K Yt+1
                         Kt t     K Yt    1                           Kt+1
         PI,t = t 1 +                  +     Et (1 - K ) PI,t+1 - t+1                                        .   (9)
                        Kt-1 t    Kt     1+r                           Kt                       t+1 Kt+1

This equation shows that the firm equalizes the marginal cost of investment (the price of investment goods)



                                                       9
to its marginal benefit, composed of three terms. First, investment relaxes the output constraint, and

this is valued at the marginal cost t . Second, investment leaves the firm with (1 - K ) units of left-over

capital in the next period, valued at next period's price of investment goods. Third, investment affects

future capital adjustment costs. When the firm expects to invest more than the BGP rate tomorrow

(implying t+1 < 0), investment today lowers tomorrow's adjustment cost. However, when the firm

expects to invest less than the BGP rate tomorrow (implying t+1 > 0), investment today requires a

costly reversal tomorrow.

   The Euler equation for quasi-fixed employment follows a similar logic, and is given by:


                                   wF,t F (HF,t ) + qF,t F (EF,t ) HF,t =
                                                                                                      (10)
                               NF,t t    FL Yt        1             NF,t+1 2 t+1 FL Yt+1
                      t 1 +   NF,t-1 t   NF,t    -   1+r Et   t+1    NF,t    t+1 NF,t+1    ,


   The firm equalizes the marginal cost of hiring a quasi-fixed worker to the sum of the flow benefit of

higher employment on the output constraint, and the continuation value (or cost) of higher employment

on future employment adjustment costs. There is, however, no capital value of employment, as the firm

needs to pay its workforce again in every period.


Taking stock Using our functional form assumption for the production function, we can express TFP

growth as
                                               F (dE
                   dZt = dYt - K (dKt + dt ) + L    F,t + dHF,t + dNF,t + dt )
                                                                                                      (11)
                             V (dE
                            +L     V,t + dHV,t + dNV,t ) + M dMt .


   where dXt  ln Xt - ln Xt-1 for any variable Xt . Equation (11) summarizes the challenges that need

to be overcome in order to measure TFP growth: while growth in output, the capital stock, hours per

worker, employment and materials are observable in many standard datasets, the output elasticities ,

the adjustment cost functions  and , and the changes in worker effort dE are not.

   In the Solow-BFK tradition, these unobservable quantities are disciplined by using the optimality

conditions of the firm's cost minimization problem and further assumptions on firm behaviour. In the

next section, we discuss these standard methods, and show how our method deviates from them.




                                                         10
3         Measuring TFP growth

3.1        Standard methods

In this section, we describe the BFK method, which nests the classical Solow (1957) method. To streamline

the discussion, we present these methods in the context of our model. In particular, we note that the

BFK estimation equation can be obtained by imposing four simplifying assumptions on our model: the

industry is always in the vicinity of the BGP, profits are zero on the BGP, all labour inputs are quasi-fixed,

and the relative price of effort with respect to hours per worker is constant.10


Adjustment costs and output elasticities As the industry is always in the vicinity of the BGP, and

marginal adjustment costs are zero on the BGP, changes in adjustment costs (dt and dt ) are zero up

to the first order, and can be ignored. Evaluating the first-order conditions for materials and employment

on the BGP, we then get

                                                           M
                                                         PM,t   t
                                                     µ            = M ,                                                    (12)
                                                          Pt Yt

                              w,t  (H  ) + q ,t  (E  ) H  N ,t
                          µ                                              = L ,     for    {F, V } ,                        (13)
                                               Pt Yt
                                
                               Pt
where we denote by µ                the industry-level markup. Summing up Equations (12) and (13), and using
                                t

the constant returns to scale assumption, we get

                                                                                             
                            M +
                          PM,t                     w,t  (H  ) + q ,t  (E  ) H  N ,t
                               t          {F,V }
                    µ                                                                         = 1 - K .                    (14)
                                                       Pt Yt


         BFK assume that BGP profits are zero, which implies µ = 1.11 Then, Equations (12) to (13) show

that the output elasticities  of materials and labour are just equal to the BGP factor shares of these

inputs (that is, the long-run average of the ratios between spending on these inputs and sales, easy to
    10
      Basu et al. (2006) specify a dynamic cost minimization model which is similar, but not identical, to the one presented
in Section 2. However, if we impose the four simplifying assumptions stated above, as well as constant return to scale, we
obtain a measurement equation that is identical to the one in their paper. Two further points are worth noting. First, while
Basu et al. (2006) allow for non-constant returns to scale, their results provide strong evidence for constant returns to scale,
and BFK impose this assumption from the outset in later work (Basu et al., 2013; Fernald, 2014b). Second, while we directly
assume that production is Cobb-Douglas, BFK impose this restriction implicitly. Indeed, they consider a log-lineariziation of
a generic production function around the BGP, making their effective production function log-linear with constant elasticities
(i.e., Cobb-Douglas). We discuss the exact differences between our and BFK's model in Appendix A.4.
   11
      Constant returns to scale imply that µ = 1- 1
                                                   
                                                     , where   is the profit share of gross output.



                                                               11
compute in standard datasets). Once we know the factor elasticities of materials and labour, the factor

elasticity of capital can be deduced as a residual from Equation (14).

    Abstracting from unobservable changes in worker effort, these results imply that we can measure TFP

growth as a standard Solow residual. That is, as advocated by Solow (1957), TFP growth is just the

difference between output growth and a weighted average of input growth rates, weighting each input by

its factor share.12 However, as we abstract from changes in worker effort, this measure is biased. The

BFK method is designed to correct this bias, and we discuss the way it does so in the next paragraph.


Accounting for unobserved changes in worker effort To capture unobserved changes in worker

effort, BFK propose a proxy method which relies on the optimality conditions of the firm's cost minim-

ization problem. Combining Equations (7) and (8), we get


                                          1                          c - 1
                           dE   ,t   =      (dw   ,t   - dq ,t ) +         dH ,t ,     for    {F, V } .              (15)
                                         c                            c

Therefore, the total unobserved effort holds


                     F         V                                 L                              c - 1
                     L dEF,t + L dEV,t =                           (dw     ,t   - dq ,t ) + L         dH   ,t   .    (16)
                                                       {V,F }
                                                                 c                               c

                                                             V = 0) and that the relative price of effort
    BFK assume that all labour inputs are quasi-fixed (i.e., L

with respect to hours per worker is constant (i.e., dwt = dqt ). Then, Equation (16) simplifies to

                                                                 c - 1
                                                         dEt =         dHt ,                                         (17)
                                                                  c

where Et stands for aggregate effort and Ht stands for aggregate hours per worker. That is, there is a

linear relationship between changes in effort and changes in hours. As a result, BFK can rewrite Equation

(11) as

                          dYt - (s                           
                                  K dKt + sL (dHt + dNt ) + sM dMt ) = H dHt + dZt ,                                 (18)

                  -1
    where H = L c                   
                 c and sK , sL and sM are BGP factor shares. The left-hand side of this equation is
  12
     To obtain this result, Solow disregarded adjustment costs from the outset and assumed perfect competition. Then, in
a much simpler setup, he also obtained the result that output elasticities are equal to factor shares. BFK consider a more
complicated dynamic setup in order to create a role for unobserved fluctuations in utilization, which their method is then
designed to address.



                                                                     12
a standard Solow residual. OLS estimation of the unknown coefficient H faces a simultaneity issue, as

input choices depend on TFP growth. Thus, BFK estimate Equation (18) with instrumental variables,

using oil price shocks, fiscal policy shocks and monetary policy shocks as instruments for changes in hours

per worker. The residual of this IV regression is their measure of TFP growth dZt .


Discussion The standard methods for estimating TFP growth have greatly advanced our understand-

ing of productivity dynamics. However, as the above discussion makes clear, they also rely on strong

assumptions. In our paper, we aim to relax three assumptions that appear particularly relevant.

   First, Equations (12) and (13) show that if firms make positive profits, the Solow-BFK estimates for

output elasticities are biased downwards for materials and labour, and upwards for capital. As capital

growth tends to be less volatile than material or labour growth, this could induce a procyclical bias for

TFP. Moreover, as capital tends to grow more than other inputs in the long run, the same bias could lead

to an underestimation of long-run TFP growth.

   Second, the Solow-BFK assumption of zero or negligible adjustment costs could underestimate TFP

growth during large increases in investment or hiring, e.g., during the recovery from a major recession or

in the early years of new industries.

   Third, relying on hours per worker as a utilization proxy may be problematic in some cases. Indeed,

Equation (15) indicates several issues. For one, if there are shocks to the relative price of hours per worker

with respect to worker effort, there is no longer a perfect correlation between both variables. Moreover,

when there are different types of workers, as in our model, aggregate hours per worker become subject to

composition effects. To make this latter point more concrete, we assume for a moment that the relative

price of hours per worker with respect to worker effort is 1, and rewrite Equation (16) as


                  F         V             c - 1         F   Ht             V       Ht
                  L dEF,t + L dEV,t =           L dHt - L d              - L d             .             (19)
                                           c                HF,t                   HV,t

This shows that in the presence of worker heterogeneity, the BFK proxying equation contains two extra
            Ht             Ht
terms, d   HF,t   and d   HV,t   . These terms are non-zero if aggregate hours per worker do not move in

line with hours per worker for both categories (which could happen if hours and/or employment levels

for both categories react differently to shocks). Depending on whether such changes are correlated with

changes in aggregate hours per worker and TFP shocks, this could either introduce a bias or at least some

noise in the estimation equation.

                                                     13
                                                  Figure 1: Relative hours per worker
                                       United States
             0.868                                                                                             Germany
                                                                                    1.86 0.92
             0.866                                                                                                                         1.58

             0.864                                                                         0.91                                            1.57
                                                                                    1.84
             0.862                                                                                                                         1.56
                                                                                            0.9
              0.86                                                                  1.82                                                   1.55
             0.858                                                                         0.89
                                                                                                                                           1.54
             0.856                                                                  1.8
                                                                                           0.88                                            1.53
             0.854
                                                                                                                                           1.52
             0.852                                                                  1.78
                                                                                           0.87
                                                                                                                                           1.51
              0.85
                                                                                    1.76 0.86                                              1.5
             0.848

                                                                                                                                           1.49
                 1995     2000         2005            2010          2015
                                                                                             1995    2000      2005          2010   2015


                                                                                                                France
                                          Spain
                                                                                   1.3
              0.96                                                                        0.944                                            1.36
                                                                                   1.28
                                                                                          0.943
             0.955                                                                                                                         1.35
                                                                                   1.26
                                                                                          0.942

              0.95                                                                 1.24                                                    1.34
                                                                                          0.941
                                                                                   1.22 0.94                                               1.33
             0.945
                                                                                   1.2 0.939
                                                                                                                                           1.32
              0.94
                                                                                   1.18 0.938
                                                                                                                                           1.31
             0.935                                                                 1.16 0.937
                                                                                          0.936                                            1.3
              0.93                                                                 1.14
                                                                                          0.935
                                                                                   1.12                                                    1.29
             0.925                                                                        0.934
                                                                                   1.1
                                                                                              1995   2000       2005         2010   2015
                1995      2000           2005             2010              2015


                                                                                                            United Kingdom
                                          Italy                                                                                            1.96
                                                                                          0.875
             0.97
                                                                                   1.46
                                                                                                                                           1.94
             0.96                                                                  1.45

                                                                                   1.44 0.87
                                                                                                                                           1.92
             0.95
                                                                                   1.43

                                                                                   1.42                                                    1.9
             0.94

                                                                                   1.41 0.865
             0.93                                                                                                                          1.88
                                                                                   1.4

                                                                                   1.39
             0.92                                                                                                                          1.86
                                                                                   1.38 0.86

                                                                                             1995    2000      2005          2010   2015
                1995      2000            2005                2010            2015

                                     Ht       Ht
Notes: This figure plots the ratios HF,t
                                         and H V,t
                                                   , aggregating up employment and hours across all industries. Quasi-fixed
workers are those with a permanent and full-time contract, variable workers are all others. Data sources are described in
Section 4. Shaded areas mark recessions, defined in Appendix B.6.


                         Ht              Ht
    Figure 1 plots      HF,t     and    HV,t      for the six countries analysed in this paper, aggregating hours and

employment across all industries. This figure shows that there are permanent differences in hours per

worker between categories, as quasi-fixed workers (i.e., workers with a permanent and full-time contract)



                                                                                     14
work longer hours. Second, aggregate hours per worker do not move symmetrically to hours per worker
                                                                    Ht                           Ht
for each category. For example, in Spain, the ratio                HF,t   falls and the ratio   HV,t   increases during the

Great Recession and Euro crisis. That is, aggregate hours per worker fall more than the hours of full-time

and permanent workers, but less than the hours of workers on temporary or part-time contracts. This

is consistent with the latter workers working lower hours in general, and being the first to lose their job

during the crisis. Such systematic composition effects could introduce a bias in the BFK estimation.

       All three measurement issues raised above may have important effects on estimated TFP growth rates.

The next section presents our estimation method and describes how it deals with these issues.


3.2      Our TFP estimation method

Our estimation method allows for non-zero profits and adjustment costs, and introduces a new proxy for

unobserved changes in worker effort. We first discuss our approach with respect to each of these issues

in isolation, and then present our full estimation algorithm. Here, we focus on conceptual issues, while

Section 4 contains further details on data and implementation.


Profit shares and output elasticities Equations (12) to (14) show that in each industry, output

elasticities depend only on BGP factor shares and BGP markups. To compute the latter, we rely on

industry-level estimates for profit shares from Gutierrez (2018).13 Taking simple averages of profit shares

over time, we obtain an estimate for BGP profit shares   , and thus for BGP markups µ . Combining

this with standard data on factor shares, Equations (12) to (14) pin down our estimates for the output
                 V , F and  .
elasticities M , L   L     K



Adjustment cost functions               Our functional form assumptions imply that adjustment cost functions

for capital and quasi-fixed employment depend on four parameters, a-   +   -     +
                                                                    , a , a and a . We determine

these parameters by structurally estimating our dynamic cost minimization model.

       To do so, we assume that shocks to output, TFP and input prices follow a multidimensional Markov

process, which we estimate from the data. We then compute model-implied input choices and compare

the standard deviations of input growth rates in the model and in the data. In particular, we target the

standard deviations of capital growth and quasi-fixed employment growth. Intuitively, these volatilities
  13
    As explained in greater detail in Section 4, Gutierrez uses the Jorgenson (1963) method to estimate rental rates of capital.
He can then compute capital shares, and determine profit as the fraction of gross output not paid to any production factor.



                                                              15
identify the magnitude of adjustment costs: for example, all else equal, a high volatility of capital growth

in the data implies low capital adjustment costs. Given our estimates for adjustment cost parameters, we

then use data on capital and quasi-fixed employment growth to compute the series dt and dt .


Utilization adjustment To proxy for unobserved changes in worker effort, we rely on firm surveys

on capacity utilization. Such surveys are well-established in many countries. In the United States,

the Census Bureau regularly asks plants to compute their capacity utilization rate, defined as the ratio

between current output and full capacity output. Full capacity output is defined as "the maximum level

of production that [...] could reasonably [be] expect[ed] under normal and realistic operating conditions

fully utilizing the machinery and equipment in place ".14 European surveys, coordinated by the European

Commission, instead ask firms to directly provide an estimate of their capacity utilization rate.15

    To map this survey to changes in worker effort, we need to define full capacity output in our model.

We assume that for every industry, full capacity output is the output obtained with (i) the current level

of capital and quasi-fixed employment, (ii) the BGP level of effort and hours per worker and (iii) a level of

other variable inputs that is scaled up proportionally to overall production. The third condition implies
                                                                                V
                                                                                N                                 M
                                                           Full
                                                          NV,t
                             V                                         YtFull                 Full
                                                                                             Mt          YtFull
that there are constants     N    and M which hold        NV,t     =    Yt          and       Mt     =    Yt          . With these

assumptions, the survey capacity utilization measure in our model is

                                                          V
                                                          L                     F
                                                                                L              V V
                                                                                               L N +M M
                     Model        Yt          EV,t HV,t        EF,t HF,t             Yt
                    St       =            =      H                H                                                           (20)
                                 YtFull       EV    V           EF   F              YtFull

From this, it is easy to deduce that changes in worker effort satisfy


                 V         F             V V         Model   V         F
                 L dEV,t + L dEF,t = 1 - L N - M M dSt     - L dHV,t - L dHF,t .                                              (21)


This equation shows that the survey can be used as a proxy for unobserved changes in worker effort. In

particular, we can rewrite Equation (11) as


                                 F                 V                     Data
           dYt - K (dKt + dt ) + L (dNF,t + dt ) + L dNV,t + M dMt = S dSt    + dZt ,                                         (22)
  14
     The     Census     questionnaire     (https://www2.census.gov/programs-surveys/qpc/technical-documentation/
questionnaires/instructions.pdf) also specifies that to compute full capacity output, respondents should consider
an unchanged capital stock, a "number of shifts, hours of plant operations, and overtime pay [that] can be sustained under
normal conditions and a realistic work schedule ", and that "labor, materials, utilities, etc. are fully available ".
  15
     For an example of a European survey, see https://www.ifo.de/DocDL/ifo_Beitraege_z_Wifo_88.pdf.


                                                              16
                     V  V -   . This is our analogue to the BFK estimation equation (18). Following
       where S = 1 - L N    M M

BFK, we estimate the utilization adjustment coefficient S with an IV regression, and take the residual

of this regression as our estimate of TFP growth. Instruments and further implementation details are

discussed in Section 4.

       Equation (22) summarizes our method. Compared to BFK, we differ both with respect to our measure

of non-adjusted TFP growth (the left-hand side of the equation) and our utilization proxy. First, our

left-hand side variable takes into account profits (through the output elasticities ) and adjustment costs.

Furthermore, it does not include changes in hours per worker. Indeed, according to our model, the

survey already fully reflects changes in hours per worker, so that including them would amount to double-

counting. In Section 4, we consider a robustness check for this assumption. Second, as argued above,

we believe that our survey-based utilization proxy may have advantages over hours per worker (or other

proxies), as it is unaffected by shocks to relative factor prices or composition effects.


The estimation algorithm Our structural estimation of adjustment costs and our utilization ad-

justment regression are not independent: to estimate adjustment cost functions, we need to know TFP

shocks, and to estimate our utilization adjustment regression, we need to know adjustment cost functions.

Therefore, our estimation uses an iterative algorithm described below.

       Step 1 We make an initial guess for the parameters of the adjustment cost functions. With this, we

compute the left-hand side of Equation (22) and run an IV regression to obtain a preliminary estimate

for the utilization adjustment coefficient S and TFP growth rates dZt .16

       Step 2 Now, we jointly estimate the adjustment cost parameters a-   +   -     +
                                                                        , a , a and a . We also

estimate the curvature parameters for the effort and hours cost functions, c and c , as there is no

external evidence to discipline these parameters. Our estimation targets eight moments: the standard

deviation of capital growth (unconditional, and for positive/negative observations, in order to identify

asymmetries in the capital adjustment cost function), quasi-fixed employment growth (unconditional, and

for positive/negative observations), growth in hours per worker and growth in the capacity utilization
                                                                                  2
                                                                           Kt
  16
       Our functional forms imply that t = 1 - a-
                                                
                                                                Kt
                                                               Kt-1
                                                                      -    
                                                                          Kt
                                                                                      if capital growth is lower than its BGP value, and
                                                                             -1
                                      2
                                Kt
t = 1 - a+
         
                     Kt
                    Kt-1
                           -    
                               Kt
                                          if capital growth is higher than its BGP value. We assume that the BGP growth rate of
                                 -1
              
            Kt
capital,    
           Kt
                  , is equal to the average growth rate observed in the data. Thus, in order to compute dt , we only need data
             -1
on capital growth. The same expressions apply for dt , which only depends on quasi-fixed employment growth.




                                                                      17
survey.17 Here, we only briefly sketch the structural estimation algorithm. Appendix A.2 provides further

details. Our procedure follows three steps.

       (a) We determine the series of output, TFP and input price shocks faced by the firm during the sample

period. We directly take series for output Yt , material prices PM,t and investment good prices PI,t from

the data, and we have obtained a series for TFP Zt in Step 1. However, wage and effort cost shifters (w                     ,t

and q ,t ) are not observable. In order to discipline these, we assume that cost shifters for both categories

of workers are perfectly correlated. Our model then imposes a relationship between (observable) changes

in the wage bill, employment and hours, and (unobservable) wage shifters, which we use to compute the

latter. Finally, we assume that effort cost shifters are constant throughout. These assumptions yield the

path of shocks faced by the firm over the sample period. To discipline expectations, we assume that shocks

follow a discrete multidimensional Markov process, whose parameters we estimate from the realizations

during the sample period.

       (b) Given our estimates for output elasticities, the current guess for adjustment cost parameters,

calibrated values for the parameters r and K , and the stochastic process for shocks, we solve our model,

using a Generalized Stochastic Simulation Algorithm inspired by Maliar et al. (2011).18 This yields a

series for the firm's optimal input choices given the sequence of shocks observed in the data, which we

use to compute the standard deviation of input growth rates predicted by our model.

       (c) If the distance between standard deviations in the model and in the data is sufficiently small, the

estimation has converged. Otherwise, we update our guess for parameters and return to Step (a).

       Step 3 If the adjustment cost parameters obtained in Step 2 are sufficiently close to our guess in

Step 1, the algorithm has converged. If not, we update our guess for the adjustment cost parameters and

return to Step 1.

       This completes the description of our estimation method. We are now ready to study its implications

for industry-level and aggregate TFP growth in the United States and in Europe. The next section

discusses the data that we use, as well as some further implementation details.
  17
     To solve our model, we express all variables in deviations from their BGP values, and compute growth rates by using
log changes (see Appendix A.2). To be consistent with this, we compute data growth rates in the same way, defining the
BGP growth rate of a variable to be equal to the sample average growth rate. To compare model and data for the capacity
                                                                                      V                     F
utilization survey, we rely on Equation (21). We compute the standard deviation of L    (dEV,t + dHV,t ) + L  (dEF,t + dHF,t )
                                                                 Data
in our model, and compare it to the standard deviation of S dSt       , where S is the coefficient estimated in Step 1.
  18
     We set r = 0.03, and calibrate K using data on capital depreciation rates from EU KLEMS. As shown in Appendix
A.2, other model parameters are irrelevant for input growth rates, and therefore do not need to be calibrated.




                                                             18
4         Data and implementation details

4.1        Data sources

We estimate TFP growth for the United States and for the five largest European economies (Germany,

Spain, France, Italy and the United Kingdom). In this section, we briefly describe our main data sources.

Appendix B contains further details, as well as plots of key variables.


Growth accounting data               Growth accounting data for European countries comes from the November

2019 release of EU KLEMS (O'Mahony and Timmer, 2009; Adarov and Stehrer, 2019).19 EU KLEMS

provides annual industry-level data for the growth rates of output, inputs and factor prices between 1995

and 2016, as well as factor shares and capital depreciation rates. We restrict our attention to the non-farm,

non-mining market economy, leaving us with 19 distinct industries.

         For the United States, we use industry-level multifactor productivity data provided by the Bureau of

Labor Statistics (BLS), which contains the same type of information as EU KLEMS.20 We aggregate the

60 industries in the dataset to 21 broader industries, comparable to the ones in the European data.


Labour composition While KLEMS and the BLS productivity data provide time series for employ-

ment and hours worked, they do not contain information on the two worker types considered in our

paper (i.e., workers with full-time and permanent contracts, and workers with part-time or temporary

contracts).21 Therefore, we need to rely on other data sources.

         For European countries, we use micro-level data from the European Union Labour Force Survey (EU

LFS), which allows us to compute the share of employment and total hours worked represented by both

categories. We then apply these shares to the KLEMS data on employment and total hours worked to

obtain time series. Our estimation also requires information on the relative BGP wages of quasi-fixed and

variable labour, for which we rely on the European Union's Structure of Earnings Survey (EU SES). As

there are no comprehensive time series on wages for both categories, we use the average hourly wages of

workers with limited and unlimited duration contracts in 2006, roughly the midpoint of our sample.

         In the United States, there is no strong distinction between permanent and temporary work contracts.

Therefore, we just identify quasi-fixed labour with full-time employment, and variable labour with part-
    19
       EU KLEMS data can be downloaded at https://euklems.eu/.
    20
       BLS data can be downloaded at https://www.bls.gov/mfp/mprdload.htm.
    21
       KLEMS does contain a split of employment by gender, education and age, but not by type of contract.


                                                            19
time employment. We use micro-level data from the BLS Current Population Survey (CPS) to compute

the share of full-time and part-time workers in employment and hours worked and apply these shares

to the BLS productivity data to obtain time series. Information on the relative wage of full-time and

part-time workers also comes from the BLS.


Profit shares Our profit shares come from Gutierrez (2018), who estimates industry-level profit shares

for European countries (with KLEMS data) and the United States (with BEA data). Following Jorgenson

(1963), Gutierrez estimates an industry-specific rental rate of capital by using an arbitrage condition that

equalizes the return to capital in a given industry (depending on the rental rate, the relative price of

investment goods, and depreciation), to the "normal" return on another asset (defined as the sum of the

risk-free rate and the spread on corporate BBB bonds). Knowing the rental rate, one can easily compute

the profit share as the share of gross output that is not paid to labour, materials or capital. For each

industry, we define the BGP profit share as the average of annual profit shares over our sample period.

       Table 1 lists average industry-level BGP profit shares (weighted by value added) for all countries of

our sample. Profit shares are high in the United States, Spain, France and Italy, and low in Germany

and in the United Kingdom.22

                                                 Table 1: Profit shares
                                      United      Germany      Spain           France         Italy        United
                                      States                                                             Kingdom
           Average profit share        5.7%          2.2%          6.2%         5.0%          6.6%         -1.2%

Notes: Annual industry-level profit data is from Gutierrez (2018). We compute an average of annual profit shares to obtain
BGP values. The table reports a value added weighted average across all industries in a country.



Capacity utilization surveys For European countries, our survey measure of firm capacity utilization

comes from the European Commission's Harmonised Business and Consumer Surveys. We mainly rely

on the quarterly manufacturing survey, which asks firms "At what capacity is your company currently

operating (as a percentage of full capacity)?". The Commission provides quarterly time series for 24

manufacturing industries, which we aggregate up to the yearly frequency using simple averages, and to

EU KLEMS industries by using value added weights.
  22
    Gutierrez finds negative profit shares in some industries. While this is a priori no issue for our methodology, we show in
Section 6.4 that our results are virtually unchanged if we assume that profits shares are bounded below by zero.



                                                             20
    For the United States, we use the Federal Reserve Board's reports on Industrial Production and Ca-

pacity Utilization. These are mainly based on the Census Bureau's Quarterly Survey of Plant Capacity,

which asks plants to report their current level of production and their full production capacity, defined as

"the maximum level of production that this establishment could reasonably expect to attain under normal

and realistic operating conditions fully utilizing the machinery and equipment in place ". Capacity utiliza-

tion is defined as the ratio between current and full production. The Federal Reserve provides time series

for 17 manufacturing industries, which we aggregate to BLS industries with value-added weights.

    These two surveys do not cover the non-manufacturing sector. However, the European Commission has

been conducting a separate survey on capacity utilization in service industries since 2011 (see Appendix

B.3 for further details). For our baseline results, we use this service data in all years in which it is available,

and backcast the industry-level series by projecting them on average capacity utilization in manufacturing

for all earlier years. In the United States, there is no independent data for service industries, and we use

the manufacturing average as a proxy for all non-manufacturing industries.

    Table 2 shows that in Europe, average capacity utilization in service industries is strongly correlated

with average capacity utilization in manufacturing. This fact provides support for our backcasting method.

                           Table 2: Capacity utilization in manufacturing and services

                                          Germany         Spain        France         Italy        United
                                                                                                  Kingdom
                  Correlation coeff.         0.75          0.83          0.68          0.67          0.61
                  Observations                27            25            24            31            25
Notes: The table gives the correlation coefficients between the quarter-on-quarter growth rates of average capacity utilization
in service industries and average capacity utilization in manufacturing, over the period in which there is data for both.




Instruments        Our baseline estimation uses four instruments: oil price shocks, monetary policy shocks,

economic policy uncertainty shocks, and shocks to financial conditions. Recall that in order to valid,

instruments should be correlated with changes in our utilization proxy, but uncorrelated with TFP shocks.

    Following Basu et al. (2006), we compute oil price shocks as the log difference between the current

quarterly real oil price and the highest real oil price in the preceding four quarters. We define the annual

oil price shock as the sum of the four quarterly shocks, and use the shock in year t - 1 as an instrument

for changes in utilization in year t.


                                                              21
   For members of the European Monetary Union, we take monetary policy shocks from Jarocinski and

Karadi (2018), who rely on surprise movements in Eonia interest rate swaps after ECB policy announce-

ments to identify monthly monetary policy shocks starting in March 1999. We take simple averages of

these shocks to obtain an annual series.23 For the United Kingdom, we follow Cesa-Bianchi et al. (2016),

who identify monetary policy shocks through changes in the price of 3-month Sterling future contracts

after policy announcements by the Bank of England. Finally, for the United States, we use narratively

identified monetary policy shocks from Romer and Romer (2004), as updated in Wieland and Yang (2016).

For all countries, we use the shock in year t - 1 as an instrument for changes in utilization in year t.

   For economic policy uncertainty (EPU), we use the measure of Baker, Bloom and Davis (2016). In

Europe countries, this measure is a monthly index based on newspaper articles on policy uncertainty. In

the United States, EPU also considers the number of federal tax code provisions set to expire in future

years and disagreement among economic forecasters. For all countries, we use the log change in the EPU

index in year t - 1 as an instrument for changes in utilization in year t.

   Finally, we measure financial conditions using the excess bond premium introduced by Gilchrist and

Zakrajsek (2012).24 This measure is computed as the difference between the actual spread of unsecured

bonds of US firms and the predicted spread based on firm-specific default risk and bond characteristics.

Thus, it captures variation in the average price of US corporate credit risk, above and beyond the com-

pensation for expected defaults. We aggregate the monthly excess bond premium to its annual average,

and use its change in year t - 1 as our instrument for changes in utilization in year t.


Data availability Table 3 summarizes data availability. Note that the binding constraint on extending

our time series backwards is data on labour composition (the EU LFS and BLS series start in 1995) and

on capacity utilization (European surveys start between 1991 and 1994).


                                              Table 3: Data availability
                               United       Germany     Spain      France              Italy        United
                                States                                                             Kingdom
               First year        1995         1995          1995          1995         1995          1995
               Last year         2018         2016          2016          2016         2015          2016
Notes: This table lists all years for which we observe growth rates of output, inputs, input prices and capacity utilization.
 23
    Moreover, we backcast monetary policy shocks for the years 1995-1999 by projecting them on the other instruments.
Our results are unchanged when we instead estimate our regressions for a shorter time period starting in 1999.
 24
    An updated time series for this measure is available at http://people.bu.edu/sgilchri/Data/data.htm.



                                                             22
4.2       Implementation details and aggregation

Pooled estimation and detrending We estimate industry-level TFP growth rates by using our

method described in Section 3.2. Two implementation details are worth noting.

       First, to increase the statistical power of the estimation, we follow BFK and divide industries into three

broad sectors (durable manufacturing, non-durable manufacturing, and non-manufacturing), assuming
                                                                                    j
that all industries in a sector j share the same utilization adjustment coefficient S .

       Second, while hours per worker are stationary in our model, they have a downward trend in the data.

We assume that only cyclical variation in hours per worker is reflected in firms' answers to the capacity

utilization survey, while long-run trends are not. Thus, we include long-run trends in hours per worker

(but not cyclical changes) in our left-hand side measure of non-adjusted TFP growth. Just like BFK (who

face the same issue when using hours per worker as their utilization proxy), we detrend the logarithm of

hours per worker with a Christiano and Fitzgerald (2003) band-pass filter, isolating frequencies between

2 and 8 years, and take the first differences in the resulting series as our measure of cyclical changes.25

       Summing up, to implement Equation (22), we pool all industries i of sector j , and estimate

                                         j      j
                                      dYi,t - dXi,t = j   j   j,Data
                                                      i + S dSi,t    + j
                                                                       i,t ,
                               j    j    j
                       where dXi,t  Ki dKi,t + dj     Fj   j        j       j,T
                                                i,t + Li dNF i,t + di,t + dHF i,t
                                                                                                                   (23)
                                       Vj   j         j,T     j     j
                                      +Li dNV i,t + dHV i,t + M i dMi,t .



       In this specification, j                                                        j,T
                              i is a dummy variable for industry i of sector j , and dH i,t stands for the trend
                                                                     j
growth of hours per worker of category . We estimate the coefficient S by using the instruments listed
                                                                            j
in Section 4.1. Our measure of TFP growth for industry i is then given by dZi,t = j   j
                                                                                  i + i,t .

       For comparison purposes, we also estimate TFP growth using the BFK method for all industries and

countries in our sample. To that effect, we estimate

                                        j      j,BF K
                                     dYi,t - dXi,t    = j   j   j,C   j
                                                        i + H dHi,t + i,t ,
                                                                                                                   (24)
                                    j,BF K
                          where   dXi,t         sj    j
                                                 Ki dKi,t   + sLi     j
                                                                    dNi,t   +     j
                                                                                dHi,t   +   sj     j
                                                                                             M i dMi,t .


The left-hand side of the BFK estimation equation is a standard Solow residual. On the right-hand side,
                                       j,C
cyclical changes in hours per worker dHi,t (computed with a band-pass filter) serve as the utilization
  25
    In the United States, the capacity utilization survey also has a downward trend (Pierce and Wisniewski, 2018). Thus,
we also detrend it, using again the band-pass filter. European surveys do not have a trend.


                                                             23
                                                j
proxy. We estimate the utilization coefficients H with the same instruments as in our baseline.


Aggregation We compute aggregate TFP growth rates by using Tornqvist weights. The Tornqvist

weight for industry i in year t is the average of the ratios of industry gross output to aggregate value

added in year t - 1 and year t. Baqaee and Farhi (2019) show that this aggregation is problematic if the

economy is distorted (e.g., if profit shares are heterogeneous across industries) and production factors are

mobile. Thus, our results can be understood as a benchmark applying if all factors are industry-specific,

an assumption which is likely to hold in the short and medium-run. Moreover, Baqaee and Farhi (2019)

show that the dispersion of profit shares across industries is substantially smaller than within industries.

    We are now ready to discuss our results, starting with our estimates for output elasticities, adjustment

costs and utilization adjustment coefficients.



5     Estimation results

5.1    Output elasticities

Table 4 lists average industry-level output elasticities and factor shares. In each country, industry-level

variables are aggregated using value-added weights.

                             Table 4: Average output elasticities and factor shares
                                United     Germany       Spain       France        Italy              United
                                  States                                                             Kingdom
        Materials
        Output elasticity          0.46          0.53          0.56         0.56          0.60          0.51
        Factor share               0.44          0.52          0.53         0.53          0.56          0.51
        Quasi-fixed labour
        Output elasticity          0.33          0.29          0.24         0.30          0.27          0.31
        Factor share               0.32          0.28          0.22         0.28          0.25          0.31
        Variable labour
        Output elasticity          0.05          0.05          0.09         0.05          0.04          0.03
        Factor share               0.05          0.05          0.09         0.05          0.04          0.03
        Capital
        Output elasticity          0.15          0.13          0.10         0.08          0.09          0.15
        Factor share               0.20          0.15          0.16         0.13          0.15          0.14
Notes: Reported values are value-added weighted averages across all industries. Values may not add to 1 due to rounding.



                                                          24
    As we have shown previously, profit shares are positive in most industries. Therefore, our estimates

for output elasticities of materials and labour are higher than their respective factor shares, and our

estimates for output elasticities of capital are lower than capital shares. Table 4 indicates that the largest

differences occur in the United States, Spain, France and Italy, where profit shares are highest.

    These differences are important. Indeed, in most countries, capital grows faster than other inputs

in the long run, and contracts less than other inputs during recessions. Therefore, a lower estimate for

the output elasticity of capital leads to higher estimates of TFP growth both in the long run and during

recessions. As we will show in Section 6, these considerations significantly alter TFP dynamics.


5.2    Adjustment costs

Table 5 lists our estimates for adjustment costs to capital and quasi-fixed employment, as well as for the

curvature of the cost functions for hours per worker and worker effort. Again, we report a value-added

weighted average of industry-level estimates for each country. Table 6 summarizes the fit of the estimation,

and shows that our dynamic cost minimization model generally manages to generate volatilities which

are close to the ones observed in the data.

                                 Table 5: Estimated adjustment cost parameters
                                         United       Germany          Spain         France         Italy        United
                                          States                                                                Kingdom
  Capital, down (a-
                  )                         4.6           2.6           3.7            4.4           4.1            6.0
  Capital, up   (a+
                  )                         3.3           1.9           5.0            6.0           3.3            4.3
  Quasi-fixed   empl., down (a-
                              )             0.5           0.9           1.4            0.8           1.2            0.8
                           +
  Quasi-fixed   empl. up (a )               0.6           0.7           1.5            0.8           1.8            1.6
  Curvature of hours cost                   4.1           4.0           4.2            3.4           4.1            4.1
  Curvature of effort costs                 4.4           3.7           4.5            4.1           2.6            4.1
Notes: Reported values are value-added weighted averages across all industries in a country.


    Several features are worth noting. First, capital adjustment costs are higher than quasi-fixed em-

ployment adjustment costs. This is in line with the existing literature (Basu et al., 2001; Hall, 2004),

and a direct consequence of the empirical fact that capital is less volatile than quasi-fixed employment.26
  26
     German manufacturing is the major outlier to this pattern. We find essentially zero capital adjustment costs in this
sector, because its capital series are highly volatile (see Figure A.4 in the Appendix). This reflects problems with the
underlying data: as the KLEMS team has confirmed to us in private correspondence, German industry-level capital data
relies on extrapolations of aggregate series, and is therefore less reliable. Future KLEMS updates should resolve this issue.




                                                             25
Second, while estimates are positively correlated across countries, there are also interesting differences.

For instance, we find that the United States has the lowest employment adjustment costs. This may reflect

some structural features of the US labour market, such as weaker employment protection legislation.

                 Table 6: Standard deviations of input growth in the model and in the data
                                       United        Germany           Spain      France          Italy        United
                                       States                                                                 Kingdom
      Capital, data                      2.3             3.4            3.2         1.4            2.2           2.2
        Model (pp difference)            0.4             1.0            0.7         0.3            0.5           0.9
      Quasi-fixed emp., data             4.7             2.8            4.9         2.5            2.6           2.7
        Model (pp difference)            1.9             0.8            0.3         0.6            0.4           0.6
      Quasi-fixed hours, data            1.8             1.8            1.1         1.2            1.5           1.4
        Model (pp difference)            0.6             0.6            0.8         0.3            0.6           0.3
      Utilization, data                  0.4             1.1            0.2         0.6            1.0           0.9
        Model (pp difference)            0.4             0.6            0.5         0.1            0.5           0.4

Notes: This table lists the standard deviations of the growth rates of capital, quasi-fixed employment, quasi-fixed hours
                                                  Data
per worker and utilization (computed as S dSt          ) in the data. The reported values are value-added weighted averages
across all industries in a country. All growth rates are expressed as log changes, multiplied by 100. The table also shows the
average absolute percentage-point difference between the data values and their model equivalents. Utilization in the model
                  V                      F
is computed as L     (dEV,t + dHV,t ) + L  (dEF,t + dHF,t ).



    To fix ideas on the magnitude of the estimated adjustment costs, note that our functional form
                                                             2
                                           Kt         Kt
assumptions imply t = 1 - a               Kt-1   -   Kt          . Thus, for a = 4 (roughly the median estimate of
                                                        -1

capital adjustment costs in Table 5) and a 2 percentage point deviation of capital growth from its BGP

trend (roughly the median standard deviation of capital growth in Table 6), we obtain that adjustment

costs reduce capital input by a modest 0.16%. This suggests that during normal times, adjustment costs

have minor effects on output growth (and thus on estimated TFP). We return to this issue in Section 6.3.


5.3    Utilization adjustment regressions

Table 7 lists the estimates for our survey-based utilization adjustment coefficients S , as specified in

Equation (23). Estimates are positive in all countries and sectors, and tend to be lower in the non-

manufacturing sector. According to our model, positive estimates imply that changes in the survey are

positively correlated with changes in worker effort: when firms report low capacity utilization, workers

perform fewer tasks per hour of work. Therefore, we need to adjust TFP growth upwards in years in which

the survey indicates falling capacity utilization, and downwards in years in which the survey indicates

                                                                 26
                Table 7: Utilization adjustment regressions (survey-based utilization proxy)

                                    United       Germany         Spain        France         Italy        United
                                     States                                                              Kingdom
      Non-durable manufacturing
      S                            0.224         0.562           0.076         0.070        0.400          0.119
      Standard error                 (0.08)       (0.063)        (0.042)      (0.064)       (0.074)       (0.066)
      Observations                    115           105           105           105           100           105
      First-stage F -statistic        19.6          24.5          11.7          23.3          10.8           7.0
      Durable manufacturing
      S                            0.296         0.392           0.096        0.255         0.337         0.228
      Standard error                (0.056)       (0.043)        (0.046)      (0.055)       (0.031)       (0.049)
      Observations                    161           105           105           105           100           105
      First-stage F -statistic        32.4          74.8          10.6          35.5          35.5          21.3
      Non-manufacturing
      S                              0.106         0.122         0.098        0.203         0.201         0.376
      Standard error                (0.084)       (0.064)        (0.167)      (0.049)       (0.057)       (0.112)
      Observations                    207           189           189           189           180           189
      First-stage F -statistic        76.1         134.4          15.5          81.7          60.3          10.0

Notes: This table reports the estimates for utilization adjustment coefficients S , estimated using 2SLS on Equation (23).
Instruments for survey capacity utilization are oil, monetary policy, economic policy uncertainty and financial shocks, as
described in Section 4.1. Robust standard errors in parentheses.  p < 0.01,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.10.


rising capacity utilization. It is also worth noting that the first stage of our IV regressions performs well,

with F -statistics that are above the critical threshold value of 10 in almost all cases. Thus, instruments

appear to be relevant for almost all countries and sectors.

    For comparison, Table 8 reports our estimates for the utilization adjustment coefficients H estimated

using the BFK method, as specified in Equation (24). In the United States, Germany and Italy, we

find the expected results, i.e., positive and significant utilization adjustment coefficients (even though F -

statistics are somewhat lower than in the regressions using the survey proxy). Results for other countries

are more problematic. This is most striking in Spain and in the United Kingdom, where we find a

weak first stage (with F -statistics below 3 in all sectors), and utilization adjustment coefficients that

are mostly insignificant, and even negative in some cases. Negative estimates imply that firms increase

unobserved worker effort when they reduce hours per worker. This is inconsistent with the BFK model,

which emphasizes a positive comovement of hours per worker and unobserved utilization margins.


                                                            27
              Table 8: BFK utilization regressions (hours per worker-based utilization proxy)
                                 United    Germany        Spain      France       Italy      United
                                 States                                                    Kingdom
       Non-durable manufacturing
       H                        0.949       0.743        -2.407       0.217     0.580         0.802
       Standard error           (0.375)      (0.134)     (1.785)    (0.221)      (0.145)     (0.820)
       Observations               115          105         105         105         100         105
       First-stage F-statistic     8.3         65.5        0.4         14.5       23.3         0.6
       Durable manufacturing
       S                        1.808       0.845         0.872     0.685       0.617       2.229
       Standard error           (0.435)      (0.068)     (0.666)    (0.163)      (0.070)     (1.073)
       Observations               161          105         105         105         100         105
       First-stage F-statistic    11.6        114.1        1.4         34.4       39.4         1.2
       Non-manufacturing
       S                         1.505      0.752       -2.021      0.706         0.230       1.900
       Standard error           (0.776)      (0.317)     (1.174)    (0.328)      (0.333)     (2.634)
       Observations               207          189         189         189         180         189
       First-stage F-statistic     8.1         33.4        2.9         8.7         4.9         0.2

Notes: This table lists the estimates for utilization adjustment coefficients H , estimated using 2SLS on Equation (24).
Instruments for hours per worker are oil, monetary policy, economic policy uncertainty and financial shocks, as described in
Section 4.1. Robust standard errors in parentheses.  p < 0.01,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.10.


    To understand the origins of these issues, Figure 2 plots time series for both the BFK hours per

worker utilization proxy, and our survey-based utilization proxy. These series are strongly correlated

in the United States and (to a somewhat lesser extent) in Germany and in Italy. These are precisely

the countries in which the BFK regressions appear to perform best. In contrast, in Spain, France and

in the United Kingdom, both series are substantially different. In these three countries, the survey is

strongly procyclical. However, Spanish hours per worker are countercyclical, falling during the 2000-2007

boom and rising during the Great Recession. This may be due to composition effects. Indeed, temporary

and part-time work contracts are particularly prevalent in Spain. The employment of these workers

is highly cyclical, and they typically work low hours. This tends to make aggregate hours per worker

countercyclical. In the United Kingdom, hours per worker also appear to be somewhat countercyclical,

and show some erratic variation during the 2000s. Finally, in France, hours per worker exhibit some large

variation in the mid-2000s, which appears unrelated to the business cycle and is probably due to the

implementation of the 35-hour work week (mandatory for all firms from January 2002, but weakened by

subsequent reforms). As we discussed in Section 3.1, composition effects or shocks to the cost of hours

per worker reduce their effectiveness as a utilization proxy.

                                                            28
                                        Figure 2: Hours per worker and survey-based capacity utilization
                            -3                        United States                                                                               Germany
                       10
                                                                                                   0.08              0.01
                                                                                                                                                                                  0.06
                                                                                                   0.06             0.005
              5                                                                                                                                                                   0.04
                                                                                                   0.04                    0                                                      0.02

                                                                                                   0.02             -0.005                                                        0
              0
                                                                                                   0                 -0.01                                                        -0.02

                                                                                                   -0.02                                                                          -0.04
              -5                                                                                                    -0.015
                                                                                                                                                                                  -0.06
                                                                                                   -0.04             -0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                  -0.08
             -10                                                                                   -0.06            -0.025
                                                                                                                                                                                  -0.1
                                                                                                   -0.08
                                                                                                                     -0.03
                                                                                                                                                                                  -0.12
             -15                                                                                   -0.1
                                                                                                                    -0.035
                                    2000              2005             2010          2015                                1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016



                       10 -3                                 Spain                                                                                 France
                                                                                                   0.03                                                                           0.04
                                                                                                                    0.015
              6
                                                                                                   0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                  0.02
              4                                                                                                      0.01
                                                                                                   0.01
                                                                                                                                                                                  0
              2                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                    0.005
                                                                                                   -0.01                                                                          -0.02
              0
                                                                                                   -0.02                   0
              -2
                                                                                                                                                                                  -0.04
                                                                                                   -0.03
              -4                                                                                                    -0.005
                                                                                                   -0.04                                                                          -0.06
              -6
                                                                                                   -0.05
                                                                                                                     -0.01                                                        -0.08
              -8                                                                                   -0.06

             -10                                                   -0.07                                            -0.015                                                        -0.1
              1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016                                                       1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016



                        10 -3                                 Italy                                                            10 -3          United Kingdom
                   5                                                                                   0.04
                                                                                                                       8                                                      0.03

                                                                                                       0.02            6                                                      0.02
                   0
                                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                                                                              0.01
                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                       2
               -5                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                       -0.02                                                                  -0.01
                                                                                                                      -2
              -10
                                                                                                                                                                              -0.02
                                                                                                       -0.04          -4
                                                                                                                                                                              -0.03
                                                                                                                      -6
              -15                                                                                      -0.06
                                                                                                                      -8                                                      -0.04

                                                                                                                     -10                                                      -0.05
              -20                                                                                      -0.08
                                                                                                                     -12                                                      -0.06
                                                                                                       -0.1
                  1996           1998   2000   2002    2004     2006   2008   2010   2012   2014                       1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016



Notes: This figure plots changes in aggregate (detrended) hours per worker, and changes in aggregate capacity utilization.
Capacity utilization surveys are aggregated across industries using value-added weights. Shaded areas mark recessions,
defined in Appendix B.6.


    Summing up, our estimation results suggest that the relevance of hours per worker as a utilization

proxy is country-specific. In some countries (including the United States, for which BFK developed this

proxy), hours per worker deliver positive and significant utilization adjustment coefficients, and have a

reasonably strong first stage. In these countries, BFK regression results also appear to be qualitatively



                                                                                                               29
in line with our survey-based regression results (we turn to a quantitative assessment of this issue in Sec-

tion 6.3). In other countries, such as Spain or the United Kingdom, hours per worker deliver insignificant

and sometimes counter-intuitive results. In contrast, our survey-based measure performs more evenly

across countries. This suggests that it may be a more robust proxy, possibly because it is not affected by

shocks to relative factor prices or country-specific idiosyncrasies in labour market institutions.



6     TFP growth in the United States and in Europe

6.1    Aggregate TFP growth

We are now ready to analyse the implications of different estimation methods for TFP dynamics. To

begin, Figure 3 shows cumulated aggregate TFP growth rates for the United States and for an aggregate

of the four Eurozone countries in our sample.27 Dotted black lines refer to a standard Solow residual,

red dashed lines refer to the measure obtained with the BFK method, and full green lines refer to the

measure obtained with our method.

                  Figure 3: Cumulated TFP growth in the United States and in the Eurozone
                              United States                                         Eurozone


                                                                 0.06
          0.2

                                                                 0.05


         0.15                                                    0.04


                                                                 0.03
          0.1

                                                                 0.02


         0.05                                                    0.01


                                                                   0
           0
           1995      2000      2005           2010   2015          1995   2000        2005        2010       2015




Notes: This figure plots cumulated TFP growth, normalized to 0 in the first year of the sample for each country. Shaded
areas mark recessions, defined in Appendix B.6.


    Figure 3 illustrates some important trends that hold for all TFP measures. First, cumulated TFP

growth between 1995 and 2015 was substantially higher in the United States than in the Eurozone. Second,
  27
     Eurozone TFP growth is computed as a value-added weighted average of the TFP growth rates of Germany, Spain, Italy
and France.



                                                            30
there was a marked slowdown in TFP growth in the second half of the sample, both in the United States

and in the Eurozone. Both of these trends have been widely noted (see, e.g., van Ark et al. (2008) or

Bloom et al. (2012) for the first, and Fernald (2014a) and Gordon (2016) for the second).

       However, Figure 3 also indicates important differences between the three TFP measures. In the

United States, we find that TFP grew by a cumulated 26.8% between 1995 and 2018, rather than the

23.0% implied by the series obtained with the BFK method. Moreover, our series suggests that the

slowdown in TFP growth was more gradual than the one implied by the standard measures. Indeed,

the Solow residual and the BFK measure both suggest a sharp break in TFP growth around the year

2005. Our measure instead implies that TFP growth remained relatively robust between 2005 and 2010

(and especially between 2007 and 2010), falling to essentially zero only after 2010, i.e., after the Great

Recession. This suggests that the Great Recession played some role for the productivity slowdown.28 We

will investigate the origins of these differences between TFP series in Section 6.3.

       In the Eurozone, Figure 3 indicates that our measure of TFP growth is substantially less volatile and

less cyclical than the other two. In particular, we find that Eurozone TFP is essentially flat during the

Great Recession and the Euro crisis, while the Solow residual and the BFK method indicate a strong fall

and a subsequent recovery. Again, we will investigate the sources of these differences in Section 6.3.

       Aggregate Eurozone TFP masks a lot of underlying heterogeneity. Figure 4 plots cumulative TFP

growth in individual Eurozone countries, as well as in the United Kingdom. Again, some trends are

common to all TFP measures, such as the widely noted long-run decline of TFP in Italy and Spain, and

the better performance of the United Kingdom and Germany (Gopinath et al., 2017; García-Santana

et al., 2020; Schivardi and Schmitz, 2020). However, there are also striking differences between series.

For instance, in Spain and Italy, standard methods suggest a fall in TFP by more than 5 percentage

points between 2008 and 2013, while we find TFP to be virtually unchanged. This effect is particularly

striking for Italy, where our method results in a substantial upward revision of TFP growth over the

sample period. We find a similar effect in France, even though French TFP still declines during the Great

Recession. Finally, the BFK series for the United Kingdom is very volatile, driven by the large BFK

utilization adjustment coefficients shown in Table 8, while our measure is substantially smoother.

       Table 9 summarizes the medium and long-run properties of TFP series in a more formal way, by
  28
    A potential mechanism accounting for this effect could be the drop in technology adoption and R&D investment observed
during the recession (Anzoategui et al., 2019; Queralto, 2019).




                                                           31
listing average growth rates during the whole sample and for selected subperiods. The first panel of the

table shows that our method implies higher average TFP growth rates than the Solow residual or BFK

in several countries, especially in the United States, France and Italy.

                           Figure 4: Cumulated TFP growth in European countries
                                    Germany                                                                 Spain
                                                                                 0
                  0.2

                0.18                                                       -0.02

                0.16                                                       -0.04

                0.14
                                                                           -0.06
                0.12
                                                                           -0.08
                  0.1

                0.08                                                        -0.1

                0.06
                                                                           -0.12
                0.04
                                                                           -0.14
                0.02

                   0                                                       -0.16
                   1995    2000      2005           2010          2015          1995          2000          2005    2010    2015


                                    France                                                                  Italy
                 0.1
                                                                                0
                0.09

                0.08
                                                                          -0.02
                0.07

                0.06                                                      -0.04

                0.05

                0.04                                                      -0.06

                0.03

                0.02                                                      -0.08

                0.01
                                                                           -0.1
                  0

                  1995     2000     2005            2010          2015          1995          2000          2005     2010    2015


                                                                    United Kingdom
                                           0.25



                                            0.2



                                           0.15



                                            0.1



                                           0.05



                                             0
                                             1995          2000          2005          2010          2015


Notes: This figure plots cumulated TFP growth, normalized to 0 in the first year of the sample for each country. Shaded
areas mark recessions, defined in Appendix B.6.


    The second panel shows our TFP growth rates over subperiods, confirming the insights conveyed by

Figure 3. In the United States, we find a gradual TFP slowdown: annual TFP growth decreased from


                                                                     32
1.9% per year between 1995 and 2005 to 0.9% between 2005 and 2010, and 0.0% between 2010 and 2018.

In contrast, the BFK measure declines more sharply from 1.8% per year in 1995-2005 to 0.4% in 2005-2010

and 0.1% in 2010-2018. For the Eurozone, in turn, there appears to be a relatively abrupt TFP slowdown

after 2007. Aggregate TFP growth for the Eurozone declines from 0.5% per year before 2007 to 0.0% per

year after 2007. There are, however, notable exceptions for Spain and Italy, where the Great Recession

actually seems to end or at least dampen a long-run TFP decline.

                                       Table 9: Average TFP growth rates
                          United      Eurozone Germany      Spain      France       Italy      United
                          States                                                              Kingdom
      Average TFP growth, full sample
      Solow residual       0.92         0.24         0.97         -0.70   0.16      -0.36        1.01
      BFK method           0.90         0.22         0.98         -0.61   0.10      -0.37        1.03
      Our method           1.03         0.30         0.92         -0.62   0.25      -0.15        0.95
      Average TFP growth, our method, subperiods
      1995-2005            1.89
      2005-2010            0.88
      2010-2018            0.05
      1995-2007                         0.49         1.19        -0.93    0.80      -0.22        1.67
      2007-2015                         0.02         0.51        -0.31    -0.39      0.05       -0.02

Notes: TFP growth rates are expressed as log changes multiplied by 100.


    Finally, Table 10 summarizes the cyclical implications of our results. The first panel lists the standard

deviations of different TFP series (expressed as a fraction of the standard deviation of real value added

growth in the respective country). In the United States, standard deviations are roughly identical across

TFP series. However, for all five European countries, our TFP series is less volatile than the Solow

residual or the series obtained with the BFK method. Differences are often substantial: for the Eurozone

as a whole, the standard deviation of our TFP measure is only one third as large as that of the Solow

residual, and half as large as that of the BFK series.

    The second panel of Table 10 shows that the Solow residual is strongly procyclical in all countries

(with the exception of Spain). Our TFP measure is in turn roughly acyclical: the correlation coefficient

of TFP and real value added growth is 0.13 in the United States and in the Eurozone, and 0.24 in the

United Kingdom. While the BFK series is also less correlated with the cycle than the Solow residual,



                                                         33
there is a substantial discrepancy in the Eurozone, where the BFK series remains quite cyclical. This

result (as well as our finding on volatilities discussed above) is consistent with the idea that in Europe,

the BFK hours per worker proxy does not fully control for unobserved cyclical changes in worker effort,

while our survey proxy is more successful at accounting for them. Relatedly, the third panel of Table 10

shows that the correlation between our measure of aggregate TFP growth and the one obtained with the

BFK method is highest in the United States.

                            Table 10: Cyclical behaviour of different TFP measures
                               United      Eurozone Germany             Spain        France         Italy       United
                               States                                                                          Kingdom
  Standard deviation (rel. to real VA growth)
  Solow residual                 0.65         0.66          0.75         0.33          0.75         0.67          0.67
  BFK method                     0.56         0.39          0.43         0.34          0.86         0.46          1.33
  Our method                     0.66         0.19          0.34         0.30          0.49         0.34          0.66
  Correlation with real VA growth
  Solow residual                 0.52         0.92          0.95         0.29          0.87         0.80          0.83
  BFK method                     0.15         0.57          0.33         0.15          0.54         0.57          0.29
  Our method                     0.13         0.13          0.24        -0.23          0.39         0.03          0.24
  Correlation between TFP measures
  BFK TFP, Our TFP               0.75         0.46          0.49         0.54          0.39         0.48          -0.28

Notes: TFP growth rates are expressed as log changes multiplied by 100.



6.2    Sectoral TFP growth rates

Figure 5 illustrates sectoral differences in TFP growth, by plotting US and Eurozone TFP growth in non-

durable manufacturing, durable manufacturing and outside of the manufacturing sector.29 In all countries,

TFP growth is highest in durable manufacturing.30 In the United States, differences between sectoral TFP

series obtained with different estimation methods mirror the aggregate differences shown in Figure 3. In

the Eurozone, there is more heterogeneity: we find that the TFP slowdown in manufacturing only sets in

around 2010, while non-manufacturing TFP starts declining around 2007 (although our measure indicates

a much smaller decline than the Solow residual or the BFK measure). As non-manufacturing represents

most of economic activity, this drives the aggregate dynamics shown in Figure 3.
  29
   Sectoral growth rates are aggregated by using Tornqvist weights of industry gross output over sectoral value added.
  30
   In the United States, this is driven by the exceptional TFP growth of a single industry, Computer and Electronic products
manufacturing (see Houseman et al., 2014).


                                                            34
                  Figure 5: Sectoral TFP growth in the United States and in the Eurozone
                                                   Non-durable manufacturing
                                   United States                                           Eurozone

                 0.1                                                      1.25



                0.05                                                        1.2



                   0                                                      1.15




                -0.05                                                       1.1



                                                                          1.05
                 -0.1



                                                                             1
                   1995    2000    2005            2010       2015           1995   2000     2005     2010   2015



                                                          Durable manufacturing
                                  United States                                            Eurozone
                 0.8
                                                                          1.35
                 0.7
                                                                           1.3
                 0.6
                                                                          1.25
                 0.5
                                                                           1.2
                 0.4
                                                                          1.15
                 0.3
                                                                           1.1
                 0.2

                                                                          1.05
                 0.1

                                                                            1
                  0
                  1995    2000     2005            2010       2015          1995    2000     2005     2010   2015



                                                           Non-manufacturing
                                   United States                                           Eurozone
                0.18
                                                                          1.01
                0.16

                0.14                                                         1

                0.12
                                                                          0.99
                 0.1

                0.08                                                      0.98

                0.06
                                                                          0.97
                0.04

                0.02
                                                                          0.96

                   0
                   1995   2000     2005            2010       2015           1995   2000     2005     2010   2015


Notes: This figure plots cumulated TFP growth, normalized to 0 in the first year of the sample for each country. Shaded
areas mark recessions, defined in Appendix B.6.


    The brief discussion in this section can obviously not do justice to the richness of TFP patterns across

all industries. Appendix C provides further details, by plotting industry-level time series for all countries.

    So far, we have shown that our estimation delivers TFP dynamics that differ from those obtained with



                                                                     35
standard methods. In the next section, we investigate which of our method's three novel aspects (profits,

adjustment costs and the new utilization proxy) matter most for these differences.


6.3       Decomposing differences between TFP estimates

To analyse the sources of differences between the three TFP measures discussed above, we separately

consider each of the three new aspects introduced in our paper.


Profit shares        Figure 6 illustrates the impact of our assumptions on profit shares. To do so, we compare

our baseline measure of aggregate TFP growth with an alternative measure obtained when setting profit

shares to zero (i.e., assuming that output elasticities are equal to factor shares, but keeping adjustment

costs and the utilization adjustment coefficients S at their baseline values).

       In countries with high profit shares (such as the United States), there are important differences

between the two series. As discussed earlier, profits reduce the output elasticity of capital and increase

the output elasticities of other inputs. However, capital generally grows faster than other inputs in the

long run. For instance, in the United States, capital grew on average by 2.4% across all industries during

our sample period, while labour input grew by 0.2% and material input by 1.2%. Thus, reducing the

output elasticity of capital attributes less of output growth to capital and more to TFP.31 In total, our

baseline estimate for cumulative TFP growth during 1995-2018 is 4.0 percentage points higher than the

zero-profit estimate (while the difference between our baseline and the BFK series was 3.8 percentage

points). There is also a cyclical dimension to this issue, as capital fell less than other inputs during the

Great Recession. Thus, during 2007-2010, our estimate for cumulated TFP growth for the United States

is 1.3 percentage points higher than the zero-profit estimate. This largely explains why we find a more

gradual TFP slowdown than the BFK series (the difference between our baseline series and BFK during

2007-2010 is 1.7 percentage points). In other words, in the United States, accounting for non-zero profit

shares alone explains almost all differences between our TFP series and the one obtained with the BFK

method.

       In Italy and Spain, profits are also high, and we also find that capital fell less than other inputs during

the Great Recession. Accordingly, our series implies higher TFP growth than the zero-profit series during

the recession. In France, capital evolved more in line with other inputs, so that there are only small
  31
    This point is also made by Karabarbounis and Neiman (2019), using aggregate data and a different estimate for profit
shares. However, they do not compute industry-level or aggregate time series.


                                                          36
differences between both series. Finally, in countries with low profit shares (Germany and the United

Kingdom), our assumptions on profits have only minor effects.32


                        Figure 6: The impact of non-zero profits on estimated TFP growth
                                   United States                                                   Germany
                                                                                 0.2

                                                                                0.18
               0.2
                                                                                0.16

                                                                                0.14
              0.15
                                                                                0.12

                                                                                 0.1

               0.1                                                              0.08

                                                                                0.06

              0.05                                                              0.04

                                                                                0.02

                 0                                                                0
                 1995      2000    2005            2010          2015             1995    2000      2005           2010    2015

                                       Spain                                                         France
                 0                                                               0.1

                                                                                0.09

                                                                                0.08

              -0.05                                                             0.07

                                                                                0.06

                                                                                0.05

                                                                                0.04
               -0.1
                                                                                0.03

                                                                                0.02

                                                                                0.01
              -0.15
                                                                                  0
                 1995       2000      2005            2010              2015      1995    2000       2005          2010    2015

                                      Italy                                                       United Kingdom
             0.01                                                                 0.2

                                                                                 0.18
                0
                                                                                 0.16

             -0.01                                                               0.14

                                                                                 0.12
             -0.02
                                                                                  0.1

                                                                                 0.08
             -0.03
                                                                                 0.06

             -0.04                                                               0.04

                                                                                 0.02
             -0.05
                                                                                   0
                1995        2000      2005                2010           2015      1995    2000      2005           2010    2015


Notes: These figures plot our baseline measure of cumulated TFP growth against an alternative measure that assumes
profits are zero. Adjustment costs and utilization adjustment coefficients are kept at their baseline values. Shaded areas
mark recessions, defined in Appendix B.6.
 32
    In Germany, capital grew slowly between 1995 and 2016 (only 0.4% per year, against 0.04% for labour and 2.8% for
materials). Therefore, taking into account positive profit shares actually revises German TFP growth estimates downward.




                                                                          37
Adjustment costs            Figure 7 illustrates the impact of our assumptions on adjustment costs. They

compare our baseline measure of TFP growth to an alternative measure obtained when setting adjustment

costs to zero (i.e., assuming dt = dt = 0), but keeping output elasticities and the utilization adjustment

coefficients S at their baseline levels.

                        Figure 7: The impact of adjustment costs on estimated TFP growth
                                   United States                                                        Germany

                                                                                 0.18

               0.2                                                               0.16

                                                                                 0.14

              0.15                                                               0.12

                                                                                  0.1

               0.1                                                               0.08

                                                                                 0.06

              0.05                                                               0.04

                                                                                 0.02

                 0                                                                 0
                 1995      2000    2005            2010          2015              1995        2000      2005           2010    2015

                                       Spain                                                             France
                 0
                                                                                 0.09
              -0.02
                                                                                 0.08


              -0.04                                                              0.07

                                                                                 0.06
              -0.06
                                                                                 0.05

              -0.08                                                              0.04

                                                                                 0.03
               -0.1
                                                                                 0.02

              -0.12                                                              0.01

                                                                                   0
                 1995       2000      2005            2010              2015       1995        2000      2005           2010    2015

                                       Italy                                                           United Kingdom
                                                                                   0.2

             0.005                                                                0.18

                 0                                                                0.16

                                                                                  0.14
            -0.005
                                                                                  0.12
             -0.01
                                                                                   0.1
            -0.015
                                                                                  0.08

             -0.02                                                                0.06

            -0.025                                                                0.04

                                                                                  0.02
             -0.03
                                                                                        0
                 1995       2000       2005               2010            2015          1995    2000      2005           2010    2015


Notes: These figures plot our baseline measure of cumulated TFP growth against an alternative measure that assumes
adjustment costs are zero. Profit shares and utilization adjustment coefficients are kept at their baseline values. Shaded
areas mark recessions, defined in Appendix B.6.



                                                                          38
    The aggregate impact of adjustment costs is limited. Indeed, while adjustment costs are most im-

portant for capital, capital is also not very volatile and has a low output elasticity. As we have shown

in Section 5.2, with typical values for adjustment costs and changes in capital growth, adjustment costs

lower capital input by just 0.16%. As the capital elasticity is around 0.15 in most industries, the impact

of this change on output (and therefore on TFP) is roughly 0.02%. The only country in which adjustment

costs have a modest impact is Spain, which combines significant employment adjustment costs and a very

large fall in employment during the Great Recession. While the United States also experienced a large

drop in employment, its estimated adjustment costs are much lower, and so this effect is negligible.


Utilization adjustments Figure 8 compares our baseline measure of TFP growth to an alternative

measure obtained by using changes in hours per worker as a utilization proxy (i.e., keeping output elast-
                                                                                               j,C
icities and adjustment costs at their baseline levels, but estimating Equation (23) by using dHi,t rather
       j,Data
than dSi,t    as the right-hand side variable).33

    Strikingly, Figure 8 shows that for the United States, both series virtually coincide. That is, conditional

on taking into account non-zero profits and adjustment costs, using either hours per worker or capacity

utilization surveys as a proxy for unobserved changes in worker effort is virtually equivalent.34 In Europe,

however, the two proxies are clearly not equivalent. In all European countries, our baseline measure

appears to be less volatile and less cyclical than the one obtained by using the hours per worker proxy.

These differences become especially apparent during the Great Recession and the Euro Crisis.

    Table 11 confirms these impressions, by listing the standard deviations of both series (expressed as a

fraction of the standard deviation of real value added growth), their correlation with value added growth,

and their correlation among each other. Both series of TFP growth virtually coincide for the United

States, where their correlation coefficient is 0.85. In Europe, however, there are large differences. For the

Eurozone as a whole, our baseline series is only half as volatile than the alternative series using hours

per worker, and its correlation with the business cycle is only 0.13, against 0.51 for the hours-per-worker

alternative. Together with the evidence on the limitations of hours per worker as a utilization proxy in

Europe presented in Sections 3.2 and 5.3, this suggests that in European countries, the capacity utilization
  33
     Moreover, to compute the alternative measure, our left-hand side variable includes changes in hours per worker (which
                                                                                                                        j
were excluded before, as they are already reflected in the capacity utilization survey). That is, we now define dXi,t      
 j        j      j       Fj     j       j        j        Vj    j        j        j     j
Ki dKi,t + di,t + Li dNF i,t + di,t + dHF i,t + Li dNV i,t + dHV i,t + M i dMi,t .
  34
     It does appear that the survey proxy implies faster TFP growth in the immediate aftermath of recessions, but differences
are very small.



                                                             39
survey is a better proxy for unobserved changes in worker effort than hours per worker.

               Figure 8: The impact of different utilization proxies on estimated TFP growth
                                   United States                                                   Germany

                                                                                0.18

               0.2                                                              0.16

                                                                                0.14

              0.15                                                              0.12

                                                                                 0.1

               0.1                                                              0.08

                                                                                0.06

              0.05                                                              0.04

                                                                                0.02

                 0                                                                0
                 1995    2000      2005            2010          2015             1995    2000      2005           2010    2015

                                       Spain                                                         France
                 0

                                                                                0.09
              -0.02
                                                                                0.08

                                                                                0.07
              -0.04
                                                                                0.06

              -0.06                                                             0.05

                                                                                0.04
              -0.08
                                                                                0.03

               -0.1                                                             0.02

                                                                                0.01
              -0.12
                                                                                   0

                 1995     2000        2005            2010              2015      1995    2000       2005          2010    2015

                                      Italy                                                       United Kingdom


                0

                                                                                  0.2
             -0.01

             -0.02
                                                                                 0.15
             -0.03

             -0.04
                                                                                  0.1

             -0.05

             -0.06                                                               0.05


             -0.07

                                                                                   0
                1995      2000        2005                2010           2015      1995    2000      2005           2010    2015


Notes: These figures plot our baseline measure of cumulated TFP growth against an alternative measure which uses changes
in hours per worker rather than the capacity utilization survey as the right-hand side utilization proxy in Equation (23).
Profit shares and adjustment costs are kept at their baseline values. Shaded areas mark recessions, defined in Appendix B.6.


    In particular, the correlation between our baseline series and the one obtained with the hours per

worker proxy is lowest in France and in the United Kingdom, two countries in which the series for hours


                                                                          40
per worker appeared to have some problematic properties. It is highest in Spain, but as we noted earlier,

this is due to the combination of countercyclical hours per worker and negative utilization adjustment

coefficients, two facts that are hard to square with the BFK method.

                 Table 11: Cyclical properties of TFP series with different utilization proxies
                                   United       Eurozone Germany                 Spain          France         Italy       United
                                    States                                                                                 Kingdom
  Standard deviation (rel. to real VA growth)
  Baseline                           0.66            0.19          0.34          0.30            0.49          0.34         0.66
  Hours per worker proxy             0.55            0.36          0.43          0.28            0.81          0.44         1.17
  Correlation with real VA growth
  Baseline                           0.13            0.13          0.24          -0.23           0.39          0.03         0.24
  Hours per worker proxy             0.17            0.51          0.30          -0.07           0.53          0.55         0.35
  Correlation between TFP measures
  Baseline, Hours proxy              0.85            0.49          0.51          0.82            0.43          0.51         -0.24
Notes: TFP growth rates are expressed as log changes multiplied by 100.



6.4    Robustness checks

Before concluding, we briefly verify whether our results are sensitive to reasonable variations of our various

implementation assumptions. Table 12 shows the correlation of the aggregate TFP series obtained in the

robustness checks with the baseline series.

                          Table 12: Robustness checks: correlations with baseline series
                                      United     Eurozone Germany Spain             France                         Italy      United
                                            States                                                                           Kingdom
  (1) No negative profits                    0.97           0.84          0.95           0.90           0.90       0.70        0.79
  (2) Dep. var. includes hours               0.88           0.79          0.86           0.93           0.82       0.70        0.73
  (3) Survey lin. detrended                  0.96           0.92          0.99           0.97           0.98       0.72        0.83
  (4) Man. avg. for services                 1.00           0.96          1.00           0.98           0.98       0.85        0.88
  (5) No uncertainty                         1.00           1.00          1.00           1.00           1.00       1.00        0.96
  (6) No uncertainty, mon. pol.              0.99           0.90          0.96           0.97           0.96       0.71        0.82
Notes: All correlations refer to growth rates, stated in log differences.


    In line (1), we reconsider profit shares. As Table 1 shows, estimated profit shares are sometimes

negative. While this is not inconsistent with our estimation method, we set all negative profit shares to

zero as a robustness check. The resulting series are strongly correlated with our baseline, as negative

                                                               41
profit shares are generally close to zero.

         In line (2), we reconsider our interpretation of the capacity utilization survey. In the baseline, we follow

our model, which suggests that answers to the survey include cyclical variation in hours per worker (which

is why the dependent variable of our estimation equation (23) does not include this cyclical variation).

Here, we abstract from this and instead use as dependent variable a measure of unadjusted TFP growth

that includes cyclical variation in hours per worker.35

         In lines (3) to (4), we consider different specifications for the survey proxy. In line (3), instead of

detrending only the survey for the United States with a band-pass filter, we detrend the surveys for all

countries using a linear filter. In line (4), we use the average of the manufacturing survey as a proxy for

capacity utilization in non-manufacturing industries throughout. This latter robustness check does not

affect our numbers for the United States, where we already use the manufacturing average in the baseline.

         Finally, in lines (5) and (6), we consider robustness checks with respect to the instruments included

in our IV estimation. In line (5), we drop the economic policy uncertainty instrument, and in line (6), we

drop both economic policy uncertainty and monetary policy shocks.

         For all robustness checks, the resulting TFP series are highly correlated with the baseline estimates,

showing that our findings are robust to reasonable variations regarding the implementation details of our

method. Appendix C.2 provides further details.



7         Conclusions

In this paper, we have proposed new estimates for industry-level and aggregate TFP growth. Our estim-

ates take into account economic profits and adjustment costs, and rely on a new survey-based proxy for

unobserved changes in factor utilization. We find that TFP growth in the United States between 1995 and

2018 was higher, and that the slowdown in TFP growth in recent years was more gradual than what is

suggested by standard methods. These differences are almost exclusively driven by the fact that we adjust

output elasticities for non-zero profits. In Europe, our estimated TFP growth series are substantially less

volatile and less cyclical than the ones obtained with standard methods. Here, differences are due both

to our adjustment for non-zero profits and to our use of a survey-based proxy for factor utilization, which

appears to be more relevant in Europe than the hours per worker proxy used by standard methods.
                           j    j    j
    35
         That is, we set dXi,t  Ki dKi,t + dj     Fj   j        j       j       Vj   j         j       j     j
                                            i,t + Li dNF i,t + di,t + dHF i,t + Li dNV i,t + dHV i,t + M i dMi,t .




                                                            42
       Our estimation method can easily be generalized to other countries or time periods, as it only requires

standard growth accounting data, survey-based data on capacity utilization, and an estimate of profit

shares.36 This could yield further insights into the dynamics of TFP growth around the world.




References
Adarov, A. and Stehrer, R. (2019). Tangible and Intangible Assets in the Growth Performance of the
 EU, Japan and the US. wiiw Research Reports 442.

Aghion, P., Bergeaud, A., Boppart, T., Klenow, P. J. and Li, H. (2017). Missing Growth from
 Creative Destruction. Working Paper 24023, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Anzoategui, D., Comin, D., Gertler, M. and Martinez, J. (2019). Endogenous Technology Adop-
 tion and R&D as Sources of Business Cycle Persistence. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
 11 (3), 67­110.

Baker, S. R., Bloom, N. and Davis, S. J. (2016). Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty. The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131 (4), 1593­1636.

Baqaee, D. R. and Farhi, E. (2019). Productivity and Misallocation in General Equilibrium. The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135 (1), 105­163.

Barkai, S. (2020). Declining Labor and Capital Shares. The Journal of Finance, 75 (5), 2421­2463.

Basu, S., Fernald, J., Fisher, J. and Kimball, M. (2013). Sector-Specific Technical Change. Mimeo.

-- and Fernald, J. G. (2001). Why Is Productivity Procyclical? Why Do We Care? In New Develop-
  ments in Productivity Analysis, University of Chicago Press, pp. 225­302.

--, -- and Kimball, M. S. (2006). Are Technology Improvements Contractionary? American Economic
  Review, 96 (5), 1418­1448.

--, -- and Shapiro, M. D. (2001). Productivity growth in the 1990s: technology, utilization, or adjust-
  ment? Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 55 (1), 117­165.

Berndt, E. R. and Fuss, M. A. (1986). Productivity measurement with adjustments for variations in
 capacity utilization and other forms of temporary equilibrium. Journal of Econometrics, 33 (1), 7 ­ 29.

Bloom, N., Sadun, R. and Reenen, J. V. (2012). Americans Do IT Better: US Multinationals and
 the Productivity Miracle. American Economic Review, 102 (1), 167­201.

Boskin, M., Dulberger, E. R., Gordon, R. J., Griliches, Z. and Jorgenson, D. (1996). Toward
 A More Accurate Measure Of The Cost Of Living. Tech. rep., Final Report to the Senate Finance
 Committee.

Brynjolfsson, E., Rock, D. and Syverson, C. (2018). The Productivity J-Curve: How Intangibles
 Complement General Purpose Technologies. Working Paper 25148, National Bureau of Economic Re-
 search.
  36
    As we find that adjustment costs have only small effects, they may be ignored as a first approximation. However, our
results obviously do not imply that adjustment costs are irrelevant in all circumstances.


                                                          43
Burnside, C., Eichenbaum, M. and Rebelo, S. (1995). Capital Utilization and Returns to Scale.
 In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1995, Volume 10, NBER Chapters, National Bureau of Economic
 Research, Inc, pp. 67­124.

Cesa-Bianchi, A., Thwaites, G. and Vicondoa, A. (2016). Monetary policy transmission in an open
 economy: new data and evidence from the united kingdom. Mimeo.

Christiano, L. J. and Fitzgerald, T. J. (2003). The Band Pass Filter. International Economic
 Review, 44 (2), 435­465.

Corrado, C., Haskel, J., Jona-Lasinio, C. and Iommi, M. (2012). Intangible Capital and Growth
 in Advanced Economies: Measurement Methods and Comparative Results. IZA Discussion Papers 6733,
 Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).

Costello, D. M. (1993). A Cross-Country, Cross-Industry Comparison of Productivity Growth. Journal
 of Political Economy, 101 (2), 207­222.

David, J. M. and Venkateswaran, V. (2019). The sources of capital misallocation. American Economic
 Review, 109 (7), 2531­67.

Fernald, J. (2014a). Productivity and Potential Output Before, During, and After the Great Recession.
  In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2014, Volume 29.

Fernald, J. G. (2014b). A quarterly, utilization-adjusted series on Total Factor Productivity. Working
  Paper Series 2012-19, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.

Field, A. J. (2012). A Great Leap Forward: 1930s Depression and U.S. Economic Growth. Yale Univer-
  sity Press.

García-Santana, M., Moral-Benito, E., Pijoan-Mas, J. and Ramos, R. (2020). Growing like
 Spain: 1995-2007. International Economic Review, 61 (1), 383­416.

Gayer, C. (2013). New question on capacity utilization in the services sector - state of play and analysis
 of results from July 2011 to October 2013. mimeo.

Gilchrist, S. and Zakrajsek, E. (2012). Credit spreads and business cycle fluctuations. American
 Economic Review, 102 (4), 1692­1720.

Gopinath, G., Kalemli-Özcan, S., Karabarbounis, L. and Villegas-Sanchez, C. (2017). Capital
 Allocation and Productivity in South Europe. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132 (4), 1915­1967.

Gordon, R. J. (2016). The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the
 Civil War. Princeton University Press.

Grullon, G., Larkin, Y. and Michaely, R. (2019). Are US Industries Becoming More Concentrated?
 Review of Finance, 23 (4), 697­743.

Gutierrez, G. (2018). Investigating Global Labor and Profit Shares. 2018 Meeting Papers 165, Society
 for Economic Dynamics.

-- and Philippon, T. (2017). Declining Competition and Investment in the U.S. Working Paper 23583,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.



                                                   44
Hall, R. E. (1988). The Relation between Price and Marginal Cost in U.S. Industry. Journal of Political
 Economy, 96 (5), 921­947.

-- (2004). Measuring Factor Adjustment Costs. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119 (3), 899­927.

Houseman, S. N., Bartik, T. J. and Sturgeon, T. J. (2014). Measuring Manufacturing: How the
 Computer and Semiconductor Industries Affect the Numbers and Perceptions. Upjohn Working Papers
 and Journal Articles 14-209, W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research,.

Huo, Z., Levchenko, A. A. and Pandalai-Nayar, N. (2020). Utilization-Adjusted TFP Across Coun-
 tries: Measurement and Implications for International Comovement. Working Paper 26803, National
 Bureau of Economic Research.

Imbs, J. M. (1999). Technology, Growth and the Business Cycle. Journal of Monetary Economics, 44 (1),
  65 ­ 80.

Inklaar, R. (2007). Cyclical Productivity in Europe and the United States: Evaluating the Evidence
  on Returns to Scale and Input Utilization. Economica, 74 (296), 822­841.

Jarocinski, M. and Karadi, P. (2018). Deconstructing Monetary Policy Surprises - The Role of In-
  formation Shocks. CEPR Discussion Papers 12765, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.

Jorgenson, D. W. (1963). Capital theory and investment behavior. The American Economic Review,
  53 (2), 247­259.

--, Ho, M. S. and Samuels, J. D. (2012). A Prototype Industry-Level Production Account for the
  United States, 1947-2010. Mimeo.

Judd, K. L., Maliar, L., Maliar, S. and Tsener, I. (2017). How to solve dynamic stochastic models
  computing expectations just once. Quantitative Economics, 8 (3), 851­893.

Karabarbounis, L. and Neiman, B. (2019). Accounting for Factorless Income. NBER Macroeconomics
 Annual, 33, 167­228.

Maliar, L. and Maliar, S. (2014). Numerical Methods for Large-Scale Dynamic Economic Models.
 In K. Schmedders and K. L. Judd (eds.), Handbook of Computational Economics Vol. 3, Handbook of
 Computational Economics, vol. 3, Elsevier, pp. 325 ­ 477.

Maliar, S., Maliar, L. and Judd, K. (2011). Solving the multi-country real business cycle model using
 ergodic set methods. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 35 (2), 207­228.

Meier, M. and Reinelt, T. (2020). Monetary Policy,Markup Dispersion, and Aggregate TFP. Discussion
 paper series, University of Bonn and University of Mannheim, Germany.

O'Mahony, M. and Timmer, M. P. (2009). Output, Input and Productivity Measures at the Industry
 Level: The EU KLEMS Database. Economic Journal, 119 (538), F374­F403.

Pierce, J. and Wisniewski, E. (2018). Some Characteristics of the Decline in Manufacturing Capacity
  Utilization. FEDS Notes, p. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Planas, C., Roeger, W. and Rossi, A. (2013). The Information Content of Capacity Utilization for
 Detrending Total Factor Productivity. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 37 (3), 577 ­ 590.

Queralto, A. (2019). A model of slow recoveries from financial crises. Journal of Monetary Economics.

                                                  45
Romer, C. D. and Romer, D. H. (2004). A New Measure of Monetary Shocks: Derivation and Implic-
 ations. American Economic Review, 94 (4), 1055­1084.

Schivardi, F. and Schmitz, T. (2020). The IT Revolution and Southern Europeâs Two Lost Decades.
  Journal of the European Economic Association, 18 (5), 2441­2486.

Solow, R. M. (1957). Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function. The Review of Eco-
  nomics and Statistics, 39 (3), 312­320.

van Ark, B., O'Mahoney, M. and Timmer, M. P. (2008). The productivity gap between europe and
  the united states: Trends and causes. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 22 (1), 25­44.

Wieland, J. F. and Yang, M.-J. (2016). Financial Dampening. NBER Working Papers 22141, National
 Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.




                                              46
A      Model Appendix
A.1     Further details on the model solution
A.1.1     Euler Equations
The problem described in (5) admits the following Bellman Equation:

    V (Kt-1 , NF,t-1 , X t ) = min (wF,t F (HF,t ) NF,t + wV,t V (HV,t ) NV,t + qF,t F (EF,t ) HF,t NF,t
                                                                             Et (V (Kt ,NF,t ,X t+1 ))
                             +qV,t V (EV,t ) HV,t NV,t + PM,t Mt + PI,t It +           1+r
                                                                                       AF,t
    such that                 Yt = Zt F Kt  KI   t
                                                t-1
                                                    -  , EF,t HF,t NF,t               NF,t-1   -  , EV,t HV,t NV,t , Mt ,
                              NF,t = (1 - N ) NF,t-1 + At ,
                              Kt = (1 - K ) Kt-1 + It .
                                                                                                                   (A.1)
    where X t  (Zt , Yt , wF,t , wV,t , qF,t , qV t , PM,t , PI,t ) is a vector containing all exogenous state variables.
    The first-order condition for next period's capital is
                                        1     Vt+1                         Kt     K Yt
                              PI,t +       Et             = t t +              t       ,                              (A.2)
                                       1+r    Kt                          Kt-1   Kt t
                    Vt+1      V
where we denote     Kt        Kt   (Kt , NF,t , X t+1 ). For next period's quasi-fixed employment, we get

                                                   1         Vt+1                         NF,t         LFY
                                                                                                            t
        wF,t F (HF,t ) + qF,t F (EF,t ) HF,t +        Et                  = t t +                             .       (A.3)
                                                  1+r        NF,t                        NF,t-1 t      NF,t t

    Next, we can derive the envelope conditions for the problem. These are given by
                                                                              2
                                Vt                          Kt                        K Yt
                                     = - (1 - K ) PI,t + t                        t        ,                          (A.4)
                                Kt-1                       Kt-1                       Kt t
                                                                  2        FY
                                        Vt          Nt                    L    t
                                               = t                    t          .                                    (A.5)
                                        NF,t-1     Nt-1                   NF,t t
   Using these envelope conditions to substitute out the derivatives of the value function in the first-order
conditions, we immediately obtain the Euler equations shown in Equations (9) to (10).

A.1.2     The Balanced Growth Path solution
As stated in the main text, the BGP is defined as a situation in which output, TFP and factor prices
grow at a constant rate forever, and the relative price of hours per worker with respect to worker effort is
constant. Note that a BGP does not require output, TFP and factor prices to grow at the same rate. As
we show in this section, the firm chooses capital, employment and materials to grow at a constant rate
on the BGP, and hours per worker and effort per hour to be constant.
   On the BGP, the first-order condition for materials becomes

                                                                 Yt
                                                  PM,t = M t        .                                                 (A.6)
                                                                 Mt

This condition must hold both at time t and at time t + 1. Dividing the expressions in both periods by
each other, we get
                                     dM  = d + dY  - dPM     
                                                               ,                                 (A.7)

                                                           47
where dx  ln x            
                t+1 - ln xt stands for the balanced growth rate of variable x.
   The first-order condition for hours becomes
                                                                                    Yt
                                w,t  (H  ) N ,t + q ,t  (E  ) N ,t = L t               ,            (A.8)
                                                                                    H
                                              w,t+1       q ,t+1
for     {F, V }. Using our assumption that     w,t    =     q ,t ,   this implies

                                          dN  = d + dY  - dw .                                      (A.9)

The Euler equation for capital investment becomes

                                               1 - K           Yt
                                     PI,t 1-         dPI = K t   ,                                 (A.10)
                                                1+r            Kt

where we have used the fact that  = 0. This equation implies

                                          dK  = d + dY  - dPI .                                    (A.11)

      Finally, the output constraint implies that

                            dY  = dZ  + K dK  + L
                                                F   
                                                  dNF   V
                                                      + L   
                                                          dNV + M dM  .                            (A.12)

Combining Equations (A.7), (A.9), (A.11) and (A.12), we get

                             d = K dPI + L
                                         F   
                                           dwF   V
                                               + L   
                                                   dwV       
                                                       + M dPM - dZ  .                             (A.13)

Because of constant returns to scale, growth in marginal cost does not depend on output growth. Replacing
Equation (A.13) into Equations (A.7), (A.9) and (A.11) then yields the balanced growth rates of capital,
variable and quasi-fixed employment and materials as a function of parameters.
    Hours and effort are constant on the BGP. To see this, note that the optimal choice of employment
holds
                                                              Yt
                       w,t  (H  ) + q ,t  (E  ) H  = L      t      , for  {F, V } .                (A.14)
                                                              N ,t
Combining Equation (A.8) with Equation (A.14), we get

                                                (H  ) H 
                                                         = 1,                                      (A.15)
                                                H

which pins down the BGP level of hours per worker. This condition is intuitive. As there are no adjustment
costs on the BGP, employment and hours enter the production function exactly symmetrically. The
elasticity of the wage bill with respect to employment is 1 by definition, so the firm chooses hours such
that the elasticity of the wage bill with respect to hours is 1 as well. With our chosen function form,
                                                                         1
                                                                        c
                                                            1
                                          H =                                .
                                                    b     (c - 1)

Finally, on the BGP, the first-order condition for effort is

                                                                             Yt
                                        q ,t  (E  ) H  N ,t = t L               .                  (A.16)
                                                                             E

                                                          48
Combining this with the previous results, we get
                                                                                                  1
                                                        w,t b c (H  )c -1                        c
                                         E =                                                          .
                                                        q ,t b (c - 1)

A.2      Numerical solution of the model
This section describes how we solve our model. Section A.2.1 restates all optimality conditions in devi-
ations from the BGP, in order to obtain a stationary problem. Section A.2.2 describes our assumptions
regarding the stochastic shock process faced by the firm. Section A.2.3 describes the solution algorithm,
and Section A.2.4 discusses some features of the obtained policy functions.

A.2.1      Normalized optimality conditions
                                         Xt
For any variable X , we denote Xt         .
                                         Xt           Then, the first-order conditions for materials, hours and effort
become
                                                                         t Yt
                                                            Mt =                   ,                                                       (A.17)
                                                                         PM,t
                          c - 1                       c -1           1                       c
                                w   ,t   H       ,t             +      q     ,t    E    ,t       H ,t N   ,t   = t Yt .                    (A.18)
                           c                                        c
                                                                c
                                             q   ,t    E   ,t       H ,t N         ,t   = t Yt .                                           (A.19)
The first-order condition for the hiring of variable workers is

                   c - 1      c - 1    1                            c              1                       c
                         wV,t       +    HV,t                              +         qV,t HV,t EV,t               NV,t = t Yt .            (A.20)
                    c          c      c                                           c
   By combining Equations (A.18) to (A.20) for variable labour inputs, it comes that HV,t = 1. This is
unsurprising: as there are no adjustment costs to employment, there is no reason for firms to vary hours
                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                            qV,t   c
per worker for variable workers. The effort of variable workers is given by EV,t =                                          wV,t
                                                                                                                                        . That is,
effort of variable workers only changes when there are shocks to the relative cost of effort. In the absence
of such shocks, the firm also leaves variable workers' effort levels unchanged, carrying out all adjustments
through the employment margin.
    The Euler equation for investment becomes

           1 - K                            1 - K
  PI,t -         Et exp (dPI ) PI,t+1 = 1 -       exp (dPI ) ·
            1+r                              1+r
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                  2
       1 + exp (dK  )
                       Kt t       t Yt  1                       Kt+1                                                  t+1 t+1 Yt+1 
                                     -     Et exp (2dK  + dPI )                                                                     (A.21)
                      Kt-1 t      Kt   1+r                       Kt                                                   t+1 Kt+1

The Euler equation for hiring of quasi-fixed workers becomes

  c - 1      c - 1    1             c              1                                c
        wF,t       +    HF,t                 +       qF,t HF,t EF,t                          =
   c          c      c                            c
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                  2
                      NF,t t    t Yt          1                       NF,t+1                                          t+1 t+1 Yt+1 
    1 + exp (dNF )                       -       Et exp (2dNF + dwF )                                                               . (A.22)
                     NF,t-1 t   NF,t         1+r                       NF,t                                           t+1 NF,t+1



                                                                        49
Finally, the output constraint can be rewritten as
                                              K                     V
                                                                    L                          F
                                                                                               L         M
                      Yt = Zt Kt t                 EV,t HV,t NV,t        EF,t HF,t NF,t t          Mt        .             (A.23)

   At this point, it is useful to note that by replacing Equations (A.17) to (A.20) into the output constraint
(A.23), we get
                                                                                                                       1
                                      V                                                                      F
                                                                                                                 
                          c -1    1   L                                       c -1                   1       L      M +V +cF
                Yt         c     c                 M                 -K       c c           c-1     c                  L   L
  t Yt =             wV,t qV,t            PM,t           Kt t               wF,t     NF,t          qF,t t                      ,
               Zt
                                                                                                 (A.24)
               c +c -1
where c          c c . t Yt captures the cost of output in period t, valued at the margin. This cost
is decreasing in the quasi-fixed capital and employment stocks, and increasing in output and the price
of variable inputs. The parameter c captures how variable the quasi-fixed labour input actually is. If
c = c = 1, c = 1: the marginal cost of increasing hours and effort is constant, and therefore, it is as
if quasi-fixed labour were variable (the firm will only adjust hours and effort, and not employment). If
instead c , c  +, c  0: hours and effort margins are infinitely costly, so the firm never uses them,
and all changes to quasi-fixed labour input entail adjustment costs.
    Equation (A.24) is useful because it allows us to reduce the number of exogenous state variables.
Indeed, substituting this equation into the Euler equations for capital and quasi-fixed employment, we
can remark that only four exogenous state variables appear in these equations: PI,t , wF,t , qF,t and
              c -1    1    V
                           L
               c     c                    M
       Yt
Bt           wV,t qV,t           PM,t         , which is a summary statistic for the effect of shocks to output, TFP
       Zt

and variable input prices.37 Thus, the firm only needs to form expectations with respect to these four
variables.

A.2.2       Stochastic shock processes
Time series for shocks We directly observe time series for the growth rates of output Yt , material
prices PM,t and investment good prices PI,t , and we estimate growth rates of TFP dZt . Using this data,
we construct time series for Yt , PM,t , PI,t and Zt , assuming that these variables are at their BGP level
in the first period (i.e., Y1 = PM,1 = PI,1 = Z1 = 1) and that their balanced growth rate is equal to the
average growth rate observed over the sample.38
     However, there is no observable series corresponding to the wage shifters w ,t and effort cost shifters
q ,t in our model. To determine these, we need to use the structure imposed by our model and make
additional assumptions. Let us denote by W ,t the wage bill paid by the firm to employees of type in
period t (that is, W ,t  w ,t  (H ,t ) N ,t + q ,t  (E ,t ) H ,t N ,t ). Then, using Equation (15), we get that
the total wage bill Wt holds

                                                     W ,t                                  c
                                 Wt =                     w ,t N    ,t   1-c+c H      ,t            .                      (A.25)
                                          {V,F }
                                                     Wt

Imposing the assumption wV,t = wF,t , Equation (A.25) shows us that we can use data on the wage bill,
employment and hours per worker of both types of labour, and the BGP wage bill shares, to deduce a
  37
     Note that the endogenous intratemporal variables appearing in the Euler Equation for employment (hours and effort)
are in turn only functions of these four exogenous state variables, and of the level of capital and quasi-fixed employment.
  38
     Under these assumptions, it is straightforward to see that Xt = exp (dXt - dX  ) Xt-1 .



                                                                50
time series for wage shifters.39 Obviously, these results are conditional upon the parameters c and c .
    Finally, regarding effort cost shocks, we impose qV t = qF t = 1. This reduces the number of exogenous
state variables in our problem to just three: PI,t , wF,t , and Bt .

Estimating a driving process Given the time series obtained above, we can now compute the series
for the composite variable Bt . We then estimate a first-order VAR for the three exogenous state variables
PI,t , wF,t , and Bt , and approximate this VAR with a multidimensional Markov chain, using six grid points
for every exogenous state variable.

A.2.3     Solution algorithm
We solve our model using an algorithm inspired by the Generalized Stochastic Simulation Algorithm
(GSSA) developed by Maliar et al. (2011). The key insight of this methodology is that one can achieve
important gains in speed by computing policy functions only in the most relevant regions of the state
space. To further speed up the code, we precompute expectations as suggested in Judd et al. (2017).
    In the algorithm, policy functions for capital and employment are approximated by polynomials,
defined by their degree D and a vector of parameters bK and bN . To solve for these polynomials, we use
the following steps.

Initialization
                                                                     T
(a) Set a simulation length T and draw a realization X t         for the path of exogenous state variables.
                                                             t=1
We choose T = 100 000.
    (b) Choose an initial condition for the state variables, K-1 and NF,-1 . We initialize these variables
at their BGP levels, such that K-1 = NF,-1 = 1.
                                                                                   (1)          (1)
    (c) Make a first guess for the path of the endogenous state variables, Kt           and NF,t . The
superscript in brackets stands for the current iteration.

Loop, Step 1 - Evaluate terms in the Euler Equations
(a) Given the path of the endogenous and exogenous state variables, Equation (A.24) pins down the level
of t Yt in every period. Then, we use Equations (A.18) to (A.19) to compute HF,t and EF,t .
     (b) With this, all we need to know in order to evaluate the Euler equations for capital and quasi-
fixed employment are two expectations, which we denote by Et (QK,t+1 ) for capital and Et (QNF ,t+1 )
for employment. These expectations are costly to compute, and we therefore follow Judd et al. (2017)
in first approximating the integrand with a polynomial in Kt , NF,t and X t+1 , and then computing the
expectation of this polynomial. To do so, we start by computing the current path of the integrands,
    (i)           (i)
  QK,t+1 and QNF ,t+1 . Then, for capital, we find the coefficients cK which solve

                                                            (i+1)        (i+1)      (i+1)
                     cK = arg min (QK,t+1 ) - P          Kt         , NF,t       , Xt+1     , cK   .             (A.26)
                                 cK

This is essentially a regression problem, in which we find the polynomial which most closely approximates
  (i)
 QK,t+1 . To solve the problem, we use an RLS-Tikhonov method, with a penalty parameter of -5 (see
                                                                         (i)
Maliar and Maliar, 2014). We proceed in the same way for QNF ,t+1 .
  39
     Recall that our model is stated in real terms. Thus, we convert material prices, investment good prices and the wage
bill in our data into real series as well, by using the price deflator for the final output of the industry.



                                                           51
    (c) Using the polynomial functions obtained in (b), we compute the expectations Et (QK,t+1 ) and
Et (QN,t+1 ). As pointed out by Judd et al. (2017), doing so is not very costly, as Kt and NF,t are known
at time t, and expectations of functions of exogenous state variables can be precomputed.40

Loop, Step 2 - Calculate Euler Equation errors
We can now update our guess for the endogenous state variables, using the Euler Equations. For capital,
we set

              
                                                                                                                  (i)   2      (i)    (i)
               exp(dPI )                                          1-K                                         Kt+1          t+1 t+1 Yt+1
               1+r Et          (1 - K ) PI,t+1 - 1 -               1+r   exp (dPI )          exp (dK  )         (i)         (i)             (i)
                                                                                                               Kt           t+1       Kt+1
   new
              
  Kt   =                                                                                                                                          +
                                                                           PI,t
        
              

                                                                                                        (i)     (i)      (i)          
                                                1-K                                                    Kt     t          t Yt
                                           1-    1+r   exp (dPI ) ·               1 + exp (dK  )    (i)       (i)        (i)
                                                                                                   Kt-1       t         Kt             (i)
                                                                                                                                       K , (A.27)
                                                                                                                                       t
                                                                                  PI,t

   where expectations are computed as described in Step 2. Note that if the Euler equation holds,
 new = K (i) . Instead, when the marginal benefit of capital today is larger than its marginal cost (i.e.,
Kt        t
when the ratio in Equation (A.27) is larger than 1), our guess for capital today is adjusted upwards, and
when the marginal benefit of capital today is smaller than its marginal cost, it is adjusted downwards.
   Likewise, for quasi-fixed employment, we get

                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                        2
           
                                     (i)                                                                       (i)              (i)    (i)
                    )              NF,t (i)          (i)
                                                     t Yt         1                              )            NF,t+1        t+1 t+1 Yt+1
         1 + exp (dNF              (i)
                                        t
                                            (i)        (i)   -   1+r Et exp (2dNF
                                                                                             + dwF                (i)           (i)         (i)
                                                                                                                                                  
                                 NF,t-1 t           NF,t                                                       NF,t         t+1 NF,t+1            
 new
                                                                                                                                                   (i)
NF,t   =                                                               (i) c                                (i) c
                                                                                                                                                  N ,
                                                                                                                                                   F,t
                                    c -1            c -1          1                       1
                                     c wF,t                  +        HF,t          +    c qF,t HF,t    EF,t
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                     c           c                                                                                

                                                                                                                                                  (A.28)
where an analogous logic        applies.41
  40
    To illustrate this, consider a simplified case with only one endogenous state variable (Kt ) and two exogenous state
variables (Bt and PI,t ). Then, computing the time-t expectation of a two-dimensional polynomial in Kt , Bt+1 and PI,t+1 ,
we get

                                                     2        2          2
           Et c0 + c1 Kt + c2 Bt+1 + c3 PI,t+1 + c4 Kt + c5 B t +1 + c6 PI,t+1 + c7 Kt Bt+1 + c8 Kt PI,t+1 + c9 Bt+1 PI,t+1

                                                            2            2             2
       =       c0 + c1 Kt + c2 Et Bt+1 + c3 Et PI,t+1 + c4 Kt + c5 E t B t +1 + c6 Et PI,t+1 + c7 Kt Et Bt+1                                       .

                                                  +c8 Kt Et PI,t+1 + c9 Et Bt+1 PI,t+1

Thus, to compute the expectation, we only need to know the time-t expectations of all polynomial terms in the exogenous
state variables. These can easily be computed once at the beginning of the loop.
  41                                                                                                      
     Note that as we have directly constructed a series for wF,t , we have not yet computed a value for dwF . However, doing
so is straightforward: assuming that dwF = dwV , we get that dNF = dNV = dN , and dwF = dW - dN  .
                                                                                                    




                                                                      52
Loop, Step 3: Update the guesses and assess convergence
(a) We now update the guess for the policy functions, using

                                                            v (i+1) =  v N ew + (1 -  ) v (i) ,                                                             (A.29)

where  = 0.05 is a dampening parameter and v stands for the vector of endogenous state variables.
   (b) We can now assess whether the loop has converged, by checking whether the condition
                                                                                                        
                                                       T                          N ew - v       (i)
                                               1                                 vt        t             < 10-6
                                                               
                                                                                       (i)
                                                                                                                                                            (A.30)
                                              2T     t=1        v {K,NF }             vt

holds. If this holds, the loop has ended, if it does not, we go back to Step 1.
    Note that this application of the GSSA algorithm differs from the one presented in Maliar et al. (2011)
in that we iterate on the path of endogenous variables, while Maliar et al. iterate on a polynomial policy
function. We find that this deviation considerably speeds up computing time in our application, but our
results do not change when we use the Maliar et al. policy function iteration instead.
    For convenience, we do not draw shocks to exogenous state variables for the first periods, but impose
that they correspond to the exact realization of shocks in the data. Thus, we can read off our model's
predictions for the path of inputs directly for the solution for these first periods.

A.2.4   Model solution: illustrations
Figure A.1 illustrates the solution of the problem for a given set of parameter values.

                                                             Figure A.1: Policy functions
                                    Policy function: capital                                            Policy function: full-time employment
                1.3                                                                      1.4


                                                                                         1.3
                1.2

                                                                                         1.2

                1.1
                                                                                         1.1


                  1                                                                        1


                                                                                         0.9
                0.9

                                                                                         0.8

                0.8
                                                                                         0.7


                0.7                                                                      0.6
                  0.6   0.7   0.8      0.9      1      1.1     1.2   1.3   1.4             0.6    0.7      0.8    0.9     1      1.1     1.2    1.3   1.4



                                    Policy function: capital                                            Policy function: full-time employment
                1.1                                                                   1.005

               1.08
                                                                                          1
               1.06
                                                                                      0.995
               1.04
                                                                                       0.99
               1.02

                 1                                                                    0.985

               0.98
                                                                                       0.98
               0.96
                                                                                      0.975
               0.94
                                                                                       0.97
               0.92

                0.9                                                                   0.965
                  0.6   0.7   0.8     0.9      1      1.1      1.2   1.3   1.4             0.6    0.7    0.8     0.9     1      1.1     1.2     1.3   1.4




                                                                                 53
    Policy functions are increasing in the past level of capital/employment, (slightly) concave, and have
slopes smaller than 1 (meaning that in the absence of shocks, firms tend to revert to the BGP). Higher
adjustment costs increase the slope of the policy functions, as firms optimally choose to adjust less, i.e.
keep capital/employment closer to their previous levels. The two lower panels of the figure show the
optimal choice of capital/employment as a function of the variable Bt (roughly speaking, output, keeping
fixed material prices and part-time labour prices). Again, policy functions are increasing and concave,
and now higher adjustment costs make them flatter, as firms react less to output shocks.

A.3    The structural estimation algorithm
This section provides further details about our structural estimation of the adjustment cost parameters
a-   +   -       +
  , a , a and a , and the curvature parameters for the effort and hours cost functions c and c .
   To perform the structural estimation, we use a Differential Evolution algorithm for MATLAB, devel-
oped by Markus Buehren and available for download at https://it.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/
fileexchange/18593-differential-evolution, to find the parameter set that minimizes the distance
function
                              8
                                       |Momentm (Data) - Momentm (Model)|
                       D=                                                        .               (A.31)
                            m=1
                                  0 . 5 · (Momentm (Data) + Momentm (Model))
The eight data moments that we target are the standard deviation of capital growth (unconditional
and conditional on positive or negative observations), quasi-fixed employment growth (unconditional and
conditional on positive or negative observations), hours per quasi-fixed worker growth, and growth in the
capacity utilization survey (measured as S dSt Data in the data).

   For each set of adjustment cost parameters and curvature parameters, we first compute the corre-
sponding series of wage shifter shocks and estimate the Markov process for exogenous state variables, as
described in Section A.2.2. We then solve for the policy functions of the firm, compute its optimal input
choices given the path of shocks observed over the sample period, and use the latter to compute the model
equivalent of our data moments.

A.4    Differences between our model and BFK
Our model in Section 2 differs from Basu and Fernald (2001) and Basu et al. (2006) in several dimensions.
These differences are mostly not fundamental: if we impose the simplifying assumptions discussed in the
main text, both models deliver the exact same TFP measurement equation. In this section, we briefly
review the non-essential differences between the two models.

Production function We assume that production is Cobb-Douglas. BFK instead consider a general
production function, but log-linearize it around the BGP. This makes their effective production function
log-linear with constant elasticities (i.e., Cobb-Douglas).

Internal adjustment costs In our model, adjustment costs are internal, reducing the effective capital
and labour input of the firm. In BFK, adjustment costs are external, i.e., akin to another type of material
spending for firms. As BFK assume that adjustment costs are negligible, this is obviously irrelevant for
their results. In Basu et al. (2001), where the authors do not consider non-negligible adjustment costs,
they also model them as internal.

Factor utilization BFK consider the utilization rate of capital Ut as an independent production factor.
Capital utilization has a wage cost, so that the wage bill is wt G (Ht , Et ) V (Ut ) Nt , where G and V are


                                                    54
convex functions capturing the costs of increasing hours per worker, effort and utilization. As noted in
the main text, our model instead considers the utilization rate of capital as an outcome that depends on
the relative use of labour and materials with respect to the capital stock. Intuitively, this captures the
idea that machines and buildings do not produce by themselves. For example, the utilization rate of a
machine depends on how many hours it is operated by workers, how much electricity it consumes, and
how many material inputs it receives. The utilization rate of a bank office depends on how many clerks
work in the office, and on how many customers they serve within an hour. Thus, we consider Ut to be a
function of all other inputs, which is why it does not appear in our reduced-form production function F .
Note, however, that these considerations are irrelevant for measurement: the BFK measurement equation
with one unobserved production factor is exactly the same as the BFK measurement equation with two
unobserved production factors.




                                                   55
B      Data Appendix
B.1     Growth accounting data
B.1.1       EU KLEMS
For the five European countries considered in this paper, our main data source is EU KLEMS.
    Throughout, we restrict our attention to industries in the market economy, defined by KLEMS as
including all industries except public administration and defence, social security, education, health and
social work, household activities, activities of extraterritorial bodies, and real estate.42 From this sample,
we further drop agriculture (NACE A), forestry and fishing, mining and quarrying (NACE B), and
manufacturing of coke and refined petroleum products (NACE 19), which leaves us with 19 industries,
listed in Table A.1.

                                         Table A.1: List of KLEMS industries
 Industry                                                                       NACE Code      Sector
 Food products, beverages and tobacco                                             C10-C12      Non-durable manufacturing
 Textiles, wearing apparel, leather and related products                          C13-C15      Non-durable manufacturing
 Wood and paper products; printing and reproduction of recorded media             C16-C18      Non-durable manufacturing
 Chemicals and chemical products                                                  C20-C21      Non-durable manufacturing
 Rubber and plastics products, and other non-metallic mineral products            C22-C23      Non-durable manufacturing
 Basic metals and fabricated metal products, exc. machinery and equipment         C24-C25      Durable manufacturing
 Electrical and optical equipment                                                 C26-C27      Durable manufacturing
 Machinery and equipment n.e.c.                                                     C28        Durable manufacturing
 Transport equipment                                                              C29-C30      Durable manufacturing
 Other manufacturing; repair and installation of machinery and equipment          C31-C33      Durable manufacturing
 Electricity, gas and water supply                                                  D-E        Non-manufacturing
 Construction                                                                        F         Non-manufacturing
 Wholesale and retail trade; Repair of motor vehicles and motorcycles                G         Non-manufacturing
 Transportation and storage                                                          H         Non-manufacturing
 Accommodation and food service activities                                            I        Non-manufacturing
 Information and communication                                                        J        Non-manufacturing
 Financial and Insurance activities                                                  K         Non-manufacturing
 Professional, scientific, technical, administrative and support service act.       M-N        Non-manufacturing
 Arts, entertainment, recreation and other service activities                       R-S        Non-manufacturing


    Our analysis uses ten KLEMS time series, all defined annually and at the industry-level: nominal gross
output (GO), the price index for gross output (GO_P), nominal expenditure on intermediate inputs (II),
the price index for intermediate inputs (II_P), the KLEMS index for capital input (CAP_QI), the KLEMS
index for labour input (LAB_QI), the nominal wage bill (LAB), the total number of persons engaged
(EMP), total hours worked by persons engaged (H_EMP), and the price index for investment goods
(Ip_GFCF).43 The correspondence between KLEMS variables and variables in our model is summarized
by Table A.2.
  42
     The latter is excluded because, as noted by O'Mahony and Timmer (2009), "for the most part the output of the real
estate sector [...] is imputed rent on owner-occupied dwellings", making productivity measures hard to interpret.
  43
     For Spain and the United Kingdom, KLEMS does not provide a separate price index for gross output and intermediate
inputs. Therefore, we assume for these countries that price indeces for gross output and intermediate inputs equal the price
index for value added (VA_P). Likewise, Italy does not have separate gross output and intermediate input price indexes for
industry R-S, and we use value-added price indexes here as well.


                                                                56
                     Table A.2: Correspondence between KLEMS variables and our model
                           Model variable                                           KLEMS variable
                           dYt                                                      dGOt - dGO_Pt
                           dMt                                                      dIIt - dII_Pt
                           dKt                                                      dCAP_QIt
                           WV,t                         WF,t
                           W,t
                                   (dNV,t + dHV,t ) +   W,t
                                                               (dNF,t + dHF,t )     dLAB_QIt
                           NV,t + NF,t                                              EMPt
                           HV,t NV,t + HF,t NF,t                                    H_EMPt
                           PM,t Mt                                                   IIt
                            Pt Yt                                                   GOt
                            Wt                                                      LABt
                           Pt Yt                                                    GOt
                           dPM,t                                                    dII_Pt - dGO_Pt
                           dPI,t                                                    dIp_GFCFt - dII_Pt
                           Wt                                                       LABt


    This correspondence is mostly straightforward, but two variables deserve some further discussion.
First, the KLEMS measure of capital input (CAP_QI) is an aggregate across nine types of capital.
KLEMS computes growth rates at the level of individual capital goods, and then aggregates these up
using the (estimated) shares of each capital good in total capital compensation. In our analysis, we
abstract from this heterogeneity and consider the growth rate of CAP_QI as the growth rate of one
unique capital good.
    Second, the KLEMS measure of labour input (LAB_QI) is also an aggregate across 18 types of
workers (differentiated by gender, three age groups and three education groups). Again, growth rates
of total hours worked are computed at the level of each individual worker, and then aggregated using
compensation weights, i.e. the share of each group of workers in the total wage bill of the industry.
                                                WV,t                    WF,t
In our model, this measure would be equal to W,t     (dNV,t + dHV,t ) + W,t  (dNF,t + dHF,t ). This is not
exactly equal to total labour input, which - abstracting from adjustment costs - is instead given by
  V                         F
 V
 +
    L
      F ( dNV,t + dHV,t )+   L
                            +F
                           V   (dNF,t + dHF,t ). As changes in the relative wage bill of the two categories
 L     L                         L    L
of workers over time are small, we ignore this difference and use LAB_QI to measure labour (allowing us
to take advantage of the full level of detail available in the KLEMS database).44
    Finally, KLEMS provides depreciation rates for each of the nine types of capital goods it covers. In
order to obtain an industry-level depreciation rate K , we compute an average depreciation rate, weighted
by the share of each type of capital good in the total capital of the industry. Table A.3 lists the obtained
depreciation rates.

                                          Table A.3: Capital depreciation rates
                                             United        Germany          Spain          France     Italy   United
                                             States                                                           Kingdom
           Non-durable manufacturing          9.1%             11.1%        9.6%           11.3%      9.7%     9.0%
           Durable manufacturing             10.5%             13.1%       10.9%           14.9%      10.6%    10.1%
           Non-manufacturing                  7.7%             8.3%         8.6%           9.7%       8.0%     6.5%

Notes: This table lists simple averages of industry-level capital depreciation rates across sectors.
  44
     This measure of labour input obviously includes cyclical changes in hours per worker. Thus, to obtain the actual measure
of labour input used in our estimation equation (23), we substract from this cyclical changes in hours per worker (for both
worker categories), computed with a band-pass filter as indicated in the main text.



                                                                   57
B.1.2     BLS
For the United States, we use the industry-level growth accounting database provided by the BLS. The
database can be downloaded at https://www.bls.gov/mfp/mprdload.htm. The original BLS dataset
contains 60 industries, which we aggregate to 21 industries that roughly correspond to the KLEMS
industries. The final 21 industries are listed in Table A.4.

                                     Table A.4: List of industries, United States
        Industry                                                          NAICS Code   Sector
        Food, Beverage and Tobacco products                                 311-312    Non-durable manufacturing
        Textile, Apparel and Leather products                               313-316    Non-durable manufacturing
        Wood, Paper, Printing and related support activities                321-323    Non-durable manufacturing
        Chemical and Plastic Products                                       325-326    Non-durable manufacturing
        Nonmetallic mineral products                                         327       Non-durable manufacturing
        Primary and fabricated metal products                               331-332    Durable manufacturing
        Machinery                                                            333       Durable manufacturing
        Computer and Electronic products                                     334       Durable manufacturing
        Electrical Equipment, Appliances, and Components                     335       Durable manufacturing
        Transportation Equipment                                             336       Durable manufacturing
        Furniture and related products                                       337       Durable manufacturing
        Miscellaneous manufacturing                                          339       Durable manufacturing
        Utilities                                                             22       Non-manufacturing
        Construction                                                          23       Non-manufacturing
        Wholesale and Retail Trade                                         42, 44-45   Non-manufacturing
        Transportation and Storage                                           48-49     Non-manufacturing
        Information and Communication                                         51       Non-manufacturing
        Finance, Insurance and Real Estate                                   52-53     Non-manufacturing
        Professional, Scientific, Administrative and Technical Services      54-56     Non-manufacturing
        Arts, Entertainment, Recreation and related activities                71       Non-manufacturing
        Accomodation and Food service activities                              72       Non-manufacturing


   The BLS growth accounting variables are defined in the same way as the ones in EU KLEMS, so we
keep using the same definitions and correspondences. The only major difference between KLEMS and
the BLS database is that the later does not contain data on employment and hours worked (instead, it
only provides a measure of total labour input, LAB_QI). Thus, we obtain measures of employment and
hours worked from the Labor Productivity and Costs (LPC) database, another database maintained by
the BLS (available at https://www.bls.gov/lpc/home.htm).

B.2     Labour composition
Europe To measure labour composition in Europe, we rely on microdata from the European Union
Labour Force Survey (EU LFS).45 The EU LFS provides industry-level annual data on employment and
total hours by contract type (permanent or temporary) and job status (full-time or part-time).46 We
  45
     See https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/microdata/european-union-labour-force-survey for further details on
the survey and data access.
  46
     The industry classification in the LFS is less fine than in KLEMS: the LFS only provides information at the NACE
1-digit level. Thus, we need to assign the same employment and hours split to all industries belonging to a 1-digit NACE
group.


                                                             58
define quasi-fixed labour as the labour provided by workers with permanent and full-time contracts, and
variable labour as the labour provided by all other workers. Using these definitions, we compute the
employment and hours share of each of the two categories, and apply these shares to the KLEMS levels
of employment and hours worked to obtain a series in levels.47
    The EU LFS does not contain information on wages. Thus, to compute the relative wage bill of both
types of workers, we use data from the European Structure of Earnings survey, provided by Eurostat.
We approximate the relative hourly wage of quasi-fixed workers with respect to variable workers with the
ratio of hourly earnings of workers with "unlimited duration" contracts to the hourly earnings of workers
with "Limited duration, except apprentice and trainee" contracts. As the Structure of Earnings survey is
only carried out every four years, we measure the relative hourly wage just at one point in time, in 2006
(roughly the middle of our sample period).

United States In the United States, there is no direct equivalent to the European notion of permanent
and temporary employment contracts. Therefore, we define quasi-fixed labour as labour provided by
workers with full-time contracts, and variable labour as labour provided by workers with part-time con-
tracts. We obtain time series on employment and hours for these two types of workers from unpublished
occupation and industry tables from the Current Population Survey (CPS), kindly provided to us by the
BLS. Likewise, data on the relative wage of full and part-time workers is also taken from the BLS.

B.3     Capacity utilization surveys
Europe Our European data on capacity utilization comes from the Joint Harmonised EU Programme
of Business and Consumer Surveys.48 All manufacturing data comes from the quarterly Industry survey,
which asks firms "At what capacity is your company currently operating (as a percentage of full capacity)?"
The firm then has to fill out the blank in the following sentence, "The company is currently operating at
__ % of full capacity". We obtain an annual measure of capacity utilization by taking a simple average
of these quarterly measures. The survey provides data for 24 NACE industries, which we aggregate to
the 10 KLEMS manufacturing industries by using value added weights.49
    Data for construction firms comes from the Construction survey, which asks firms about the number
of months of activity that they can sustain with current orders and current staff. Our baseline uses this
survey to measure capacity utilization in construction, but our results do not change if we instead use the
average capacity utilization in manufacturing (results are available upon request).
    Finally, starting in 2011, the Services Sector survey measures capacity utilization for service industries.
Firms are asked "If the demand addressed to your firm expanded, could you increase your volume of activity
with your present resources? If so, by how much? " The Commission interprets the hypothetical level of
activity that a firm could reach as that firm's full capacity output (Gayer, 2013). Capacity utilization is
defined as the ratio of current output to full capacity output. We use data from this survey, whenever
available, in our baseline analysis.50 To extend the series for years before 2011, we regress industry-level
  47
     Our assumptions imply that the change in employment adjustment costs in year t depends on the change in quasi-fixed
employment between year t - 2 and t - 1. Thus, in order to be able to compute TFP growth between 1995 and 1996, we
assume that quasi-fixed employment growth in 1994 was equal to total employment growth. As employment adjustment
costs are negligible in almost all countries and industries, this assumption has no bearing on our results.
  48
     See             https://ec.europa.eu/info/business-economy-euro/indicators-statistics/economic-databases/
business-and-consumer-surveys_en.
  49
     We also perform some limited data cleaning on the original time series. We drop industries with two or more gaps in
the original data, set all values larger than 100% in the original data to 100%, and winsorize the lowest values to the 0.1%
percentile. These changes apply to a very small number of observations.
  50
     Utilities (D-E) and Wholesale and Retail Trade (G) are not covered, and Financial and Insurance Activities (K) are only
covered in Spain. We assign to these industries the average capacity utilization in all service industries which have data.



                                                            59
series on average capacity utilization in manufacturing, and use the regression coefficients to backcast the
series. In Section 6.4, we show that our results do not change when using average capacity utilization in
manufacturing for all service industries throughout.

United States US capacity utilization data comes from the Federal Reserve Board's monthly reports
on Industrial Production and Capacity Utilization (G.17).51 The data is constructed by the Federal
Reserve on the basis of the Census Bureau's Quarterly Survey of Plant Capacity (QSPC).
    The QSPC is carried out at the plant level. Plants are first asked to report the value of current
production: "Report the value of production based on estimated sales price(s) of what was produced during
the quarter, not quarter sales ". Second, they should report their full production capacity, defined as
"the maximum level of production that this establishment could reasonably expect to attain under normal
and realistic operating conditions fully utilizing the machinery and equipment in place ". In the detailed
instruction that plant managers are given about how they should calculate this number, it is noteworthy
that the Census suggests that "if you have a reliable or accurate estimate of your plant's sustainable
capacity utilization rate, divide your market value of production at actual operations [..] by your current
rate of capacity utilization [to get full production capacity] ". Finally, firms are asked to report the ratio
between current and full production, which is capacity utilization. Once they have done so, firms are
asked "Is this a reasonable estimate of your utilization rate for this quarter? Mark (X) yes or no. If
no, please review your full production capability estimate. If yes, continue with the next item." For our
purposes, we use the annual version of the Federal Reserve's database, which provides data for 17 NAICS
manufacturing industries, as well as for Electric and Gas utilities.
    The United States does not have a survey on capacity utilization in service industries. Therefore, we
use average capacity utilization in manufacturing as a utilization proxy for all service industries.

B.4    Instruments
Our instruments for monetary policy and financial shocks are fully described in the main text. Data on
nominal oil prices (used to compute oil price shocks) are from World Bank Commodity Price Data (The
Pink Sheet), and deflated with country-specific CPIs from OECD.Stat.
    Our measure of Economic Policy Uncertainy (EPU) was developed by Baker, Bloom and Davis (2016),
and is regularly updated at http://www.policyuncertainty.com. For European countries, the measure
is a monthly index based on newspaper articles on policy uncertainty (articles containing the terms
uncertain or uncertainty, economic or economy, and one or more policy­relevant terms, in the native
language of the respective newspaper). The number of economic uncertainty articles is then normalized
by a measure of the number of articles in the same newspaper and month, and the resulting newspaper-
level monthly series is standardized to unit standard deviation prior to 2011. Finally, the country-level
EPU series is obtained as the simple average of the series for the country's newspapers, and normalized to
have a mean of 100 prior to 2011.52 For the United States, measurement is more sophisticated, considering
not only newspaper articles, but also the number of federal tax code provisions set to expire in future
years and disagreement among economic forecasters.
    In order to obtain an annual series, we take a simple average of monthly values. In Europe, the index
is available since 1987 for France, 1993 for Germany, 1997 for Italy and the United Kingdom, and 2001
for Spain. If there is no available data for a country during a given period, we use the change in the
European EPU series (which is the simple average of the series of for five European countries considered
in our analysis).
 51
   The data can be accessed at https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/G17/Current/default.htm.
 52
   The newspapers used are Le Monde and Le Figaro for France, Handelsblatt and Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung for
Germany, Corriere Della Sera and La Repubblica for Italy, and El Mundo and El Pais for Spain.


                                                       60
B.5   Plots of key variables
The following figures plot some key variables used in our analysis. To generate these plots, we have
aggregated industry-level growth rates across the three sectors used in our paper (using gross output
weights for gross output, materials and capital, and employment weights for employment).


                                               Figure A.2: Gross output growth
                       Gross output growth:United States                                  Gross output growth:Germany
         0.1

                                                                               0.1
        0.05
                                                                              0.05

              0
                                                                                 0

       -0.05
                                                                              -0.05


        -0.1                                                                   -0.1


       -0.15                                                                  -0.15


                                                                               -0.2
        -0.2

              1995   2000          2005          2010          2015              1995   2000            2005          2010   2015

                             Gross output growth:Spain                                         Gross output growth:France
         0.1                                                                   0.1


        0.05
                                                                              0.05
              0


       -0.05                                                                     0


        -0.1
                                                                              -0.05

       -0.15

                                                                               -0.1
        -0.2


       -0.25
                                                                              -0.15
              1995    2000            2005          2010              2015       1995   2000            2005          2010   2015

                            Gross output growth:Italy                                   Gross output growth:United Kingdom
        0.1                                                                    0.08

                                                                               0.06
       0.05

                                                                               0.04
         0
                                                                               0.02

      -0.05
                                                                                  0

       -0.1                                                                   -0.02

                                                                              -0.04
      -0.15
                                                                              -0.06
       -0.2
                                                                              -0.08

      -0.25
                                                                               -0.1
         1995        2000             2005              2010           2015      1995   2000            2005          2010   2015




                                                                        61
                                          Figure A.3: Material input growth
                      Materials growth:United States                                      Materials growth:Germany
                                                                          0.1
  0.05

                                                                         0.05
        0

                                                                            0
 -0.05

                                                                         -0.05
  -0.1

                                                                          -0.1
 -0.15

                                                                         -0.15
  -0.2

                                                                          -0.2
 -0.25
     1995      2000            2005         2010          2015              1995   2000           2005          2010   2015

                         Materials growth:Spain                                           Materials growth:France

   0.1                                                                    0.1

  0.05
                                                                         0.05
        0

 -0.05                                                                      0

  -0.1
                                                                         -0.05
 -0.15

  -0.2                                                                    -0.1

 -0.25
                                                                         -0.15
  -0.3

        1995    2000             2005             2010           2015       1995   2000           2005          2010   2015

                         Materials growth:Italy                                     Materials growth:United Kingdom
                                                                           0.1
 0.1


0.05
                                                                          0.05
   0


-0.05                                                                        0

 -0.1

                                                                         -0.05
-0.15


 -0.2
                                                                          -0.1
-0.25

   1995        2000              2005              2010           2015      1995   2000           2005          2010   2015




                                                                   62
                                          Figure A.4: Capital input growth
                      Capital growth:United States                                        Capital growth:Germany

  0.07                                                                  0.05


  0.06


  0.05
                                                                           0

  0.04


  0.03

                                                                        -0.05
  0.02


  0.01


        0                                                                -0.1
    1995       2000          2005          2010          2015              1995    2000          2005          2010       2015

                          Capital growth:Spain                                             Capital growth:France


  0.06                                                                   0.04



  0.04                                                                   0.03



  0.02                                                                   0.02


        0
                                                                         0.01


 -0.02
                                                                            0


 -0.04
                                                                        -0.01
        1995    2000            2005             2010           2015        1995   2000           2005             2010   2015

                         Capital growth:Italy

0.04



0.03



0.02



0.01



   0



-0.01



   1995        2000             2005              2010           2015




                                                                  63
                                               Figure A.5: Employment growth
                       Employment growth:United States                                    Employment growth:Germany
                                                                             0.03
        0.02


              0                                                              0.02

       -0.02
                                                                             0.01
       -0.04


       -0.06                                                                    0


       -0.08
                                                                             -0.01

        -0.1
                                                                             -0.02
       -0.12


              1995   2000           2005        2010          2015              1995   2000           2005         2010   2015

                             Employment growth:Spain                                          Employment growth:France
        0.06                                                                 0.04

        0.04                                                                 0.03

        0.02                                                                 0.02

              0                                                              0.01

       -0.02                                                                    0

       -0.04                                                                 -0.01

       -0.06                                                                 -0.02

       -0.08                                                                 -0.03
        -0.1
                                                                             -0.04
       -0.12
                                                                             -0.05
       -0.14
              1995    2000            2005             2010          2015       1995   2000           2005         2010   2015

                             Employment growth:Italy                                   Employment growth:United Kingdom

       0.03                                                                   0.03

       0.02                                                                   0.02

                                                                              0.01
       0.01
                                                                                 0
         0
                                                                             -0.01
      -0.01
                                                                             -0.02

      -0.02                                                                  -0.03

      -0.03                                                                  -0.04

      -0.04                                                                  -0.05

                                                                             -0.06
      -0.05

         1995        2000             2005             2010           2015      1995   2000            2005        2010   2015




B.6   Recession definitions
In all graphs, shaded areas mark recessions. Recession dates are taken from the NBER for the United
States, the Euro Area Business Cycle Network for the Eurozone, and the Conference Board for the United


                                                                       64
Kingdom. We consider a year to be a recession year if at least 6 months of the year are defined as a
recession by these institutions.


C     Additional results and tables
C.1    TFP growth at the industry level
The following figures plot cumulated industry-level TFP growth rates for all industries in our sample.

                     Figure A.6: Industry-level cumulated TFP growth, United States, manufacturing
                               United States,311-312                                 United States,313-316                                United States,321-323
          0
                                                                    0.07                                             0.12
       -0.01
                                                                    0.06                                              0.1
       -0.02
                                                                    0.05                                             0.08
       -0.03

       -0.04                                                        0.04                                             0.06

       -0.05                                                        0.03                                             0.04

       -0.06                                                        0.02                                             0.02
       -0.07
                                                                    0.01
                                                                                                                           0
       -0.08
                                                                       0
                                                                                                                     -0.02
       -0.09
                                                                   -0.01
        -0.1                                                                                                         -0.04

          1995         2000        2005         2010       2015        1995   2000       2005         2010   2015          1995    2000       2005            2010    2015

                               United States,325-326                                   United States,327                                  United States,331-332
         0.1
                                                                                                                     0.06
       0.08                                                         0.04
                                                                                                                     0.05
       0.06
                                                                    0.02
                                                                                                                     0.04
       0.04

                                                                       0                                             0.03
       0.02

                                                                                                                     0.02
          0
                                                                   -0.02

       -0.02                                                                                                         0.01

                                                                   -0.04
       -0.04                                                                                                               0


       -0.06                                                       -0.06                                             -0.01


          1995         2000        2005         2010       2015        1995   2000       2005         2010   2015          1995    2000       2005            2010    2015

                                 United States,333                                    United States,334                                    United States,335

        0.08                                                        1.4                                              0.1

                                                                                                                    0.08
        0.06                                                        1.2
                                                                                                                    0.06
        0.04                                                          1
                                                                                                                    0.04

        0.02                                                                                                        0.02
                                                                    0.8
                                                                                                                       0
              0
                                                                    0.6
                                                                                                                    -0.02
        -0.02
                                                                    0.4                                             -0.04

        -0.04                                                                                                       -0.06
                                                                    0.2
        -0.06                                                                                                       -0.08

                                                                      0                                              -0.1
              1995      2000        2005            2010    2015      1995    2000      2005         2010    2015      1995       2000       2005         2010       2015

                                United States,336                                     United States,337                                   United States,339
                                                                                                                    0.25
       0.25                                                        0.02


                                                                      0                                              0.2
        0.2

                                                                   -0.02
                                                                                                                    0.15
       0.15
                                                                   -0.04
                                                                                                                     0.1
        0.1
                                                                   -0.06

                                                                                                                    0.05
       0.05                                                        -0.08


                                                                    -0.1                                              0
         0
         1995          2000       2005         2010        2015       1995    2000      2005         2010    2015     1995        2000      2005          2010       2015




                                                                                        65
        Figure A.7: Industry-level cumulated TFP growth, United States, non-manufacturing
                     United States,22                               United States,23                                    United States,42, 44-45
                                                      0
                                                                                                      0.05
0.05                                              -0.02
                                                                                                      0.04
   0                                              -0.04
                                                                                                      0.03
                                                  -0.06
-0.05
                                                  -0.08                                               0.02

 -0.1                                                                                                 0.01
                                                    -0.1

-0.15                                             -0.12                                                     0

                                                  -0.14                                               -0.01
 -0.2
                                                  -0.16
                                                                                                      -0.02
-0.25
                                                  -0.18
                                                                                                      -0.03

   1995     2000       2005         2010   2015       1995   2000     2005             2010   2015              2000       2005          2010       2015



                   United States,48-49                              United States,51                                     United States,52-53
 0.2
                                                   0.25
                                                                                                      0.08


0.15                                                0.2
                                                                                                      0.06

                                                   0.15

 0.1                                                                                                  0.04
                                                    0.1

                                                                                                      0.02
0.05                                               0.05


                                                      0                                                     0

   0
                                                  -0.05
                                                                                                     -0.02

   1995     2000      2005          2010   2015       1995   2000     2005         2010       2015       1995    2000       2005            2010    2015



                   United States,54-56                              United States,71                                     United States,72
0.14
                                                  0.08                                                0.1
0.12
                                                                                                     0.09
                                                  0.06
                                                                                                     0.08
 0.1

                                                  0.04                                               0.07
0.08
                                                                                                     0.06
                                                  0.02
                                                                                                     0.05
0.06
                                                                                                     0.04
                                                     0
0.04                                                                                                 0.03

                                                  -0.02                                              0.02
0.02
                                                                                                     0.01
                                                  -0.04
  0                                                                                                    0
  1995      2000      2005         2010    2015      1995    2000    2005          2010       2015     1995     2000       2005          2010      2015




                                                                     66
           Figure A.8: Industry-level cumulated TFP growth, Germany, manufacturing
                   Germany,C1012                                       Germany,C1315                                    Germany,C1618
 0.07
                                                    0.15
                                                                                                       0.18
 0.06
                                                                                                       0.16
 0.05
                                                                                                       0.14
 0.04
                                                     0.1
                                                                                                       0.12
 0.03
                                                                                                        0.1
 0.02
                                                                                                       0.08
 0.01
                                                    0.05                                               0.06
       0
                                                                                                       0.04
-0.01
                                                                                                       0.02
-0.02
                                                      0                                                   0
   1995     2000       2005         2010    2015      1995     2000       2005          2010    2015      1995   2000      2005         2010   2015

                   Germany,C2021                                      Germany,C2223                                     Germany,C2425

0.18                                               0.18
                                                                                                        0.1
0.16                                               0.16

0.14                                               0.14                                                0.08

0.12                                               0.12

 0.1                                                 0.1                                               0.06

0.08                                               0.08
                                                                                                       0.04
0.06                                               0.06

0.04
                                                   0.04
                                                                                                       0.02
0.02
                                                   0.02
   0
                                                      0                                                  0
   1995     2000       2005        2010    2015       1995    2000        2005         2010    2015      1995    2000      2005         2010   2015

                   Germany,C2627                                       Germany,C28                                      Germany,C2930
                                                                                                       0.14
0.35
                                                   0.06
                                                                                                       0.12
                                                   0.05
 0.3
                                                   0.04                                                 0.1
0.25
                                                   0.03                                                0.08

 0.2                                               0.02
                                                                                                       0.06
                                                   0.01
0.15                                                                                                   0.04
                                                      0
                                                                                                       0.02
 0.1                                               -0.01

                                                   -0.02                                                  0
0.05
                                                   -0.03                                               -0.02

  0                                                -0.04
  1995     2000       2005         2010    2015        1995   2000        2005         2010    2015       1995   2000       2005        2010   2015

                                                                      Germany,C3133

                                                   0.18

                                                   0.16

                                                   0.14

                                                   0.12

                                                    0.1

                                                   0.08

                                                   0.06

                                                   0.04

                                                   0.02

                                                     0
                                                     1995     2000       2005          2010    2015




                                                                       67
           Figure A.9: Industry-level cumulated TFP growth, Germany, non-manufacturing
                     Germany,DE                                         Germany,F                                     Germany,G
 0.14
                                                  0.01
                                                                                                      0.2
 0.12
                                                0.005
  0.1
                                                                                                     0.15
                                                        0
 0.08
                                                -0.005
                                                                                                      0.1
 0.06
                                                 -0.01

 0.04
                                                -0.015                                               0.05

 0.02
                                                 -0.02
                                                                                                        0
   0
   1995       2000     2005       2010   2015           1995    2000      2005       2010    2015       1995   2000     2005       2010   2015



                     Germany,H                                          Germany,I                                     Germany,J
                                                    0
                                                                                                      0.4
 0.12
                                                -0.02
                                                                                                    0.35
  0.1
                                                -0.04                                                 0.3

 0.08                                                                                               0.25
                                                -0.06

 0.06                                                                                                 0.2
                                                -0.08
                                                                                                    0.15
 0.04
                                                  -0.1
                                                                                                      0.1

 0.02
                                                -0.12                                               0.05


    0                                                                                                  0
    1995      2000     2005       2010   2015       1995       2000      2005       2010    2015       1995    2000     2005       2010   2015



                     Germany,K                                         Germany,MN                                     Germany,RS
                                                   0                                                0.01

   0                                            -0.02
                                                                                                       0
-0.02                                           -0.04

                                                -0.06                                               -0.01
-0.04
                                                -0.08                                               -0.02
-0.06
                                                 -0.1
-0.08                                                                                               -0.03
                                                -0.12
 -0.1                                                                                               -0.04
                                                -0.14

-0.12                                           -0.16
                                                                                                    -0.05
-0.14                                           -0.18
                                                                                                    -0.06
-0.16                                            -0.2
    1995     2000     2005        2010   2015      1995        2000      2005       2010    2015       1995    2000     2005       2010   2015




                                                                       68
          Figure A.10: Industry-level cumulated TFP growth, Spain, manufacturing
                 Spain,C1012                                    Spain,C1315                                     Spain,C1618
                                             0.14
0.05
                                                                                               0.01
                                             0.12
0.04
                                                                                                  0
0.03                                           0.1


0.02                                         0.08                                              -0.01


0.01                                         0.06                                              -0.02

   0
                                             0.04                                              -0.03

-0.01
                                             0.02
                                                                                               -0.04
-0.02
                                                0
   1995   2000     2005        2010   2015      1995    2000       2005        2010    2015       1995   2000     2005        2010   2015

                 Spain,C2021                                     Spain,C2223                                    Spain,C2425
0.08                                          0.02


0.07                                                                                           0.12
                                              0.01

0.06                                                                                            0.1
                                                    0

0.05
                                             -0.01                                             0.08
0.04
                                             -0.02                                             0.06
0.03

                                             -0.03                                             0.04
0.02


0.01                                         -0.04                                             0.02

   0                                         -0.05
                                                                                                  0
   1995   2000     2005        2010   2015      1995     2000      2005         2010    2015      1995   2000     2005        2010   2015

                 Spain,C2627                                      Spain,C28                                     Spain,C2930
 0.12
                                              0.12                                             0.12

  0.1
                                               0.1                                              0.1

 0.08
                                              0.08                                             0.08

 0.06
                                              0.06                                             0.06
 0.04
                                              0.04
                                                                                               0.04
 0.02
                                              0.02
                                                                                               0.02
    0
                                                    0
                                                                                                  0
-0.02
   1995   2000     2005        2010   2015      1995     2000      2005         2010    2015      1995   2000     2005        2010   2015

                                                                Spain,C3133




                                              0.2




                                             0.15




                                              0.1




                                             0.05




                                               0
                                               1995     2000      2005         2010    2015




                                                                69
           Figure A.11: Industry-level cumulated TFP growth, Spain, non-manufacturing
                    Spain,DE                                        Spain,F                                         Spain,G
                                                       0                                               0
 0.02

       0                                        -0.02                                           -0.01

-0.02                                           -0.04                                           -0.02

-0.04                                                                                           -0.03
                                                -0.06
-0.06
                                                -0.08                                           -0.04
-0.08
                                                 -0.1                                           -0.05
 -0.1

                                                -0.12                                           -0.06
-0.12
                                                                                                -0.07
-0.14                                           -0.14

-0.16                                                                                           -0.08
                                                -0.16

   1995      2000    2005       2010    2015       1995     2000     2005       2010    2015       1995     2000    2005       2010    2015



                     Spain,H                                         Spain,I                                        Spain,J
                                                       0                                         0.06
-0.02
                                                -0.05                                            0.04
-0.04

-0.06
                                                                                                 0.02
                                                 -0.1
-0.08
                                                                                                       0
 -0.1
                                                -0.15
-0.12
                                                                                                -0.02
-0.14
                                                 -0.2
-0.16                                                                                           -0.04

-0.18
                                                -0.25                                           -0.06
 -0.2

-0.22                                                                                           -0.08
                                                 -0.3

   1995      2000    2005       2010    2015       1995     2000     2005       2010    2015       1995     2000    2005       2010    2015



                    Spain,K                                        Spain,MN                                        Spain,RS
0.45                                              0
                                                                                               0.06

 0.4
                                                                                               0.04
                                               -0.05
0.35
                                                                                               0.02
 0.3                                            -0.1
                                                                                                  0
0.25
                                               -0.15
 0.2                                                                                           -0.02


0.15                                                                                           -0.04
                                                -0.2

 0.1
                                                                                               -0.06
                                               -0.25
0.05
                                                                                               -0.08
  0
  1995      2000    2005       2010    2015       1995     2000    2005        2010    2015       1995     2000    2005       2010    2015




                                                                   70
              Figure A.12: Industry-level cumulated TFP growth, France, manufacturing
                       France,C1012                                          France,C1315                                    France,C1618
0.035                                                  0.15
                                                                                                             0.16
 0.03

0.025                                                                                                        0.14

 0.02                                                                                                        0.12
                                                        0.1
0.015                                                                                                         0.1

 0.01
                                                                                                             0.08
0.005
                                                       0.05                                                  0.06
       0
                                                                                                             0.04
-0.005
                                                                                                             0.02
 -0.01
                                                             0
                                                                                                               0
       1995    2000       2005         2010    2015          1995    2000       2005         2010    2015      1995   2000      2005        2010   2015

                      France,C2021                                          France,C2223                                     France,C2425
                                                                                                            0.09
                                                      0.16
0.05                                                                                                        0.08
                                                      0.14
                                                                                                            0.07

0.04                                                  0.12
                                                                                                            0.06
                                                        0.1
                                                                                                            0.05
0.03
                                                      0.08
                                                                                                            0.04

                                                      0.06
0.02                                                                                                        0.03

                                                      0.04                                                  0.02
0.01
                                                      0.02                                                  0.01

                                                         0                                                     0
   0
   1995       2000       2005         2010    2015       1995       2000       2005         2010    2015       1995   2000     2005         2010   2015

                      France,C2627                                           France,C28                                      France,C2930
                                                                                                             0.05
                                                      0.18
 0.1                                                                                                        0.045
                                                      0.16
                                                                                                             0.04
0.08
                                                      0.14
                                                                                                            0.035

                                                      0.12                                                   0.03
0.06
                                                       0.1                                                  0.025
0.04
                                                      0.08                                                   0.02

0.02                                                  0.06                                                  0.015

                                                      0.04                                                   0.01
   0
                                                      0.02                                                  0.005

                                                        0                                                      0
  1995        2000      2005          2010    2015      1995        2000       2005         2010    2015       1995   2000      2005        2010   2015

                                                                            France,C3133

                                                      0.18

                                                      0.16

                                                      0.14

                                                      0.12

                                                       0.1

                                                      0.08

                                                      0.06

                                                      0.04

                                                      0.02

                                                        0
                                                        1995        2000      2005          2010    2015




                                                                            71
           Figure A.13: Industry-level cumulated TFP growth, France, non-manufacturing
                    France,DE                                    France,F                                    France,G
 0.05

                                                                                           0.08
                                                  0
                                                                                           0.07
    0
                                                                                           0.06
                                              -0.02
                                                                                           0.05

-0.05                                         -0.04                                        0.04

                                                                                           0.03
                                              -0.06
                                                                                           0.02
  -0.1
                                                                                           0.01
                                              -0.08
                                                                                              0

-0.15                                           -0.1                                      -0.01
    1995     2000    2005       2010   2015       1995   2000     2005      2010   2015       1995   2000     2005      2010   2015



                    France,H                                     France,I                                   France,J
                                               0.04
                                                                                          0.18
                                               0.03
  0.1                                                                                     0.16
                                               0.02
                                                                                          0.14
 0.08
                                               0.01                                       0.12

                                                  0                                         0.1
 0.06
                                                                                          0.08
                                              -0.01
 0.04                                                                                     0.06
                                              -0.02
                                                                                          0.04
 0.02                                         -0.03
                                                                                          0.02
                                              -0.04
                                                                                             0
    0
    1995     2000    2005       2010   2015       1995   2000     2005      2010   2015      1995    2000    2005       2010   2015



                    France,K                                    France,MN                                   France,RS
                                                 0
0.06
                                              -0.01                                       0.06
0.05
                                              -0.02
0.04                                                                                      0.04
                                              -0.03
0.03
                                              -0.04                                       0.02
0.02
                                              -0.05
0.01                                                                                         0

                                              -0.06
   0
                                                                                          -0.02
                                              -0.07
-0.01
                                              -0.08                                       -0.04
-0.02
                                              -0.09
   1995      2000   2005        2010   2015       1995   2000    2005       2010   2015      1995    2000    2005       2010   2015




                                                                72
             Figure A.14: Industry-level cumulated TFP growth, Italy, manufacturing
                  Italy,C1012                                      Italy,C1315                                     Italy,C1618
0.015                                           0.04                                              0.09

 0.01                                                                                             0.08

0.005                                           0.02
                                                                                                  0.07
    0
                                                      0                                           0.06
-0.005
                                                                                                  0.05
 -0.01
                                               -0.02
-0.015                                                                                            0.04

 -0.02                                         -0.04                                              0.03

-0.025
                                                                                                  0.02
 -0.03                                         -0.06
                                                                                                  0.01
-0.035
                                               -0.08                                                 0
    1995   2000       2005      2010   2015        1995    2000        2005       2010    2015       1995   2000      2005       2010   2015

                  Italy,C2021                                     Italy,C2223                                      Italy,C2425

 0.06                                                                                            0.03
                                                0.1
 0.05
                                                                                                 0.02

 0.04                                          0.08
                                                                                                 0.01
 0.03
                                               0.06                                                 0
 0.02
                                                                                                 -0.01
 0.01
                                               0.04
                                                                                                 -0.02
    0

                                               0.02                                              -0.03
-0.01

-0.02                                                                                            -0.04
                                                  0
   1995    2000      2005       2010   2015       1995    2000       2005        2010    2015       1995    2000      2005       2010   2015

                  Italy,C2627                                       Italy,C28                                      Italy,C2930
                                               0.06
                                                                                                     0
   0                                           0.05

                                               0.04                                              -0.01
-0.01
                                               0.03
                                                                                                 -0.02
-0.02                                          0.02
                                                                                                 -0.03
                                               0.01
-0.03
                                                  0                                              -0.04

-0.04                                         -0.01
                                                                                                 -0.05
                                              -0.02
-0.05
                                                                                                 -0.06
                                              -0.03
   1995    2000      2005       2010   2015       1995    2000        2005       2010    2015       1995    2000      2005       2010   2015

                                                                  Italy,C3133
                                              0.03



                                              0.02



                                              0.01



                                                 0



                                              -0.01



                                              -0.02



                                              -0.03
                                                  1995    2000       2005        2010    2015




                                                                  73
            Figure A.15: Industry-level cumulated TFP growth, Italy, non-manufacturing
                    Italy,DE                                        Italy,F                                       Italy,G
    0
                                                                                                0.02
                                                   0
                                                                                                0.01
                                               -0.01
                                                                                                   0
                                               -0.02
-0.05
                                                                                               -0.01
                                               -0.03
                                                                                               -0.02
                                               -0.04
                                                                                               -0.03
                                               -0.05
  -0.1
                                                                                               -0.04
                                               -0.06
                                                                                               -0.05
                                               -0.07
                                                                                               -0.06
-0.15                                          -0.08

    1995    2000      2005     2010    2015        1995    2000      2005      2010    2015        1995   2000     2005     2010   2015



                     Italy,H                                         Italy,I                                      Italy,J

                                                 0.04                                            0.2
  0.04

                                                 0.03                                           0.18
  0.03
                                                 0.02                                           0.16
  0.02
                                                 0.01                                           0.14
  0.01
                                                       0                                        0.12
        0
                                                -0.01                                            0.1
 -0.01
                                                -0.02                                           0.08
 -0.02
                                                -0.03                                           0.06
 -0.03
                                                -0.04                                           0.04
 -0.04
                                                -0.05                                           0.02
 -0.05                                          -0.06                                              0
    1995     2000     2005      2010    2015        1995    2000      2005      2010    2015       1995   2000     2005     2010   2015



                    Italy,K                                        Italy,MN                                      Italy,RS
                                                  0                                            0.02
 0.1
                                               -0.02
0.08                                                                                              0
                                               -0.04

0.06                                           -0.06                                           -0.02

                                               -0.08
0.04                                                                                           -0.04
                                                -0.1

0.02                                           -0.12                                           -0.06

                                               -0.14
                                                                                               -0.08
   0
                                               -0.16
                                                                                                -0.1
-0.02                                          -0.18

                                                -0.2                                           -0.12
-0.04

   1995     2000     2005      2010    2015       1995     2000     2005       2010    2015       1995    2000    2005      2010   2015




                                                                   74
           Figure A.16: Industry-level cumulated TFP growth, UK, manufacturing
                 United Kingdom,C1012                                     United Kingdom,C1315                                   United Kingdom,C1618
                                                       0.25
0.04
                                                                                                                0.08

0.03                                                    0.2
                                                                                                                0.06
0.02
                                                       0.15
                                                                                                                0.04
0.01


   0                                                    0.1
                                                                                                                0.02

-0.01
                                                       0.05                                                        0
-0.02
                                                          0                                                     -0.02
-0.03


   1995   2000          2005            2010   2015       1995    2000           2005            2010   2015       1995   2000          2005            2010   2015

                 United Kingdom,C2021                                      United Kingdom,C2223                                  United Kingdom,C2425
0.18                                                     0.1
                                                                                                                0.15
0.16
                                                        0.08
0.14

0.12
                                                        0.06                                                     0.1
 0.1

0.08                                                    0.04

0.06
                                                        0.02                                                    0.05
0.04

0.02                                                          0

   0                                                                                                               0
                                                       -0.02
-0.02
   1995   2000          2005            2010   2015       1995     2000          2005            2010    2015      1995   2000          2005            2010   2015

                 United Kingdom,C2627                                      United Kingdom,C28                                    United Kingdom,C2930
0.18
                                                       0.16                                                     0.18
0.16
                                                       0.14                                                     0.16
0.14
                                                       0.12                                                     0.14
0.12
                                                                                                                0.12
                                                        0.1
 0.1
                                                                                                                 0.1
                                                       0.08
0.08                                                                                                            0.08
                                                       0.06
0.06                                                                                                            0.06
                                                       0.04
0.04                                                                                                            0.04
                                                       0.02
0.02                                                                                                            0.02
                                                          0
   0                                                                                                               0
                                                      -0.02
   1995   2000         2005         2010       2015       1995    2000           2005            2010   2015       1995   2000         2005         2010       2015

                                                                          United Kingdom,C3133
                                                       0.2




                                                      0.15




                                                       0.1




                                                      0.05




                                                         0




                                                      -0.05
                                                         1995     2000          2005            2010    2015




                                                                              75
           Figure A.17: Industry-level cumulated TFP growth, UK, non-manufacturing
                   United Kingdom,DE                                          United Kingdom,F                                         United Kingdom,G
 0.05                                                    0.1
                                                                                                                    0.08

                                                        0.08
                                                                                                                    0.06
       0
                                                        0.06
                                                                                                                    0.04


                                                        0.04                                                        0.02
-0.05

                                                        0.02                                                              0


                                                                                                                   -0.02
 -0.1                                                         0


   1995     2000        2005            2010    2015       1995       2000         2005            2010    2015       1995     2000         2005           2010    2015



                   United Kingdom,H                                            United Kingdom,I                                        United Kingdom,J
                                                                                                                   0.35
0.15
                                                        0.04

                                                                                                                    0.3
                                                        0.02
                                                                                                                   0.25
                                                              0
  0.1
                                                                                                                    0.2
                                                        -0.02
                                                                                                                   0.15
                                                        -0.04
0.05                                                                                                                0.1

                                                        -0.06
                                                                                                                   0.05

                                                        -0.08
                                                                                                                      0

   0
   1995     2000        2005           2010    2015           1995    2000         2005            2010    2015       1995    2000          2005          2010    2015



                   United Kingdom,K                                          United Kingdom,MN                                        United Kingdom,RS
0.25                                                                                                                 0
                                                       0.18

                                                       0.16
 0.2                                                                                                              -0.05
                                                       0.14

                                                       0.12
0.15                                                                                                               -0.1
                                                        0.1

                                                       0.08
                                                                                                                  -0.15
 0.1
                                                       0.06

                                                       0.04                                                        -0.2
0.05
                                                       0.02

                                                         0                                                        -0.25
  0
  1995     2000        2005            2010    2015      1995        2000         2005            2010    2015       1995     2000         2005           2010    2015




                                                                                76
C.2     Utilization adjustment estimates for robustness tests
Table A.5 lists the estimates for S obtained for each of the robustness checks described in the main text.

              Table A.5: Results for utilization adjustment regressions across robustness checks

                                   United     Germany        Spain      France      Italy          United
                                    States                                                     Kingdom

      Non-durable manufacturing
   Baseline                        0.224       0.562         0.076      0.070      0.400           0.119
   (1) No negative profits         0.211       0.574         0.084      0.078      0.410           0.113
   (2) Dep. var. includes hours    0.157       0.405         0.057      0.006      0.278           0.076
                                                                                           
   (3) Survey linearly detrended   0.179       0.562         0.076      0.070      0.400           0.119
   (5) No uncertainty              0.227       0.572         0.053      0.063      0.401           0.052
                                                                                           
   (6) No uncertainty, mon. pol.   0.267       0.583         0.063      0.115      0.371           0.054
   Durable manufacturing
   Baseline                        0.296       0.392         0.096      0.255      0.337       0.228
   (1) No negative profits         0.289       0.397         0.107      0.235      0.351       0.229
   (2) Dep. var. includes hours    0.242       0.291         0.058      0.197      0.242       0.213
   (3) Survey linearly detrended   0.242       0.392         0.096      0.255      0.337       0.228
   (5) No uncertainty              0.275       0.377         0.090      0.236      0.333       0.206
   (6) No uncertainty, mon. pol.   0.293       0.381         0.073      0.298      0.333       0.222
   Non-manufacturing
   Baseline                         0.106       0.122        0.098      0.203      0.201       0.376
   (1) No negative profits          0.077       0.129        0.104      0.186      0.223       0.173
   (2) Dep. var. includes hours     0.067       0.121        0.101      0.164      0.161       0.212
   (3) Survey linearly detrended    0.066       0.129        0.076      0.186      0.212       0.173
   (4) Man. avg. for services       0.106      0.077         0.042      0.146      0.137       0.112
   (5) No uncertainty               0.114       0.128        0.080      0.201      0.190       0.271
   (6) No uncertainty, mon. pol.   0.147        0.073        0.052      0.208      0.212       0.150




                                                        77
