                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          THE SLOPE OF THE PHILLIPS CURVE:
                             EVIDENCE FROM U.S. STATES

                                       Jonathon Hazell
                                         Juan Herreño
                                        Emi Nakamura
                                        Jón Steinsson

                                     Working Paper 28005
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28005


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          October 2020, Revised October 2020




We would like to thank Thomas Breach, Massimiliano Cologgi, and Victoria de Quadros for
excellent research assistance. We thank John Molino, our project coordinator at the BLS, for all
his help throughout the project. We thank Olivier Blanchard, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Pierre-
Olivier Gourinchas, Chen Lian, John Williams, Regis Barnichon and seminar participants at
various institutions for valuable comments and discussions. We thank the National Science
Foundation, the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the Smith Richardson Foundation, the Institute for
New Economic Thinking, and the Julis-Rabinowitz Center for Public Policy and Finance for
financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Jonathon Hazell, Juan Herreño, Emi Nakamura, and Jón Steinsson. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Slope of the Phillips Curve: Evidence from U.S. States
Jonathon Hazell, Juan Herreño, Emi Nakamura, and Jón Steinsson
NBER Working Paper No. 28005
October 2020, Revised October 2020
JEL No. E30

                                           ABSTRACT

We estimate the slope of the Phillips curve in the cross section of U.S. states using newly
constructed state-level price indexes for non-tradeable goods back to 1978. Our estimates indicate
that the Phillips curve is very flat and was very flat even during the early 1980s. We estimate only
a modest decline in the slope of the Phillips curve since the 1980s. We use a multi-region model
to infer the slope of the aggregate Phillips curve from our regional estimates. Applying our
estimates to recent unemployment dynamics yields essentially no missing disinflation or missing
reinflation over the past few business cycles. Our results imply that the sharp drop in core
inflation in the early 1980s was mostly due to shifting expectations about long-run monetary
policy as opposed to a steep Phillips curve, and the greater stability of inflation since the 1990s is
mostly due to long-run inflationary expectations becoming more firmly anchored.


Jonathon Hazell                                   Emi Nakamura
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
Princeton University                              University of California, Berkeley
214 Julis-Rabinowitz Center                       685 Evans Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544                               Berkeley, CA 94720
jadhazell@gmail.com                               and NBER
                                                  enakamura@berkeley.edu
Juan Herreño
Columbia Business School                          Jón Steinsson
Uris Hall                                         Department of Economics
3022 Broadway                                     University of California, Berkeley
New York, NY 10027                                671 Evans Hall
jdh2181@columbia.edu                              Berkeley, CA 94720
                                                  and NBER
                                                  jsteinsson@berkeley.edu
1        Introduction

The Phillips curve is a formal statement of the common intuition that, if demand is high in a
booming economy, this will provoke workers to seek higher wages, and firms to raise prices. A
well-known formulation is the New Keynesian Phillips curve:


                                           t = Et t+1 - (ut - un
                                                               t ) + t .                              (1)


According to this formulation, inflation t is determined by three factors: expected inflation
Et t+1 , the output gap -- measured here as the difference between unemployment ut and the
natural rate of unemployment un
                              t -- and cost-push shocks t . The slope of the Phillips curve 

represents the sensitivity of inflation to the output gap (i.e., to an increase in demand).
        The episode in US economic history that has perhaps most strongly influenced the profession's
thinking regarding the slope of the Phillips curve is the Volcker disinflation. In the early 1980s,
Paul Volcker's Federal Reserve sharply tightened monetary policy. Unemployment rose sharply
and inflation fell sharply. The conventional interpretation of this episode is that it provides evi-
dence for a relatively steep Phillips curve.
        One way to formalize this conventional interpretation is to assume that inflationary expecta-
tions are adaptive: Et t+1 = t-1 in equation (1). This yields the accelerationist Phillips curve:


                                               t = -(ut - un
                                                           t ) + t .                                  (2)


        Stock and Watson (2019) estimate  in this equation and refer to it as the "Phillips correlation."
They measure t by the annual change in 12-month core PCE inflation, and ut - un
                                                                              t by the CBO

unemployment gap, both at a quarterly frequency. Figure 1 reproduces this analysis. It suggests
that the slope of the Phillips curve was steep prior to and during the Volcker disinflation (0.67
for the period 1960-1983), but has flattened considerably since then (to only 0.03 for the period
2000-2019q1).1
        The insensitivity of inflation to changes in unemployment over the past few decades has led
many economists to suggest that the Phillips curve has disappeared--or is "hibernating." During
the Great Recession, unemployment rose to levels comparable to those during the Volcker dis-
inflation, yet inflation fell by much less. The "missing disinflation" during and after the Great
    1
        See also Ball and Mazumder (2011), Kiley (2015), and Blanchard (2016).



                                                             1
                                                  6
                                                                                                          1960-1983
                                                  5                                                       1984-1999
                                                                                                          2000-2019
             Year-over-year change in inflation   4

                                                  3

                                                  2

                                                  1

                                                  0

                                                  -1

                                                  -2

                                                  -3

                                                  -4
                                                    -3       -2      -1       0        1      2       3       4       5
                                                                           Unemployment Gap
                                                       Figure 1: Stock and Watson's Changing Phillips Correlation
   Note: Black solid line is a regression line for 2000-2019. Dark grey broken line is regression for 1984-1999. Light
   gray dash-dot line is a regression line for 1960-1983. The year-over-year change in inflation is the 4 quarter
   change in the (backward-looking) 4 quarter moving average of headline PCE inflation. The unemployment
   gap is the 4 quarter (backward-looking) moving average of the gap between the unemployment rate and the
   natural rate of unemployment. Author's calculations. The figure replicates Figure 1 from Stock and Watson
   (2019).


Recession then gave way to "missing reinflation" in the late 2010s as unemployment fell to levels
not seen in 50 years, but inflation inched up only slightly. A similar debate raged in the late 1990s,
when unemployment was also very low without this leading to much of a rise in inflation. Some
have argued that the apparent flattening of the Phillips curve signals an important flaw in the
Keynesian model.
   There is, however, an alternative interpretation of these facts that emphasizes the anchoring
of long-term inflation expectations in the United States (Bernanke, 2007; Mishkin, 2007). Figure
2 plots long-term inflation expectations from the Survey of Professional Forecasters. During the
1980s, long-term inflation expectations fluctuated a great deal. In particular, they fell rapidly over
the period of the Volcker disinflation. In sharp contrast, since 1998, long-term inflation expecta-
tions have been extremely stable.
   An alternative to the standard narrative of the Volcker disinflation is that the decline in infla-


                                                                                   2
             10
                                                   Core CPI Inflation - Research Series
              9                                    Long-Run SPF Forecast of CPI Inflation

              8

              7

              6

              5

              4

              3

              2

              1

              0
                    1980      1985      1990      1995       2000     2005      2010      2015
                                                         Year
                  Figure 2: PCE Core Inflation and Long-Term Inflation Expectations
   Note: The grey line plots 10 year ahead inflation expectation for the CPI. From 1990 onward, these come
   from Survey of Professional Forecasters. For the 1980s, these come from Blue Chip. The black line plots
   12 month core CPI inflation using the Bureau of Labor Statistics' research series. This research series uses
   current methods to calculate inflation back in time. The inflation expectations we use before 1990 can be found
   at: https://www.philadelphiafed.org/-/media/research-and-data/real-time-center/survey-of-professional-
   forecasters/historical-data/additional-cpie10.xls?la=en


tion was driven not by a steep Phillips curve but by shifts in beliefs about the long-run monetary
regime in the United States that caused the rapid fall in long-run inflation expectations we observe
in Figure 2. To see how this can be the case, it is useful to solve equation (1) forward and assume
for simplicity that unemployment follows an AR(1) process. This yields


                                          t = - u
                                                ~t + Et t+ + t ,                                                     (3)


where u
      ~t denotes the deviation of unemployment from its long-run expected value, Et t+ rep-
resents long-term inflation expectations, and the parameter  is proportional to  in equation (1).
(Section 2 presents a more detailed derivation.) What this formulation of the Phillips curve makes
clear is that changes in beliefs about the long-run monetary regime feed strongly into current infla-
tion: the coefficient on Et t+ in equation (3) is one. Furthermore, in the presence of substantial

                                                         3
variation in Et t+ , the relationship between t and u
                                                    ~t may be essentially uninformative about
the slope of the Phillips curve ( and ). In particular, if changes in Et t+ comove negatively
with u
     ~t (as they would during an imperfectly credible shift in the long-run inflation target) the
Phillips curve would appear to be steeper than it actually was.
   Sargent (1982) emphasizes that hyperinflations tend to end quickly, much too quickly to be
explained by even a very large value of  in the Phillips curve. In these episodes, it is clear that the
primary cause of the abrupt fall in inflation is an abrupt fall in Et t+ associated with an abrupt
change in the policy regime. Volcker's monetary policy constituted a sharp regime shift that was
imperfectly credible at the outset but became gradually more credible as time passed (Erceg and
Levin, 2003; Goodfriend and King, 2005; Bianchi and Ilut, 2017). This regime shift led to a large
and sustained decline in long-term inflation expectations over the 1980s but also a transitory rise
in unemployment. Perhaps it was this large change in inflation expectations that was the pri-
mary cause of the rapid fall in inflation over this period rather than high unemployment working
through a steep Phillips curve.
   This discussion highlights an important identification problem researchers face when they seek
to estimate the slope of the Phillips curve: inflation expectations may co-vary with the output gap.
Standard methods for estimating the Phillips curve aim to address this issue by controlling for
inflation expectations Et t+1 when estimating equation (1). A challenge with this approach is that
estimates are quite sensitive to details of the specification. Mavroeidis, Plagborg-Møller, and Stock
(2014) show that reasonable variation in the choice of data series, the specification, and the time
period used yield a wide range of estimates for  roughly centered on a value of zero (i.e., they are
equally likely to have the "right" as the "wrong" sign). Mavroeidis, Plagborg-Møller, and Stock
(2014) point to a weak instruments problem in driving these results: there simply isn't enough
variation available in the aggregate data to separately identify the coefficients on unemployment
and expected inflation. They conclude: "the literature has reached a limit on how much can be
learned about the New Keynesian Phillips curve from aggregate macroeconomic time series. New
identification approaches and new datasets are needed to reach an empirical consensus."
   In addition to the identification problem discussed above, researchers seeking to estimate the
slope of the Phillips curve also face the classic simultaneity problem of distinguishing demand
shocks from supply shocks. Supply shocks (un
                                           t and t ) yield positive comovement of inflation

and unemployment (stagflation). If the variation used to identify the slope of the Phillips curve is
contaminated by such shocks, the estimated slope will be biased towards zero and may even have


                                                  4
the "wrong" sign. Fitzgerald and Nicolini (2014) and McLeay and Tenreyro (2019) point out that
a central bank conducting optimal monetary policy will seek to offset aggregate demand shocks.
If the central bank is successful, the remaining variation in inflation will be only due to supply
shocks, a worst case scenario for the simultaneity problem.
   Can cross-sectional data help overcome these problems? Several recent papers have argued
that they can. Fitzgerald and Nicolini (2014) and McLeay and Tenreyro (2019) show that using
regional data helps overcome the simultaneity problem of distinguishing demand and supply
shocks: central banks cannot offset regional demand shocks using a single national interest rate.
These papers as well as Babb and Detmeister (2017) and Hooper, Mishkin, and Sufi (2019) make
use of city-level inflation data produced by the BLS to estimate regional Phillips curves. Beraja,
Hurst, and Ospina (2019) use regional wage data to estimate wage Phillips curves.
   We contribute to this regional Phillips curve literature in several ways. First, we show formally
how estimating the Phillips curve using regional data provides a solution to the problem of shift-
ing values of Et t+ confounding the estimation of the slope of the Phillips curve. We derive a
regional Phillips curve in an multi-region model of a monetary union. The model clarifies the in-
terpretation of the slope of regional Phillips curves relative to that of the aggregate Phillips curve.
We also use the model to show that changes in the long-run monetary regime are absorbed by time
fixed effects when the regional Phillips curve is estimated using a panel data specification. The
intuition is that such long-run regime changes are common to all regions and therefore "cancel
out" across regions within the monetary union.
   Our cross-sectional estimates indicate that the Phillips curve is very flat and was very flat even
during the 1980s: a one percentage point increase in unemployment lowered inflation over time
by a mere 0.46 percentage points in the 1980s. This implies that the 5 percentage points increase
in unemployment during the Volcker disinflation lowered inflation by only about 2.3 percentage
points. Using our cross-section specification, we estimate a modest flattening of the Phillips curve
when we split our sample in 1990: the Phillips curve in the post-1990 sample is flatter by a factor
of about 1.8. This contrasts sharply with empirical specifications that make use of time series
variation: a specification without time fixed effects yields a 45 times steeper Phillips curve for
the pre-1990 sample. We interpret this as evidence that shifting long-run inflation expectations
seriously confound estimates of the Phillips curve based on time series variation in the pre-1990
sample.
   Figure 2 shows that core CPI inflation fell by about 6 percentage points during the Volcker


                                                  5
disinflation (as measured by the BLS's research series which employs modern methods back in
time). Our estimates indicate that only a little more than 1/3 of this fall was due to the rise in
unemployment over this period. Figure 2 shows that long-run inflationary expectations fell by
about 4 percentage points from 1981 to 1987, accounting for about 2/3 of the fall in core inflation
during this period. We conclude that a majority of the rapid decline in core inflation during the
Volcker disinflation arose from a rapid decline of long-term inflation expectations, associated with
a rapidly changing monetary regime.
       Our estimates of the slope of the Phillips curve imply essentially no "missing disinflation"
during the Great Recession or "missing reinflation" in the late 2010s or late 1990s. We conclude
that the stability of inflation since 1990 is due to long-run inflationary expectations becoming more
firmly anchored. These conclusions echo those of Jorgensen and Lansing (2019).
       Our analysis uses new state-level consumer price indexes for the United States that we have
constructed back to the 1970s. Prior to our work, state level price indexes based on BLS micro price
data have not existed. The BLS has published city-level inflation series for a group of relatively
large cities. But it has refrained from reporting inflation indexes for smaller metropolitan areas
(and for states). Our new state-level price indexes use all the available underlying micro-data
gathered by the BLS. We also construct state-level price indexes for non-tradeables and tradeables.
We focus our analysis on the behavior of the prices of non-tradeable goods. This is important. For
prices set at the national level--as is more likely for tradeables--the slope of the regional Phillips
curve will be zero no matter how large the slope of the aggregate Phillips curve is.
       A notable conclusion of the recent regional Phillips curve literature has been that the estimated
slope of the regional Phillips curve has tended to be steeper than the slope estimated for the ag-
gregate Phillips curve. The theoretical framework we develop helps explain why this is the case.
We show that panel data estimates of the regional Phillips curve are estimates of  in equation
(3) as opposed to estimates of  in equation (1). This means that they are not directly comparable
to much of the aggregate literature. We discuss how researchers can convert estimates of  to 
and explain what other statistics this conversion depends on (primarily the degree of persistence
of the unemployment variation used to estimate  ). Our analysis highlights the importance of the
exact specification used in estimating regional Phillips curves.2
       The regional setting, along with our new inflation indexes, allow us to leverage new forms
   2
    For example, Nishizaki and Watanabe (2000) find evidence of Phillips curve flattening in their baseline specification
with no time fixed effects but this evidence changes dramatically when time fixed effects are added.




                                                           6
of variation in estimating the Phillips curve. We develop a new "tradeable demand spillovers"
instrument building on insights from Nguyen (2014). This instrument is based on the idea that
supply shocks in tradeable sectors will differentially affect demand in non-tradeable sectors in
regions that are differentially exposed to the shocked tradeable sectors: e.g., an oil boom will
increase demand for restaurant meals in Texas.
    In carrying out our regional analysis, we are careful to account for the fact that roughly 42% of
the expenditure weight in core inflation is on the shelter component of housing services, which are
measured by rents.3 We estimate the slope of the regional Phillips curve for rents, and show that
it is substantially steeper than the regional Phillips curve for non-tradeables excluding housing.
We use the combination of these two estimates to predict the behavior of aggregate core inflation,
which includes rents, and show that these predictions match the greater aggregate cyclicality of
core inflation than core inflation excluding housing, a fact emphasized by Stock and Watson (2019).
We conclude from this that the behavior of rent prices play an important role in determining the
slope of both the regional and aggregate Phillips curves.
    In addition to the papers discussed above, our work builds on the vast empirical and theoret-
ical literature on the Phillips curve. The literature on the Phillips curve originates with Phillips
(1958) and Samuelson and Solow (1960). Friedman (1968) and Phelps (1967) emphasized the
importance of including an inflationary expectations term in the Phillips curve. Gordon (1982)
emphasized the importance of supply shocks. Important early papers that estimate the New Key-
nesian include Roberts (1995), Fuhrer and Moore (1995), Gali and Gertler (1999) and Sbordone
(2002), but see also papers cited in Mavroeidis, Plagborg-Møller, and Stock (2014). Important re-
cent papers estimating the Phillips curve include Ball and Mazumder (2011, 2019), Coibion and
Gorodnichenko (2015b), Stock and Watson (2019), Barnichon and Mesters (2019), Geerolf (2019)
and Del Negro et al. (2020). Our paper is also related to a recent literature that assesses the miss-
ing disinflation during the Great Recession through the lens of fully specified DSGE models (see,
e.g., Del Negro et al., 2015; Christiano et al., 2015; Gilchrist et al., 2017).
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 derives equation (3) and explains the problem of
regime change in estimating the Phillips curve. Section 3 describes our main framework for in-
terpreting the regional Phillips curve. Section 4 describes our new state-level inflation indexes.
    3
      Much of the expenditure weight for housing derives from owner-occupied housing. However, rents are used to
measure inflation for all shelter, due to the difficulty of backing out the user cost of housing from actual house prices in
a theoretically appealing way. The expenditure weight of the CPI less food and energy is 77.7%, and 32.3% out of this
expenditure weight is rents.



                                                             7
Section 5 presents our empirical results. Section 6 concludes.



2       The Power and Problem of Long-Run Inflation Expectations

To appreciate the value of using regional variation to estimate the slope of the Phillips curve,
it is useful to understand the central role of long-run inflationary expectations in determining
aggregate inflation. To this end, we solve equation (1) forward to get

                                                        
                                        t = -Et                j ut+j + t                                  (4)
                                                       j =0


                           j  n
where t  Et           j =0  (ut+j   + t+j ). This equation illustrates how inflation at time t is deter-
mined by the path of unemployment out into the infinite future.4 We can furthermore decompose
the variation in future unemployment ut+j into a transitory and permanent component. Define
                                                            ~t = ut - Et ut+ , where Et ut+
the transitory component of variation in unemployment to be u
is the permanent component of the variation in unemployment. Using these concepts, we can
rewrite equation (4) as
                                            
                                                                
                               t = -Et            j u
                                                    ~t+j -        Et ut+ + t ,                             (5)
                                                               1-
                                           j =0

                                                                                      
Assuming that shocks to un
                         t and t are transitory, equation (1) implies that Et t+ = - 1- Et ut+ .

We can then rewrite equation (5) as

                                                  
                                    t = -Et           j u
                                                        ~t+j + Et t+ + t .                                 (6)
                                               j =0


Finally, let's assume for simplicity that u
                                          ~t follows and AR(1) process with autocorrelation coeffi-
                                   ~t+j = j
cient equal to u . In this case Et u      uu~t and we can rewrite equation (6) as


                                        t = - u
                                              ~t + Et t+ + t ,                                             (7)


where  = /(1 - u ).
        This way of writing the Phillips curve highlights the importance of long-run inflation expec-
tations in determining inflation at the aggregate level. Long-run inflation expectations Et t+
    4
    Sbordone (2002) and Rudd and Whelan (2005) develop approaches to estimating the Phillips Curve on aggregate
data using versions of equation (4).



                                                        8
appear with a coefficient of one in equation (7). In other words, current inflation moves one-for-
one with changes in long-run inflation expectations. These long-run expectations are determined
by the private sector's beliefs about the long-run monetary regime being followed by the cen-
tral bank (the long-run inflation target). Variation in beliefs about the long-run monetary regime
therefore have very large effects on current inflation.5
    Equation (7) implies that inflation can vary dramatically without any variation in u
                                                                                       ~t if there
is substantial variation in long-run inflation expectations. In this case, the relationship between
inflation and u
              ~t may be entirely uninformative about the slope of the Phillips curve. Worse still,
variation in long-run inflation expectations may be correlated with variation in u
                                                                                 ~t . For example, it
seems very plausible that Paul Volcker's willingness to allow unemployment to rise to very high
values in the early 1980s--and the fact that Volcker was not forced to resign--signalled to the pub-
lic that he was serious about bringing down inflation (and had the backing of the president to do
this). Such a correlation will impart an upward bias on estimates of the slope of the Phillips curve
unless variation in inflation expectations can be controlled for. But in practice, controlling for in-
flation expectations is hard due to weak instruments (Mavroeidis et al., 2014) and because direct
measures of inflation expectations may be imperfect. So, a rapid drop in inflation expectations
may masquerade as a steep Phillips curve.
    Why has the Phillips curve appeared to flatten over the past few decades? Figure 2 shows that
since roughly 1998, long-term inflation expectations have been firmly anchored at close to 2%.
This has led to a collapse of the covariance between Et t+ and unemployment and therefore
eliminated any bias associated with poorly proxied variation in inflation expectations. A fall in
this bias will appear from the perspective of the (misspecified) accelerationist Phillips curve (such
as the one we discuss in the introduction) as a flatter curve.
    One piece of corroborating evidence for this view is the close relationship between t and
Et t+1 in the data. Recall that the standard formulation of the New Keynesian Phillips--equation
(1)--implies that it is the gap between t and Et t+1 --let's call this the "inflation gap"--that
must be explained by demand pressure (the ut term) or supply shocks (un
                                                                      t + t ). Figure 3 plots

SPF forecasts of inflation over the next year along with four different measures of current inflation.
The difference between the two series is approximately equal to the inflation gap t - Et t+1 .
    5
      Equations (6) and (7) remain valid in the case where the coefficient on Et t+1 in equation (1) is equal to one rather
than  . In this case, the long-run Phillips curve is vertical and Et ut+ is a constant independent of long-run inflation
expectations. But the solved-forward Phillips curve has a Et t+ term with a coefficient of one, i.e., it takes the form
of equation (6) as opposed to equation (4).



                                                            9
                                  CPI                                                    Core CPI
          15                                                       15



          10                                                       10



           5                                                        5



           0                                                        0
                      CPI Inflation                                            Core CPI Inflation
                      1 Year SPF Forecast of PGDP Inflation                    1 Year SPF Forecast of PGDP Inflation
          -5                                                       -5
               1980      1990      2000       2010                      1980      1990      2000       2010



                                Core PCE                                 Core CPI Inflation Research Series
          15                                                       15



          10                                                       10



           5                                                        5



           0                                                        0
                      Core PCE Inflation                                       Core CPI Inflation RS
                      1 Year SPF Forecast of PGDP Inflation                    1 Year SPF Forecast of PGDP Inflation
          -5                                                       -5
               1980      1990      2000       2010                      1980      1990      2000       2010
                                                 Figure 3: t vs Et t+1
   Note: Each panel shows the comparison of the one-year ahead forecast of the GDP deflator coming from the
   Survey of Professional of Forecasters and a measure of inflation. The top left panel uses the published headline
   CPI. The top right panel excludes food and energy by plotting the published measure of the Core CPI. The
   bottom panels correct for changes in the methodology of inflation measurement. The bottom left panel uses
   PCE inflation which has maintained a stable methodology, while the bottom right panel uses the Constant
   Methodology Research Series for Core CPI published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. We use forecasts of the
   GDP deflator because forecasts for the CPI are not available before 1980.


   The measure of current inflation plotted in the top-left panel of Figure 3 is the 12-month change
in the overall CPI. This conventional way of comparing current inflation and inflationary expecta-
tions over the next year suggests that these series are closely related, but that there is nevertheless
substantial variation in the gap between them (the inflation gap). Moving to the top-right panel,
we measure current inflation by the 12-month change in core CPI inflation, excluding food and
energy. The inflation gap measured this way is quite a bit smaller. Evidently, commodities ac-
count for a large part of the inflation gap for the overall CPI. However, a substantial inflation gap
remains in the early 1980s.
   The measure of current inflation plotted in the bottom-left panel of Figure 3 is the 12-month
change in the core PCE. The advantage of this series is that it makes use of current measurement


                                                              10
methods, retroactively applied back in time. In this case, the inflation gap is very small. A similar
message emerges in the bottom-right panel using the 12-month change in the core CPI research
series published by the BLS. This series also uses consistent, modern methods to calculate inflation
back in time. A particularly important measurement change for our purposes occurred in 1983,
when the BLS switched to using rent inflation as a proxy for overall housing inflation, including
for owner-occupied housing ("rental equivalence"). Before that time, housing services inflation in
the CPI was constructed from a weighted average of changes in house prices and mortgage costs
(i.e., interest rates). This earlier approach essentially "baked in" a strong relationship between
Volcker's actions to curb the Great Inflation and measured CPI inflation, since interest rates (and
house prices) fed directly into the CPI.6
    The overall message that emerges from Figure 3 is that the inflation gap for core inflation mea-
sured using modern methods is tiny throughout our sample period. Importantly, this includes the
period of the Volcker disinflation. This is suggestive evidence that the slope of the Phillips curve
was small throughout our sample period: unemployment varied a great deal both in the early
1980s and again in the Great Recession without much variation in the inflation gap. However, the
four panels in Figure 3 illustrate well that this conclusion is sensitive to the details of how inflation
is measured.7 It is also sensitive to whether the expectations data used come from the SPF or from
the Michigan Survey of Consumers (Coibion and Gorodnichenko, 2015b) emphasize and the exact
timing of the variables.



3    A Model of the Regional Phillips Curve

We now develop a two-region, New Keynesian, open economy model featuring tradeable and
non-tradeable sectors. We derive a regional Phillips curve in this model and show how it relates
to the aggregate Phillips curve. The model demonstrates a chief benefit of regional data: time
fixed effects "difference out" changes in long run inflation expectations. The model also illustrates
the importance of using non-tradeable inflation to estimate the regional Phillips curve.
    6
      These choices are consequential since the housing component of the CPI has a weight of roughly one-third in the
overall CPI. Appendix B.2 presents our attempt to replicate the pre-1983 BLS housing methodology on more modern
data. The main conclusion from this is that this methodology would have led to much more variable (and cyclical)
inflation over the past few decades.
    7
      We discuss this in more detail in appendix B.1.




                                                         11
3.1     Model Setup

Our model consists of two regions that belong to a monetary and fiscal union. We refer to the
regions as Home (H) and Foreign (F). The population of the entire economy is normalized to one.
The population of the home region is denoted by  . Household preferences, market structure, and
firm behavior take the same form in both regions. Below, we describe the economy of the home
region. All prices in the economy are denominated in "dollars," a digital currency issued by the
federal government.8 Throughout, we adopt the following conventions unless otherwise stated.
Lower case variables are the logs of upper case variables. Hatted variables denote the percentage
deviation of a variable from its steady state value. Steady state values are recorded without time
subscripts.


3.1.1     Households

The representative household in the home region seeks to maximize the utility function

                                                        
                                               E0           t u(CHt , NHt ),
                                                    t=0


where CHt is consumption of a composite consumption good, NHt is employment, and  is the
household's subjective discount factor. We follow Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Huffman (1988) in
assuming that the function u(CHt , NHt ) takes the form

                                                                      1+   -1   1- -1
                                                                    NHt
                                                            CHt -    1+ -1
                                    u(CHt , NHt ) =
                                                                    1 -  -1

where  is the household's Frisch elasticity of labor supply,  is the household's elasticity of in-
tertemporal substitution, and  governs the intensity of the household's disutility of labor. We
refer to this preference specification as GHH preferences.
      The composite consumption good CHt is a constant elasticity of substitution (CES) index over
            T and non-tradeables C N given by
tradeables CHt                    Ht

                                                                                 
                                                   N -1
                                                    1                1
                                                                       T -1      -1
                                       CHt =    N CHt 
                                                    
                                                                +   T CHt 
                                                                     
                                                                                      ,

  8
      In other words, we are considering an economy in the cashless limit (Woodford, 1998, 2003).




                                                              12
where  is the elasticity of substitution between tradeables and non-tradeables and T and N
are the household's steady state expenditure shares on tradeable and non-tradeable goods, re-
             N and C T are themselves composite goods described further below. Non-tradeable
spectively. CHt     Ht

goods are only consumed in the region in which they are produced. In contrast, the market for
tradeable goods is completely integrated across regions. Hence, home and foreign households
may face different prices for non-tradeables, but face the same prices for tradeable goods. The
expenditure share on tradeable and non-tradeable goods must sum to one, i.e., N + T = 1.
                                     N is given by
   The composite non-tradeable good CHt

                                                                                         
                                                                     1            -1     -1
                                             N                            N
                                            CHt    =                     CHt (z )  dz
                                                                 0

       N (z ) denotes consumption of variety z of non-tradeable goods in the home region. The
where CHt
                                             N (z ). The parameter  > 1 denotes the elasticity of
home price of this non-trabeable variety is PHt
substitution between different non-tradeable varieties.
                               T is a CES aggregate over tradeable goods produced in the
   Home tradeable consumption CHt
home and foreign regions given by

                                                                                                       
                                                       1              -1          1       -1           -1
                                   T         H  TH                              F  TF     
                                  CHt   =    Ht CHt                         +   Ht CHt                      ,                         (8)


       T H and C T F are home consumption of composite tradeable goods produced in the home
where CHt       Ht

and foreign regions, respectively. We assume (for simplicity) that the elasticity of substitution be-
tween home-produced and foreign-produces tradables is  (the same as the elasticity of substitu-
tion between tradeables and non-tradeables). Demand for home-produced and foreign-produced
                                           H and  F , respectively. We normalize  H +  F = 1.
tradeables is subject to shocks denoted by Ht    Ht                              Ht   Ht
                                                                       H =  H = .
For simplicity, we do not allow home bias in tradeable consumption, so H   F

   The home and foreign composite tradeable goods are CES indexes given by

                                                                                                                             
                             1               -1             -1                                    1               -1         -1
               TH                 TH                                             TF                    TF
              CHt =              CHt (z )         dz                     and    CHt =                 CHt (z )         dz         .
                         0                                                                    0

       T H (z ) and C T F (z ) are home consumption of varieties of tradeable goods produced in the
where CHt            Ht

home and foreign region, respectively. The prices of these home-produced and foreign-produced
                              T (z ) and P T (z ), respectively.
tradeable good varieties are PHt          Ft




                                                                          13
   Households maximize utility subject to a sequence of budget constraints

          1                              1                                  1
               N       N                      TH      T                          TF      T
              CHt (z )PHt (z )dz +           CHt (z )PHt (z )dz +               CHt (z )PF t (z )dz + Et [MHt,t+1 BH,t+1 ]
      0                              0                                  0

                                                                 1                          1
                               BHt + WHt NHt +                       N
                                                                     Ht (z )dz +                T
                                                                                                Ht (z )dz
                                                             0                          0

where BHt is a random variable denoting payoffs of the state contingent portfolio held by house-
holds in period t, MHt,t+1 is the one-period-ahead stochastic discount factor of the home repre-
sentative household, and N           T
                         Ht (z ) and Ht (z ) are the profits of non-tradeable and tradeable firms

producing varieties z , respectively, in the home region. There is a complete set of financial markets
across the two regions. To rule out Ponzi schemes, we assume that household debt cannot exceed
the present value of future income in any state.
   Labor is immobile across regions. Within each region, there is a single labor market. Workers
in region H receive a nominal wage WHt . Let PHt denote the lowest cost of purchasing a unit of
the composite consumption good CHt . Household optimization regarding the trade-off between
current consumption and current labor supply yields the following labor supply curve:

                                                      un (CHt , NHt )   WHt
                                                  -                   =     ,
                                                      uc (CHt , NHt )   PHt

where subscripts on the utility function denote partial derivatives.                                        Using expressions for
un (CHt , NHt ) and uc (CHt , NHt ), we can rewrite the home labor supply curve as

                                                             -1        WHt
                                                        NHt =              .                                                  (9)
                                                                       PHt

   Household optimization regarding the trade-off between current consumption and consump-
tion in the next period yields the following consumption Euler equation:

                                      n            uc (CH,t+1 , NH,t+1 ) PHt
                                     Rt Et                                    = 1.                                           (10)
                                                       uc (CHt , NHt ) PH,t+1

       n is the gross nominal interest rate, which is common to both regions in the monetary
where Rt
union. Household optimization also implies a standard transversality condition and it implies
that the stochastic discount factor takes a standard form.
   Households choose how much to purchase of the various goods in the economy to minimize
the cost of attaining the level of consumption CHt they choose. This implies the following demand

                                                                 14
curves for home and foreign tradeable and non-tradeable goods:

                                                                             N     -
                                                 N                          PHt
                                                CHt = N CHt                              ,
                                                                            PHt

                                                 T       -                                                   T         -
                      TH         H              PHt                          TF            F                PF t
                     CHt   =   T Ht CHt                      ,        and   CHt      =   T Ht CHt                          .
                                                PHt                                                         PHt
                                                                                        N , PT ,
where PHt is a price index that gives the mimimum cost of purchasing a unit of CHt and PHt   Ht
     T are price indexes that give the minimum cost of purchasing a unit of C N , C T H , and C T F ,
and PF t                                                                     Ht    Ht          Ht

respectively. Utility maximization, furthermore, implies the following demand curves for each of
the varieties of goods produced in the economy:

                         N (z )     -                                     T (z )     -                                    T (z )    -
   N          N         PHt                   TH         TH              PHt                  TF         TF              PF t
  CHt (z ) = CHt          N
                                             CHt (z ) = CHt                T
                                                                                             CHt (z ) = CHt                  T
                                                                                                                                         (11)
                         PHt                                              PHt                                             PF   t


The cost minimizing price indexes are given by

                                     1                                                1                                                  1
                1                   1-                           1                   1-                           1                     1-
   N
  PHt   =            N
                    PHt (z )1- dz        ,      T
                                               PHt   =                T
                                                                     PHt (z )1- dz           ,    T
                                                                                                 PF t   =              T
                                                                                                                      PF t (z )
                                                                                                                                1-
                                                                                                                                   dz        ,
            0                                                0                                                0

                                                                                                         1
                                    N           1-        H T               1-       F   T        1-    1-
                           PHt = N PHt                + T Ht PHt                 + T Ht PF t                  .                          (12)

   As we noted above, the problem of the foreign household is analogous. We therefore refrain
from describing it in detail here. However, for simplicity, we do not allow for tradeable demand
shocks to foreign tradeable consumption as we did for home tradeable consumption.


3.1.2   Firms

There is a continuum of firms in each of the tradeable and non-tradeable sectors. Firms are indexed
by z and firm z specializes in the production of differentiated good z . Labor is the only variable
factor of production used by firms. We begin by discussing the non-tradeable sector. The output
                                                  N (z ). The production function of firm z in this
of good z in the non-tradeable sector is denoted YHt
sector is
                                                      N          N   N
                                                     YHt (z ) = ZHt NHt (z ),                                                            (13)

       N (z ) is the amount of labor demanded by firm z and Z N is a productivity shock.
where NHt                                                    Ht




                                                                      15
   Firm z in the non-tradable sector acts to maximize its value

                             
                                            N           N                    N
                       Et          MHt,t+j PH,t +j (z )YH,t+j (z ) - WH,t+j NH,t+j (z ) .
                            j =0


Its demand is given by
                                                                 N (z )   -
                                           N              N     PHt
                                          YHt (z )   =   CHt      N
                                                                              .
                                                                 PHt

The firm must satisfy demand. This implies that production must satisfy the constraint

                                                 N (z )    -
                                         N      PHt               N   N
                                        CHt       N
                                                                 ZHt NHt (z ).
                                                 PHt

Firm z takes the wage WHt as given. Optimal choice of labor by the firm implies that

                                                       N       N
                                                WHt = SHt (z )ZHt ,                               (14)


       N (z ) is the firm's nominal marginal cost, i.e. the Lagrange multiplier on its output con-
where SHt
straint. Firm z can reoptimize its price with probability 1 -  as in Calvo (1983). With probability
 it must keep its price unchanged. Optimal price setting by firm z in periods when it can change
its price implies

                    
                                                     N                 
                          k Et MHt,t+k YH,t
                                        N
                                            +k (z ) PHt (z ) -            SN     (z )   = 0,      (15)
                                                                       - 1 H,t+k
                    k=0


       N  (z ) is the price the firm chooses if it has the opportunity to reset its price in period t.
where PHt
Intuitively, the firm sets its price equal to a constant markup over a weighted average of current
and expected future marginal cost.
   Analogously to the non-tradeable sector, the output of firm z in the tradeable sector is denoted
 T (z ). Its production function is
YHt
                                                T          T   T
                                               YHt (z ) = ZHt NHt (z )

       T (z ) is the amount of labor demanded by the firm producing good z and Z T is a pro-
where NHt                                                                       Ht

ductivity shock.




                                                           16
   Firm z maximizes its value given by

                             
                                            T           T                    T
                       Et          MHt,t+j PH,t +j (z )YH,t+j (z ) - WH,t+j NH,t+j (z ) .
                            j =0


Demand for the output of firms in the tradeable sector comes from both the home and foreign
regions. Firm z 's demand is thus given by

                                                                         T (z )   -
                              T          TH            TH               PHt
                             YHt (z ) = CHt + (1 -  ) CF t                T
                                                                                      .
                                                                         PHt

The firm's optimal choice of labor implies that

                                                     T       T
                                              WHt = SHt (z )ZHt (z ).


       T (z ) is the firm's nominal marginal cost. The tradeable goods firm also have an opportu-
where SHt
nity to change their price with probability 1 - . Optimal choice of a new reset price at these times
implies
                    
                                                                    
                          k Et MHt,t+k YH,t
                                        T            T
                                            +k (z ) PHt (z ) -         ST     (z )        = 0.
                                                                    - 1 H,t+k
                    k=0

The problems of foreign firms are analogous to those of home firms. For this reason, we do not
detail them here.


3.1.3   Government Policy and Equilibrium

The federal government operates a common monetary policy for the two regions. This policy
takes the form of the following interest rate rule

                                       n
                                     r
                                     ^t  =  (t - ¯t ) - u (^
                                                           ut - u
                                                                ¯t ) + rt ,


where, as elsewhere in the paper, hatted variables denote deviations from a zero inflation steady
state and lower case variables are the logs of upper case variables. Economy-wide inflation t is
a population weighted average of inflation in the two regions: t  Ht + (1 -  )F t , where
Ht = pHt - pH,t-1 is consumer price inflation in the home region and F t is defined analogously
for the foreign region. In our model, we define unemployment in the home region simply as
uHt = 1 - NHt . We define foreign unemployment analogously. This implies that to a first order


                                                         17
^Ht = -n
u               ^F t = -n
       ^ Ht and u       ^ F t . Economy-wide unemployment is a population weighted average
of unemployment in the two regions, so u     ^Ht + (1 -  )^
                                       ^t =  u            uF t .
       Importantly, we allow the monetary authority to have a time-varying inflation target ¯t .9 Since
the long-run Phillips curve in our model is not vertical, variation in long-run inflation yields vari-
ation in long-run unemployment. We assume that the monetary authority targets an unemploy-
                                                                       ¯t = (1 -  )¯
ment rate that is consistent with its long-run inflation target, i.e., u           t /. We assume that
 and u obey the Taylor principle, ensuring that the economy has a unique locally bounded
equilibrium. rt is a transitory monetary shock, which we assume follows an exogenous AR(1)
process.
       For simplicity, the government levies no taxes, engages in no spending, and issues no debt.
In other words, there is no fiscal policy. The digital currency issued by the government is in zero
net supply. The government's monetary policy, therefore, has no fiscal implications. An equi-
librium in this economy is an allocation that satisfies household optimization, firm optimization,
the government's interest rate rule, and market clearing. We focus on the unique locally bounded
equilibrium of the model. Implicitly we rule out equilibria in which the inflation rate rises without
bound using the trigger strategy argument presented in Obstfeld and Rogoff (1983).


3.2      Regional and Aggregate Phillips Curves

Taking a log-linear approximation of the model presented in section 3.1 around a zero-inflation
steady state yields the following regional Phillips Curve for the inflation of non-tradeable goods:

                                  N       N
                                  Ht = Et H,t +1 - u     ^N
                                                   ^Ht - p      N
                                                           Ht + Ht ,                                         (16)


and aggregate Phillips Curve for overall inflation:


                                          t = Et t+1 - u
                                                       ^t + t ,                                              (17)


      N = pN - pN                                      ^N      N
where Ht   Ht   H,t-1 is home non-tradeable inflation, p Ht = PHt /PHt - 1 is the percentage
                                                                                          N is a
deviation of the home relative price of non-tradables from its steady state value of one, Ht
non-tradeable home supply shock, t is a corresponding aggregate supply shock, and the parame-
ter  = -1 , where  = (1 - ) (1 -  ) /. We provide a detailed derivation of these equations
   9
   Prior work that allows for a time-varying inflation target includes Stock and Watson (2007), Ireland (2007) and
Cogley and Sbordone (2008).



                                                       18
in Appendix A.1.
   Equations (16) and (17) yield an important result: The slopes of the regional Phillips curve for
non-tradeables and the aggregate Phillips curve are the same in our model. These slopes are both
equal to . This result holds for the non-tradeable regional Phillips curve, but does not carry over
to the regional Phillips curve for overall consumer price inflation--which includes both tradeable
and non-tradeable inflation in the region. As we show in Appendix A.2, the slope of the regional
Phillips curve for overall consumer price inflation is smaller by a factor equal to the expenditure
share on non-tradeable goods.
   Intuitively, the difference in the slope between the non-tradeable and overall regional Phillips
curves arises because all regions share the tradeable goods and these goods are priced nationally.
The tradeable goods therefore don't contribute to difference in inflation across regions, which
means that the regional CPI is made up partly of goods whose regional prices are insensitive
to regional variation in unemployment. This makes the regional CPI less sensitive to regional
unemployment than the aggregate CPI is to aggregate unemployment.
   Our result that the slope of the non-tradeable regional Phillips curve is equal to the slope
of the aggregate Phillips curve leads us to focus our cross-sectional empirical work on inflation
for non-tradeable goods. Earlier research that has estimated regional Phillips curves has done
so for overall consumer price inflation at the regional level (e.g., Fitzgerald and Nicolini, 2014;
McLeay and Tenreyro, 2019). Our model suggests that results from such analysis are less directly
informative about the slope of the aggregate Phillips curve.
   Our assumption that households have GHH preferences helps simplify the derivation of the
regional and aggregate Phillips curves in our model--equations (16) and (17). GHH preferences
imply that wealth effects on labor supply are zero, which eliminates the dependence of marginal
costs on consumption. The absence of a consumption term in the Phillips curve plays a role in the
derivation of our result that the non-tradeable regional Phillips curve and the aggregate Phillips
curve have the same slope. We discuss this point at greater length in Appendix A.3. The form of
the Phillips curve in our model does not, however, depend on the structure of financial markets.
We have assumed complete financial markets across regions, but the Phillips curve is the same in
a model with incomplete markets across regions.
   An important difference between equations (16) and (17) is the presence of the relative price of
                    ^N
non-tradeables term pHt in equation (16). This term implies that inflation in the non-tradeables

sector will be lower the higher is the relative price of non-tradeables. The reason for this is that


                                                19
the inflation rate for non-tradeable goods is driven by variation in the real wage deflated by non-
tradeable prices. Labor supply in the home region, however, is a function of the real wage deflated
by the home consumer price index. The real marginal cost variable in the home non-tradeable
Phillips curve therefore gives rise to an unemployment term and a relative price of non-tradeables
term.


3.3      Estimating the Slope of the Phillips Curve with Regional Data

Next we solve the regional Phillips curve -- equation (16) -- forward to obtain

                                           
                           N
                           Ht    = -Et            j u        ^N
                                                    ~H,t+j + p                N
                                                              H,t+j + Et t+ + Ht ,                                        (18)
                                          j =0


                               N = E                               j N
      ~Ht = uHt - Et uH,t+ and Ht
where u                             t                         j =0  H,t+j .    For expositional simplicity, we now
introduce an approximation to the model presented above. We assume that both u       ^N
                                                                             ~Ht and p Ht

follow AR(1) processes with autocorrelation coefficients equal to u and pN , respectively. In this
case, equation (18) simplifies to

                                      N
                                      Ht = - u      ^N
                                             ~Ht -  p             N
                                                     Ht + Et t+ + Ht ,                                                    (19)


where  = /(1 - u ) and  = /(1 - pN ).
       A major benefit of estimating the slope of the Phillips curve using regional data from a mon-
etary union is that variation in long-run inflation expectations -- the Et t+ term in equation
(19) -- is constant across regions.10 This implies that we can adopt an empirical specification that
replaces the Et t+ term in equation (19) with time fixed effects:

                                          N
                                          it = i - uit - pN
                                                          it + t + it ,                                                   (20)


      N , u , and pN are non-tradeable inflation, unemployment, and the relative price of non-
where it   it      it

tradeable goods, respectively, for region i at time t, i denotes a set of region fixed effects, t
denotes a set of time fixed effects, and it is a regression residual.
       Intuitively, while short-run inflation expectations (Et t+1 ) will differ across regions due to
  10
     Our empirical specification actually allows for the possibility of a constant difference in inflation rates across regions
(e.g., California becoming increasingly more expensive than Kansas for ever). Such a constant difference would be
picked up by the state fixed effects.




                                                              20
differences in their economic circumstances, long-run inflation expectations (Et t+ ) are inde-
pendent of the current business cycle. They are determined solely by beliefs about the long-run
monetary regimes. In a monetary union like the US, these beliefs will vary uniformly across re-
gions. This means that these expectations are "differenced out" in a panel regression with time
fixed effects. As we have discussed earlier in the paper, changes in the monetary regime over time
that yield variation in long-run inflation expectations may confound estimates of the slope of the
Phillips curve using aggregate variation.
   In principle, researchers can control for inflation expectations when estimating the slope of
the Phillips curve. This procedure, if successful, obviates the need to control for changes in the
monetary regime with time fixed effects in a panel setting. Controlling well for inflation expecta-
tions may, however, be quite difficult. One strand of the literature makes a rational expectations
assumption and instruments for realized future inflation using lagged variables. Mavroeidis et al.
(2014) emphasize that this approach suffers from a weak instruments problem. Another strand of
the literature uses survey measures of inflation expectations. But different measures differ sub-
stantially suggesting that they are imperfect indicators of inflation expectations.
   A curious feature of the regional Phillips curve literature is that it has tended to yield larger
estimates of the slope of the Phillips curve than more traditional estimation strategies based on
aggregate data (Fitzgerald and Nicolini, 2014; Babb and Detmeister, 2017; McLeay and Tenreyro,
2019; Hooper et al., 2019). Comparing equations (16) and (20) provides a simple explanation for
this discrepancy. The slope coefficient in equation (16) is , while the slope coefficient in equation
(20) is  = /(1 - u ). Since unemployment is quite persistent,  >> . However, our analysis
highlights that under the simplifying assumption that unemployment follows an AR(1) it is rel-
atively straightforward to convert estimates of  into estimates of . For this, one simply needs
estimates (or assumptions) for u and  .
   This same type of lack of comparability arises in some cases for different estimates based on
aggregate data. Some researchers use longer-term inflation expectations, rather than one-period
ahead inflation expectations, to proxy for Et t+1 when estimating the Phillips curve using aggre-
gate data. Our analysis shows, however, that when researchers choose to use data on long-term
inflation expectations, they (perhaps inadvertently) end up estimating  , not . To compare such
estimates with those based on a specification that controls for one-period ahead expectations, one
must translate between the two, e.g., by using the formula  = /(1 - u ) or a version of this
formula appropriate for (say) 10-year ahead inflation expectations.


                                                 21
       The difference between  and  arises due to the different ways equations (16) and (20) capture
the effects of expected future unemployment on current inflation. In equation (16), the effects of
expected future unemployment on current inflation are captured by the inflation expectations
term Et t+1 and the coefficient on current unemployment  only reflects the effect of current
unemployment on current inflation. In contrast, the slope coefficient in equation (20) captures
both the effect of current unemployment and the effect of expected future unemployment into the
indefinite future on current inflation--i.e., the fact that high unemployment today forecasts high
unemployment in future periods.11
       An additional advantage of estimating a specification such as equation (20) rather than equa-
tion (16) is that the identification of the slope coefficient is less sensitive to the exact timing of
changes in inflation relative to inflation expectations. In Figure 3, we show that the difference
between inflation and inflation expectations is quite sensitive to the exact measure of inflation.
Furthermore, estimates of equation (16) rely quite heavily on the exact timing of inflation and
inflation expectations implied by the New Keynesian Phillips curve.


3.4      Relaxing Full Information Rational Expectations

We have so far manipulated the Phillips curve under the standard assumption of full-information
rational expectations. However, the arguments we make above -- i.e., solving the Phillips curve
forward -- rely only on the weaker assumption that the law of iterated expectations holds. Under
this assumption, one can show that manipulating the aggregate Phillips curve -- equation (17) --
yields
                                                    
                                        t = -          u
                                                       ~t + Ft t+ + ~t,                                               (21)
                                                 1 - F
                                                     ~
                                                     u

where Ft is agents' expectations conditional on information at time t, Ft t+ is the agent's sub-
                                                                       j
jective forecast about the inflation target, ~ t  Ft              j =0  t+j ,   and F
                                                                                    ~ is agents' subjective belief
                                                                                    u

about the autoregressive coefficient governing the persistence of fluctuations in unemployment.
Notice that if F   ~ , the Phillips Curve is less forward looking than the rational expectations
               ~ < u
               u

Phillips curve. Rational expectations is the special case where F   ~ and Ft t+ = Et t+ .
                                                                ~ = u
                                                                u

Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012, 2015a) provide evidence consitent with the law of iterated ex-
pectations holding but full information rational expectations not holding. See Adam and Padula
  11
    McLeay and Tenreyro (2019) control for inflation expectations at the Census Region level when they estimate the
regional Phillips curve. The variation across regions in these inflation expectations data is quite minimal. It may
therefore be that the variation in this variable is quite attenuated relative to actual variation in inflation expectations
across the MSA areas that form the regional units in their analysis.


                                                            22
(2011), Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015a), Coibion, Gorodnichenko, and Kamdar (2018) for fur-
ther discussion of these issues.



4     Data and Construction of State-Level Price Indexes

The BLS does not publish state-level price indexes. Prior work has used metropolitan level BLS
price indexes and cost of living estimates from the American Chamber of Commerce Realtors
Association (ACCRA) to construct state-level price indexes (see, e.g., Del Negro, 1998; Nakamura
and Steinsson, 2014). An important drawback of this approach is that the BLS imputes missing
data using data from other regions. Recent work has used scanner price data to construct state-
level price indexes (Beraja, Hurst, and Ospina, 2019). An important drawback of scanner data is
the short sample period available.
      We construct new state-level price indexes for the US based on the micro-price data the BLS
collects for the purpose of constructing the CPI. Our sample period is 1978 to 2018 (with a 26
month gap in 1986-1988 due to missing micro-data). The micro-data that we base our price indexes
on are available in the CPI Research Database at the BLS. The data for the period 1978-1987 were
constructed by Nakamura et al. (2018). The micro-price data in the CPI Research Database cover
thousands of individual goods and services, constituting about 70% of consumer expenditures.
They are collected by BLS employees visiting outlets to collect prices. The database does not
include the rent prices used to construct the shelter component of the database. For this reason,
we analyze the behavior of rents separately. Prices are sampled in 87 geographical areas across
the United States. In New York, Chicago, and Los Angeles, all prices are collected at a monthly
frequency. In other locations, food and energy prices are collected monthly and the prices of other
items are collected bimonthly. The CPI Research Database is described in more detail in Nakamura
and Steinsson (2008) and Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008).


4.1     State-Level Price Index Construction

Our methodology for constructing price indexes is a simplified version of the procedure used by
the BLS to construct the CPI. One key difference versus the BLS procedure, and a key reason why
we do not simply employ the BLS's own price index software, is that we do not impute missing
price observations using inflation rates calculated for other sectors or regions. We describe our
procedure below.


                                                23
       We start by calculating price relatives for individual products. These are the fundamental
building blocks of a matched-model price index. For product i at time t, the formula we use to
calculate the price relative is
                                                                     1/
                                                             Pi,t
                                                  ri,t =                  .                                            (22)
                                                            Pi,t-

where ri,t denotes the price relative, Pi,t denote the effective price, and  denotes the number of
months since the last time a price was collected for this product. Several details are important.
First, it is important to use the effective price rather than the raw "collected price." The difference
between the collected and effective prices is that the latter adjusts for changes in the number and
size of the items being priced (e.g. a 2L bottle of Diet Coke vs. a two-pack of 2L bottles of Diet
Coke).
       Second, we define a product not only by its characteristics (e.g., 2L bottle of Diet Coke), but
also by the location in which it is sold. To be precise, in the CPI Research Database, each product
is indexed by outlet, quote, and version. The quote is a very narrowly described product, and the
version is the exact specification of the item that the price collector identifies in the store. We hold
all three of these parameters--outlet, quote, and version--fixed in constructing a product's price
relative.
       Third, we must decide what to do when prices are missing. Missing prices occur when the
product is unavailable due to a temporary stockout, or as a consequence of the bimonthly pricing
schedule used by the BLS for most products in most cities. Our procedure is to divide the price
change evenly among the periods between successive price observations by taking the  -th root
of the price change and applying this price relative to all  periods. This implies that ri,t = ... =
ri,t- +1 where again  is the number of periods between successive price changes. There are
several other important details of our index construction procedure that we describe in Appendix
B.3.
       We aggregate the price relatives in several steps. First, we compute an unweighted geometric
average of the price relatives within each Entry Level Item ("ELI") product category and state.
ELIs are relatively narrow product categories such as "Full Service Meals and Snacks" (restau-
rants) and "Motorcycles" defined by the BLS for the purpose of calculating the CPI.12 We then
calculate sectoral state-level price indexes by computing a weighted geometric average of the ELI-
state indexes across the ELIs within that state and sector. We use weights from the Consumer
  12
       See the appendix to Nakamura and Steinsson (2008) for a list of the ELIs used in the construction of the CPI.



                                                             24
Expenditure Survey (CEX) from 1998 to perform this aggregation.
       Our empirical analysis focuses on non-tradeables but we also construct state-level price in-
dexes for tradeables--which we simply define as the complement of non-tradeables--and overall
state-level price indexes. We construct a price index for non-tradeables based on our own cate-
gorization of BLS's ELI product categories. In doing this, we attempt to be conservative in our
definition of what constitutes a non-tradeable good, since including tradable goods could lead to
attenuation of the slope of the Phillips curve if tradeable goods are priced nationally. In contrast,
the main downside of excluding some non-tradeable goods is less precise estimates. The goods we
classify as non-tradeables account for roughly 44% of non-housing consumer expenditures. Im-
portantly, our index of non-tradeables does not include housing services or transportation goods
(mainly airline tickets). Appendix B.4 provides a detailed list of which ELI categories we classify
as non-tradeable.
       We find that there is much more variablility across states in non-tradeable inflation than trade-
able inflation. For non-tradeables, the first principal component of state-level inflation captures
only about 37% of the variance in the underlying state-level series. In contract, for tradeables, the
first principal component captures about 71% of the variance in the underlying state-level series.
This pattern is consistent with our argument in section 3.2 that many tradeable goods are priced
nationally, and do not respond to regional marginal costs.13
       Our method for calculating state-level price indexes aims to approximate the non-shelter price
index published by the BLS. Figure 4 illustrates our ability to match the official BLS data by com-
paring the evolution of 12-month inflation at the aggregate level using our methodology with offi-
cial CPI inflation excluding housing. The figure shows that we are able to approximate the official
BLS data very closely. This is true even for the pre-1988 period when we rely on the micro-data
recovered by Nakamura et al. (2018) which likely have greater measurement error.


4.2      Employment data

The measure of unemployment that we use as our measure of labor market slack in the Phillips
curve is the quarterly, seasonally adjusted, state unemployment rate from the Local Area Un-
employment Statistics (LAUS) published by the BLS. We also make use of employment data in
constructing our tradeable demand spillovers instrument discussed in section 5. This instrument
  13
   In the present draft, we drop Arizona due to anomalous trends that we have not been able to investigate due
Covid-19 related access restrictions at the BLS.



                                                     25
                 15
                                                                                          Replication
                                                                                          Official


                 10




                   5




                   0




                  -5
                       1980      1985       1990      1995        2000     2005       2010    2015
                                                             Date
                                     Figure 4: Aggregate Non-Shelter Inflation
       Note: The figure plots the 12-month non-shelter inflation rate for the US published by the Bureau of Labor
       Statistics (official) as well as the corresponding inflation rate using our methods (replication).


is a shift-share instrument, similar to the one used in Bartik (1991). It is constructed using em-
ployment shares of individual industries at the state level. Industry-state employment data are
available from the QCEW, at quarterly frequency for 2-digit SIC codes (1975-2000) and 3-digit
NAICS codes (1990-2017). Before 1990 we use 2-digit SIC codes to define industry, whereas after
2000 we use 3-digit NAICS Code. For the period 1990-2000, when both the NAICS and SIC code
classifications are available, we construct both versions of the instrument and use a simple average
of the two. Finally, we seasonally adjust the resulting series by regressing it on an exponentially
weighted moving average of its lags as well as state by quarter-of-year fixed effects. We use the
variation not explained by the quarter-of-year dummies as our instrument.14
       We follow Mian and Sufi (2014) in defining the tradeable employment share as the share asso-
ciated with the following sectors: "agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting," "mining, quarrying,
and oil and gas extraction," and manufacturing (SIC sectors A, B and D; and NAICS sectors 11, 21,
  14
       Using the X-11 algorithm for seasonal adjustment yields virtually identical results.




                                                             26
and 31-33). The QCEW censors data if there are fewer than three establishments in the industry-
state, or if one firm constitutes more than 80 percent of industry-state employment. 5% of NAICS
3 digit state-by-industry cells are censored, while 10% of SIC 2 digit state-by-industry cells are
censored. If an industry-state observation is missing or censored in a given quarter, we assign it
zero employment in that quarter.15



5        Empirical Results

We now turn to our empirical results. We focus on estimating a regional Phillips curve for non-
tradeables for the reasons discussed in section 3.2. Our empirical specification is a slight variation
on equation (20):
                                    N
                                    it = i + t - ui,t-4 - pN
                                                           i,t-4 + it .                                           (23)

     N = pN - pN
Here it   it   i,t-4 is non-tradeable inflation over the previous 12 months, ui,t-4 is the unem-

ployment rate lagged by four quarters, and pN
                                            i,t-4 is the relative price of non-tradeable goods also

lagged by four quarters. Studying inflation over four quarters allows us to reduce measurement
error and eliminate seasonality. We use lagged unemployment as a regressor, instead of current
unemployment, for consistency with previous studies such as Ball and Mazumder (2019).
         Our panel data approach implies that we are relying on cross-state variation in unemployment
to identify the slope of the Phillips curve. Figure 5 depicts the evolution of the unemployment
rate for three states, California, Texas and Pennsylvania, over our sample period. While there
is certainly a great deal of comovement, this figure illustrates well that there is also substantial
cross-state variation. One example is that both the 1991 and 2007-2009 recessions affected Cali-
fornia much more than Texas and Pennsylvania. Another is that Texas experienced a recession in
the mid-1980s (widely thought to stem from a dramatic fall in oil prices) while most other states
experienced a continued fall in unemployment.
         As we have emphasized throughout the paper,  in equation (23) (and equation (3)) is not
the same object as  in equation (1). Making the simplifying assumption that the unemployment
rate follows an AR(1), we have derived a simple formula for the relationship between these two
concepts:  = /(1 - u  ), where u is the first order autoregressive coefficient for unemployment.
    15
    We did not find any transcription errors in the QCEW at the state level. Chodorow-Reich and Wieland (2019)
discuss such errors at the county-industry level for the QCEW. Anthracite mining is discontinued after 1987 in the SIC.
We drop this industry. We also drop observations from California before 1978, due to the exceptionally volatile share
of agricultural employment in California during 1976-1978.



                                                          27
            15
                                                                                            CA
                                                                                            TX
                                                                                            PA



            10




              5




              0
               1980       1985          1990    1995        2000     2005       2010       2015
                                                       Date
                                      Figure 5: Regional Business Cycles
   Note: This figure plots the unemployment rate for California, Pennsylvania and Texas.


In reality, however, the dynamics of the US unemployment rate differ substantially from an AR(1)
(see, e.g., Neftc
                ¸ i, 1984; Sichel, 1993; Dupraz, Nakamura, and Steinsson, 2020). For this reason, we
use a more direct approach to estimating the appropriate scaling factor for converting our estimate
of  into an estimate of . We estimate the following regression

                                  T
                                         j ui,t+j = uit + pN
                                                           it + i + t +       it .                (24)
                                 j =0


We can then combine the estimate of  from this regression with our estimate of  from equation
(23) to get an estimate of . In appendix A.4, we show that

                                                         
                                                    =      ,                                      (25)
                                                         4

under relatively mild assumptions about the dynamics of the unemployment rate. The appear-
ance of 4 in the denominator accounts for time aggregation--the outcome variable in regression



                                                       28
equation (23) is cumulative inflation over four quarters, but our benchmark model is specified
at quarterly frequency. We discuss our choice of the truncation length T below. We calculate
standard errors for  under the simplifying assumption that  is random but  is known.
    The presence of supply shocks and cost push shocks (un
                                                         t and t in equation (1)) is an impor-

tant challenge to the identification of the slope of the Phillips curve. We present results for two
alternative identifying assumptions regarding supply shocks. Our first approach is to estimate
equation (23) by OLS. The identifying assumption here is that when state A experiences a boom
or bust relative to other state, it does not systematically experience non-tradeable supply shocks
relative to other state. For example, when Texas experiences a recession relative to Illinois, this is
not systematically correlated with changes in restaurant technology in Texas relative to Illinois.
    Our second approach is to construct an instrumental variable that captures variation in de-
mand. The idea behind our instrumental variable is the notion that national variation in demand
for specific tradeable goods will differentially affect demand for non-tradeable goods in states that
produce those tradeable goods. For example, an increase in oil prices will differentially affect the
income of people in Texas (and other oil producing states). As a result, Texans will differentially
increase their demand for non-tradeables (such as restaurant meals). Building on this idea, we
construct a "tradeable demand spillovers" instrument as


                               Tradable Demandi,t =            ¯x,i × log S-i,x,t ,
                                                               S                                           (26)
                                                           x


      ¯x,i is the average employment share of industry x in state i over time, and log S-i,x,t is the
where S
national employment share of industry x at time t excluding state i. This shift-share instrument
builds on Bartik (1991) and more closely on Nguyen (2014). The identifying assumption in this
case is that there are no supply factors that are both correlated with the shifts log S-i,x,t in the time
                                      ¯x,i in the cross section. For example, costs will increase as a
series and correlated with the shares S
result of an increase in oil prices. But if such cost increases are no larger on average for restaurants
in Texas than Illinois they will be uncorrelated with our instrument.16
   16
      In a related approach, McLeay and Tenreyro (2019) use identified demand shocks from government spending to
estimate the slope of the regional Phillips Curve.




                                                      29
                              Table 1: Slope of the Regional Phillips Curve: OLS
                                       No Fixed          No Time                            No Rel.
                                                                           Baseline
                                        Effects           Effects                          Price Term
                                           (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)

                                             Panel A: Estimates of  from equation (23)
                                          -0.103           0.017             0.112            0.155
                                         (0.044)          (0.048)           (0.056)          (0.066)
                                             Panel B: Estimates of  from equation (24)
                                         10.06              7.48             8.99              9.02
                                         (0.72)            (0.75)           (0.48)            (0.46)
                                             Panel C: Estimates of  from equation (25)
                                        -0.0026            0.0006           0.0031            0.0043
                                        (0.0011)          (0.0016)         (0.0016)          (0.0018)

                 State Effects
                 Time Effects
                 pN
                  i,t-4

      Note: The table presents OLS estimates of  ,  and . In Panel A, the outcome variable is cumulative non-
      tradeable inflation over four quarters, measured in percentage points. The regressor of interest is the fourth
      lag of quarterly state unemployment, measured in percentage points. In panel B, the outcome variable is
      the present value of unemployment, truncated at 20 quarters. The regressor of interest is quarterly state
      unemployment. In panel C, we report estimates of  = /4 . In all panels, the sample period is 1978-2018.
      Standard errors are reported in parentheses. These are two-way clustered by state and time. Controls for each
      column are reported at the bottom of the table. All regressions are unweighted. The number of observations
      is 4490 in panel A, 4400 in panel B, and 3916 in panel C.


5.1     Main Results

Table 1 presents estimates of  ,  , and  based on OLS regressions of equations (23) - (25) for our
full sample period of 1978-2018. Let's start by considering the estimates of  in Panel A. When
we estimate equation (23) without fixed effects, our estimate has "wrong" sign, i.e., higher unem-
ployment is associated with higher rather than lower inflation ( = -0.103). Adding state fixed
effects raises the estimate of  to 0.017. This implies that states with persistently high unemploy-
ment had lower average inflation rates over our sample period. Adding time fixed effects further
raises the estimate of  to 0.112. This implies that supply shocks that result in "stagflation" were
an important driver of inflation at the national level over sample period. Finally, dropping the
relative price of non-tradeables control raises our estimate of  modestly to 0.155.
      Panel B of Table 1 presents estimates of the scaling factor  from equation (24). For the base-
line case with state and time fixed effects and including the control for the relative price of non-


                                                           30
tradeables, our estimate of  is 8.99. We truncate the discounted sum of future unemployment
rates on the left-hand-side of equation (24) at T = 20 quarters. We have explored truncating at
other horizons. If we truncate at T = 10, we get substantially smaller estimates of  . This reflects
the fact that the shorter sum does not capture the full dynamic effect of changes in unemployment.
If we, instead, truncate at T = 30, we get quite similar values for  .17
      In Panel C of Table 1, we then combine our estimates of  and  using equation (25) to arrive at
estimates of . Focusing on the baseline case in column (3), we divide our estimate of  = 0.112 by
4x8.99 to arrive at an estimate for  of 0.0031. Intuitively,  captures the effect not only of current
unemployment, but also future unemployment, while  is an estimate of the effect of current
unemployment alone.
      Table 2 presents IV estimates of  ,  , and  for three different versions of our tradeable demand
spillovers instrument: the level of tradeable, a three-year difference, and a five-year difference.
These IV specifications yield substantially larger estimates of both  and  than OLS. The IV
estimates of  range from 0.339 to 0.525. The IV estimates of  are also larger, ranging from 12.3
to 14.04. Combining these yields estimates of  ranging from 0.0060 to 0.0105. The fact that our
IV estimates of  are substantially larger than our estimates of  based on OLS suggests that IV
strategy excludes variation due to supply shocks that confounds our OLS estimates. We take the
estimate using the three-year difference instrument of 0.0075 as our baseline IV estimate of .18


5.2     Subsample Analysis

We next analyze to what extent the Phillips curve has flattened over our sample period. In partic-
ular, we investigate to what extent the Phillips curve was steeper during the period of the Volcker
disinflation than in subsequent years. Table 3 presents OLS estimates of  and  for the periods
1978-1990 and 1991-2018. We present these estimates for a specification with time fixed effects and
   17
      If we truncate at T = 40 or higher values, we also get smaller values of  . For these very high values of T , the
discounted sum on the left-hand-side of equation (24) starts getting substantially influenced by the subsequent busi-
ness cycle since business cycles during our sample period last less than a decade. Our interpretation of this is that our
sample is too short to reliably estimate equation (24) with values of T as high as 40. We have also explored modelling
the unemployment rate as an AR(p) to avoid the truncation above, and we have estimated an impulse response for
unemployment using a lag-augmented local projection (Montiel Olea and Plagborg-Moller, 2020). Modelling the un-
employment rate as an AR(p) yields results that are highly sensitive to the chosen lag length. In particular, when we
estimate such a model with many lags (say 8), our estimates indicate that the unemployment rate is non-stationary. In
contrast, the impulse response we estimate using a lag-augmented local projection does not suggest a unit root. These
results suggest that AR models are unable to accurately capture the dynamics of the unemployment rate.
   18
      The level instrument has stronger trends than the differenced instruments and results based on this instrument are
more sensitive to small changes in the regression specification. This leads us to favor results based on the differenced
instruments.



                                                           31
                            Table 2: Slope of the Regional Phillips Curve: IV
                   Instrument:                  Level            3Y Diff          5Y Diff
                                                  (1)              (2)               (3)

                                            Panel A: Estimates of  from equation (23)
                                                0.525             0.369             0.339
                                               (0.184)           (0.142)           (0.124)
                   1st. Stage F Stat             28.7             30.7               45.5
                                             Panel B: Estimates of  from equation (24)
                                                12.50             12.30            14.04
                                                (1.87)            (2.24)           (1.50)
                   1st. Stage F Stat             23.4              37.8             58.7
                                            Panel C: Estimates of  from equation (25)
                                                0.0105           0.0075            0.0060
                                               (0.0037)         (0.0029)          (0.0022)

   Note: The table presents IV estimates of  ,  and . Tradeable demand is defined in equation (26). We
   instrument for unemployment with several instruments based on tradeable demand. Column (1) instruments
   with the level of tradeable demand. Column (2) uses the three-year difference of tradeable demand. Column
   (3) uses the five-year difference. In Panel A, the outcome variable is cumulative non-tradeable inflation over
   four quarters, measured in percentage points. The regressor is the fourth lag of quarterly state unemployment,
   measured in percentage points. In panel B, the outcome variable is the present value of unemployment,
   truncated at 20 quarters. The regressor is quarterly state unemployment. In panel C, we report estimates of
    = /4 . All specifications include state and time fixed effects and a control for the relative price of non-
   tradeables. The sample period is 1978-2018. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. These are two-way
   clustered by state and time. All regressions are unweighted. The number of observations in the first column
   is 4490 in panel A, 4400 in panel B, and 3916 in panel C. The number of observations is slightly smaller in the
   second and third columns due to the differencing in the instrument.


a specification without time fixed effects. Both specifications include state fixed effects and control
for the relative price of non-tradeables.
   Consider first the specification without time fixed effects reported in columns (1) - (2). This
specification yields a sharp drop in the estimated values of  and  between the early part of the
sample and the later part of the sample. For the pre-1990 sample,  is estimated to be 0.449, while
 is estimated to be 0.0150. In sharp contrast, for the post-1990 sample,  is estimated to be 0.009
and  is estimated to be 0.0003. The difference across samples is roughly a factor of 50. In other
words, aggregate inflation became much less sensitive to unemployment after 1990 than it was
during the Volcker disinflation.
   Contrast this with the results in columns (3) - (4) where time fixed effects are included in the
regressions. In this case, the estimated values of  and  fall only modestly between the early
part of the sample and the later part of the sample. For the pre-1990 sample,  is estimated to be


                                                          32
                             Table 3: Has the Phillips Curve Flattened? ­ OLS
                                    Without Time Fixed Effect            With Time Fixed Effect
                                     Pre-1990        Post-1990            Pre-1990       Post-1990
                                        (1)             (2)                  (3)            (4)

                                          Panel A: Estimates of  from equation (23)
                                        0.449           0.009               0.198           0.090
                                       (0.073)         (0.043)             (0.106)         (0.057)
                                           Panel B: Estimates of  from equation (25)
                                       0.0150          0.0003              0.0055          0.0025
                                      (0.0024)        (0.0014)            (0.0029)        (0.0016)

    Note: The table presents OLS estimates of  and  for subsamples. Columns (1) and (3) present results for
    the sample period 1978-1990, and columns (2) and (4) for the sample period 1991-2018. The specifications
    in columns (1)-(2) include state fixed effects and control for the relative price of non-tradeables. The specifi-
    cations in columns (3)-(4) include time fixed effects as well. In Panel A, the outcome variable is cumulative
    non-tradeable inflation over four quarters, measured in percentage points. The regressor is the fourth lag of
    quarterly state unemployment, measured in percentage points. Standard errors are reported in parentheses.
    These are two-way clustered by state and time. In panel B, we report estimates of  = /4 . To estimate , we
    fix the value of  while  varies by subsample. Columns (1)-(2) use the estimate of  from column (2) of Table
    1, estimated over the full sample 1978-2018. Columns (3)-(4) use the estimate of  from column (3) of Table 1,
    again estimated over the full sample. All regressions are unweighted.


0.198 and  is estimated to be 0.0055. For the post-1990 sample,  is estimated to be 0.090 and 
is estimated to be 0.0025. The difference across samples is a little less than a factor of two and is
marginally statistically significant.
   As we emphasize in section 2, estimates of the Phillips curve based on time-series variation --
such as the estimates without time fixed effects in Table 3 -- are likely to be heavily influenced
by time-series variation in long-run inflation expectations Et t+ . In contract, the specifications
in Table 3 that include time fixed effects difference out the influence of long-run inflation expec-
tations. The results in Table 3 therefore suggest that the apparent flattening of the Phillips curve
in the time series is really due to inflationary expectations becoming more firmly anchored over
time. In the early part of the sample, inflationary expectations shifted a great deal and these shifts
were negatively correlated with the unemployment rate, which meant that shifts in inflationary
expectations masqueraded as a steep Phillips curve. The cross-sections results in columns (3) - (4)
of Table 3 reveal that in fact the Phillips curve has always been quite flat (or at least since 1978).
   Figure 6 provides a visual representation of the results in Table 3. In the left panel, we plot
a binned scatterplot of state-level non-tradeable inflation against state-level unemployment after
removing state fixed effects and the effects of the relative price of non-tradeables (but not time


                                                           33
                                                        No Time Effects                                                                               Time Effects
                                      2                                                                                                    2
                                                                                1978-1990                                                                                  1978-1990
                                                                                1991-2018                                                                                  1991-2018
                                    1.5                                                                                                  1.5
State Non-Tradeable Inflation (%)




                                                                                                     State Non-Tradeable Inflation (%)
                                      1                                                                                                    1

                                    0.5                                                                                                  0.5

                                      0                                                                                                    0

                                    -0.5                                                                                                 -0.5

                                     -1                                                                                                   -1

                                    -1.5                                                                                                 -1.5

                                     -2                                                                                                   -2
                                       -4          -2          0            2               4                                               -4   -2         0          2               4
                                                   State Unemployment (pp)                                                                       State Unemployment (pp)
                                                   Figure 6: Scatterplots--Non-Tradeable Inflation and Unemployment
                                      Note: in the the left hand size panel we residualize state non-tradeable inflation and unemployment against
                                      state fixed effects and the relative price of non-tradeables, before and after 1990. We then plot residualized
                                      inflation and unemployment, before and after 1990, grouped by 20 bins of state unemployment. The right
                                      hand side panel carries out the same exercise after further residualizing against time fixed effects. In both
                                      panels inflation is cumulated over the previous four quarters and unemployment is lagged by four quarters.


fixed effects). We plot the data separately for the period 1978-1990 and 1991-2018. The plot also
includes regression lines for each subsample. The data in this panel does not account for time
fixed effects and therefore includes aggregate time-series variation. As a consequence, we see a
huge flattening of the Phillips curve in this case.
                                     Contrast this with the right panel in Figure 6. This is an analogous figure to the left panel except
that we also demean by time fixed effects. These data therefore only reflect regional variation in
inflation. In this case, the difference in the slope of the Phillips curve between the early sample
and the late sample is modest.
                                     Tables 4 reports an analogous set of results to the results in columns (3) - (4) of Table 3 but
based on IV regressions using the tradeable demand instruments discussed above. As with the
full sample results, using our IV strategy over subsamples yield larger estimates of  and  than
does OLS. However, the time pattern of the results are quite similar to those in Table 3. When we
use the of three-year difference in tradeable demand as our instrument, the estimate of  for the
period prior to 1990 is 0.0106. This estimate falls to 0.0059 for the post-1990 sample. As in the case
of OLS, the flattening of the Phillips curve is a factor of about 1.8. The results when the five-year
difference in tradeable demand is used as an instrument are similar. The modest flattening of the
Phillips curve that we find over our sample seems consistent with the fact that the frequency of

                                                                                                34
                              Table 4: Has the Phillips Curve Flattened? ­ IV
             Instrument:                           3Y Diff                           5Y Diff
                                        Pre-1990        Post-1990         Pre-1990         Post-1990
                                           (1)             (2)               (3)              (4)

                                             Panel A: Estimates of  from equation (23)
                                          0.522               0.292         0.422               0.332
                                         (0.212)             (0.185)       (0.206)             (0.155)
             1st. Stage F Stat             14.1               23.9            7                   39
                                             Panel B: Estimates of  from equation (25)
                                         0.0106           0.0059            0.0075           0.0059
                                        (0.0043)         (0.0038)          (0.0037)         (0.0028)

Notes: the table presents IV estimates of  and  by subsample. Columns (1) and (3) present results for the sample
period 1978-1990, columns (2) and (4) for the sample period 1991-2018. We instrument for unemployment with several
instruments based on tradeable demand. Columns (1)-(2) instruments with the three year difference of tradeable de-
mand, lagged by four quarters. Columns (3)-(4) uses the five-year difference of tradeable demand. All columns include
state and time fixed effects and control for the relative price of non-tradeables. In Panel A, the outcome variable is
cumulative non-tradeable inflation over four quarters, measured in percentage points. The regressor of interest is the
fourth lag of quarterly state unemployment, measured in percentage points. Standard errors are reported in parenthe-
ses. These are two-way clustered by state and time. In panel B, we report estimates of  = /4 . To estimate , we fix
the value of  while  varies by subsample. Columns (1)-(2) use the estimate of  from column (2) of Table 2, estimated
over the full sample 1978-2018. Columns (3)-(4) use the estimate of  from column (3) of Table 2, again estimated over
the full sample. All regressions are unweighted.


price change in the U.S. has declined by about 40% as inflation has fallen since the early 1980's
(Nakamura et al., 2018).


5.3   How Do Our Estimates Compare to Prior Work?

It is instructive to compare our estimate of  to values of  arrived at by means of structural
estimation or calibration of New Keynesian models. Table 5 reports three such estimates from
Rotemberg and Woodford (1997), Gali (2008), and Nakamura and Steinsson (2014). In all cases,
we have adjusted the reported value of  in these papers by the elasticity of output with respect
to employment in the models used in these papers. As is well known, the value of  in a New
Keynesian model is highly dependent on both the degree of nominal rigidities assumed and the
degree of real rigidities assumed. The values for  used in these papers ranged from about an or-
der of magnitude larger than our estimated value to a value roughly equal to our estimated value.
The main difference between Gali's relatively high value and the much lower values in Rotemberg
and Woodford (1997) and Nakamura and Steinsson (2014) lies in the degree of real rigidity that
the models used in these papers imply. Gali's model is a relatively simple (textbook) version of

                                                         35
                            Table 5: Our Estimates Compared to Prior Work
                                                                     

                           Rotemberg and Woodford (1997)                       0.019
                           Gali (2008)                                         0.085
                           Nakamura and Steinsson (2014)                       0.0077
                           Our Estimate
                           Full Sample IV Estimate                             0.0075

             Note: We adjust the estimates from Rotemberg and Woodford (1997), Gali (2008), and Naka-
             mura and Steinsson (2014) by the elasticity of output with respect to employment in the
             model in these papers. For Nakamura and Steinsson (2014), we use the calibration with
             GHH preferences.


the New Keynesian model, which does not incorporate strong sources of real rigidity. Rotemberg
and Woodford (1997) and Nakamura and Steinsson (2014) use models with heterogeneous labor
markets, which yields a much larger amount of real rigidity. In both cases, the large amount of real
rigidity helps these authors match moments that they target in their analysis. Similarly, our esti-
mates imply that the data we have analyzed is also more consistent with New Keynesian models
that incorporate a large amount of real rigidity.


5.4     Aggregate Implications

A question that naturally arises regarding our cross-sectional estimates of  is whether they can
explain the aggregate time-series variation in inflation over our sample. A number of researchers
and commentators have suggested that the stability of inflation at the aggregate level in the U.S.
has been surprising over the past 25 years ("missing disinflation" during the Great Recession and
"missing reinflation" during the late 1990s and late 2010s). Some researcher have recently argued
that cross-sectional variation suggests a steeper Phillips curve than time-series variation for the
past few decades. Here, we assess whether this is the case for our estimates.
      We start with the solved-forward aggregate Phillips curve--equation (6). Our first step is to
estimate a scaling factor  for the aggregate unemployment rate analogous to the scaling factor
we use in our cross-sectional analysis--equations (24) and (25). We do this using the following
specification
                                           T
                                                 j u
                                                   ~t+j =  u
                                                           ~t +  + t .                                  (27)
                                          j =0

The series we use for u
                      ~t in this regression is the difference between the aggregate unemployment



                                                        36
                         Table 6: Slope of the Regional Phillips Curve: Rents
                                           No Fixed          No Time
                                                                               Baseline
                                            Effects           Effects
                                               (1)              (2)               (3)

                                         Panel A: Estimates of  from equation (23)
                                              0.268            0.356             0.603
                                             (0.041)          (0.044)           (0.124)
                                          Panel B: Estimates of  from equation (24)
                                             10.06              7.46             9.03
                                             (0.72)            (0.76)           (0.46)
                                          Panel C: Estimates of  from equation (25)
                                             0.0067           0.0119            0.0167
                                            (0.0010)         (0.0015)          (0.0034)

                    State Effects
                    Time Effects
       Note: The table presents OLS estimates of  ,  and  for rents. In Panel A, the dependent vari-
       able is the state-level annual rent inflation rate, measured in percentage points from the American
       Community Survey for the years 2001 to 2017. The regressor of interest is the lag of annual state un-
       employment, measured in percentage points. In panel B, the outcome variable is the present value of
       unemployment, truncated at 20 quarters. The regressor of interest is quarterly state unemployment.
       In panel C, we report estimates of  = /4 . Standard errors are reported in parentheses. These
       are two-way clustered by state and time. Controls for each column are reported at the bottom of the
       table. All regressions are unweighted. The number of observations is 850 in panel A, 4400 in panel
       B, and 850 in panel C.


rate in the U.S. and the CBO's estimate of the natural rate of unemployment at each point in time.
We run this regression for the sample period 1979Q4-2017Q4. This yields an estimate of  for
aggregate variation in the unemployment rate of 6.16 with a standard error of 0.87.
   Our cross-sectional estimates of  are for non-tradeables excluding housing services. As we
emphasize in section 2, the treatment of housing services has important implications for the be-
havior of inflation. Table 6 presents estimates of  and  using state-level annual rent inflation
data from the American Community Survey for the years 2001 to 2017. For our baseline specifi-
cation with state and time fixed effects, we estimate  to be 0.0167. This estimate of  is roughly
two and a half times larger than our post-1990 IV estimate of  for non-housing non-tradeable
goods reported in Table 4 and about twice as large as our full-sample IV estimate reported in Ta-
ble 2 (using the three-year difference instrument). We account for this difference below by taking
a weighted average of our  estimate for non-tradeables and this  estimate for housing services.



                                                        37
                             Core                                                     Core Ex Housing
   4                                                                 4
              Inflation less long-term inflation expectations                 Inflation less long-term inflation expectations
              Philips Curve Fit                                               Philips Curve Fit
   3                                                                 3


   2                                                                 2


   1                                                                 1


   0                                                                 0


  -1                                                                 -1


  -2                                                                 -2

  1980        1990             2000             2010                 1980      1990            2000             2010
                             Date                                                            Date
                  Figure 7: Aggregate Phillips Curve and Housing: Predicted vs. Fit
   Note: The figure shows the fit of the aggregate Phillips curve for core inflation (left panel) and core inflation
   excluding shelter (right panel). The fit curves use the estimates for  from the IV specifications, and convert
   them to estimates of  using the persistence of cyclical unemployment. For the case of core inflation including
   housing, we compute a weighted average of  using our estimates for non-tradeable goods excluding housing,
   and the coefficient from rents from Table 6.


   Using equation (27), we can rewrite equation (6) as


                                                  t - Et t+ = - u
                                                                ~t + t .                                                        (28)


To assess whether our cross-sectional estimates of  implies a missing disinflation during the Great
Recession and missing reinflation during the late 2010s and the later 1990s, Figure 7 plots the left-
hand side or equation (28) against the first term on the right-hand side of equation (28) using our
full-sample estimates of  and  from above. The left panel in Figure 7 does this for core inflation,
while the right panel does it for core inflation excluding shelter. For both indices, we use the 10
year ahead inflation expectation for the CPI gathered from the Survey of Professional Forecasters
as our measure of long-term inflation expectations.
   Consider first the left panel in Figure 7. The black line is core CPI inflation using the BLS's
research series less 10-year inflation expectations from the Survey of Professional Forecasters. The
gray line is the demand-induced variation in inflation predicted by our estimates. Specifically,
we multiply the unemployment gap -- U.S. unemployment rate less the CBO's estimate of the
natural rate of unemployment -- by our aggregate estimate of  (6.16) times a weighted average




                                                                38
of our IV estimate of  for non-shelter (0.0081) and our estimate of  for shelter (0.0167).19 The
figure indicates that the amplitude of inflation fluctuations over the last few business cycles has
been roughly in line with what our cross-sectional estimates of  suggest. The disinflation during
the Great Recession and reinflation during the 2010s was about 0.5 percentage point smaller than
our  would imply. The rise in inflation during the second half of the 1990s was very comparable
to what our estimate implies. The fall in inflation during the 1991 and 2001 recessions somewhat
exceed what our estimates imply. Overall, the fitted value explains inflation dynamics for the
post-1985 period fairly well, even though the slope of the Phillips curve is estimated using the
full sample. By this metric, there is very little missing disinflation or missing reinflation. These
findings echo the results of Ball and Mazumder (2019).
       A more substantial deviation arises between the actual and fitted values is for the pre-1985
period, when actual inflation lies far above the fitted value. While the conventional view is that
the Phillips curve has broken down after 1990, we are finding the opposite: a poor fit of our cross-
sectional estimate of the Phillips curve when applied to aggregate inflation dynamics over the
Volcker period. The reason for this finding is straightforward. Figure 3 shows clearly that core
inflation was above not below long-term inflation expectations during the Volcker disinflation, de-
spite the high unemployment during this period. A natural interpretation of this phenomenon is
the presence of adverse supply shocks, for example, associated with the oil price shocks associate
with the Iranian Revolution and the Iran-Iraq War.20 More generally, the deviations between the
black line and the gray line in Figure 3 indicate that supply shocks played a non-trivial role in
inflation dynamics throughout our sample period.
       It is important to recognize, however, that a disproportionate share of the systematic variation
in inflation and the fitted value predicted by our model comes from the housing services (rent)
component of the index. The right panel of Figure 7 is analogous to the left panel except that
the inflation series is core inflation excluding housing services and the  used in the construction
of the grey line does not put weight on our estimated  for housing services. We see that core
inflation excluding housing services varies much less systematically than core inflation including
housing services.
       Finally, we consider the quantitative significance of the flattening of the Phillips curve that we
estimate. Figure 8 compares the right-hand side of equation (28) using our pre-1990  estimate
  19
     We use the shelter and non-shelter expenditure weights in the core CPI. These are 0.42 and 0.58, respectively.
  20
     An alternative explanation is some form of intrinsic inflation persistence arising other sources than inflation expec-
tations.


                                                            39
              4
                                                                                       Pre-1990
                                                                                       Post-1990
              3


              2


              1


              0


             -1


             -2

              1980       1985       1990        1995       2000       2005        2010       2015
                                                        Date
                      Figure 8: How Much Flatter Can a Flat Phillips Curve Get?
   Note: In this figure we compute the variation in inflation caused by the - u~t term in the Phillips curve using
   our estimates for  and  . We report to cases, using our pre-1990 and post-1990 estimates of . We combine
   estimates of  for the non-shelter component of goods and services from Table 4 with our estimate of  for
   shelter. We translate our estimates for  into estimates of  at the aggregate level using the persistence of the
   the aggregate unemployment gap. See the text for more detail.


and using our post-1990  estimate. In both cases, we take a weighted average of our non-shelter
 and our  for shelter. Since we do not have a pre-1990  for shelter, we rescale our post-1990
 for shelter assuming the same flattening occurred for shelter as non-shelter. These calculations
yield an overall pre-1990  = 0.01867 and an overall post-1990  = 0.01039. Applying our  for
aggregate variation in the unemployment gap (6.16), we get a pre-1990  = 0.4605 and a post-1990
 = 0.2563. Using these values, Figure 8 shows that the roughly five percentage point increase
in the unemployment gap in the early 1980s causes a roughly 2.3 percentage point reduction in
inflation over time. Had the Phillips curve instead been as flat as we estimate in for the post-1990
period, this same increase in unemployment would have led to a 1.3 percentage point reduction
in inflation. The message of the figure is that a very flat Phillips curve can't get much flatter in
levels even if it flattens substantially in proportional terms.



                                                         40
6   Conclusion

This paper provides new estimates of the slope of the Phillips curve? We estimate that the Phillips
curve is very flat, and was very flat even during the Volcker disinflation of the early 1980s. Our
results indicate that shifts in expectations about the conduct of monetary policy explain much of
the drop of inflation in the early 1980s and more firmly anchored inflation expectations explain the
stability of inflation since the mid-1990s. Our estimates are consistent with the insensitivity of in-
flation to unemployment during the both the Great Recession and during the low unemployment
periods of the late 1990s and late 2010s.
    To reach these conclusions, we estimate the Phillips curve in the cross-section of U.S. states.
We use newly constructed state-level price indexes for non-tradeable goods starting in 1978. We
map from our regional estimates to the slope of the aggregate Phillips curve using a multi-region
New Keynesian model. The model clarifies that the slope of the aggregate Phillips curve is equal
to the slope of the regional Phillips curve for non-tradeable goods. We also use the model to show
that regional data "difference out" the effects of the long-run monetary regime, which otherwise
confound estimates of the slope of the Phillips curve. Guided by the model, we show that the
conventional empirical specification used to estimate regional Phillips curves must be scaled by a
factor relating to the persistence of unemployment fluctuations to yield an estimate of the slope
of the Phillips curve. Finally, we develop a new "tradeable demand spillover" instrument that
allows for flexible patterns of supply shocks at the local level.
    An important lesson from our analysis is that when it comes to managing inflation, the ele-
phant in the room is long-run inflation expectations. This view contrasts sharply with the con-
ventional view that managing inflation is about moving up and down a steep Phillips curve. A
crucial question for inflation dynamics is why long-run inflation expectations are sometimes so
firmly anchored but at other times move sharply? Beliefs about inflation in the long run are gov-
erned by beliefs about the long-run behavior of the monetary authority and ultimately the political
process that shapes the long-run behavior of the monetary authority. Since this is fundamentally
a very low-frequency phenomenon, it is not easily pinned down by half a century or so of data
from a single country. While much interesting research has sought to understand the behavior of
long-run inflation expectations, we believe it is still not sufficiently well understood and its crucial
importance for the conduct of monetary policy implies that even more research should focus on
this question.



                                                  41
A       Theory Appendix

A.1     Model Derivation

This subsection presents the complete set of equations characterizing the log-linear dynamics of
the model, and derives them.


A.1.1    Log-Linearized Equations of the Model

    · Parameters:

                                        -1
          ­ c =  1 - µ-1 1 + -1

          ­  = -1

          ­  = (1 - ) (1 -  ) /

          ­ µ = / ( - 1)
            H = H = 
          ­ H   F


    · The law of motion for tradeable demand is as follows. Define ^Ht = log Ht - log H and
        ^F t = log F t - log F . Then
        
                                              ^Ht =  
                                                     ^Ht + t


        and
                                              ^F t = -  
                                                         ^Ht .
                                                      1-

    · The home non-tradeable Phillips Curve is:

                                    N       N
                                    Ht = Et H,t +1 - u     ^N
                                                     ^Ht - p     N
                                                            Ht + Ht



    · The home tradeable Phillips Curve is:

                                    T       T
                                    Ht = Et H,t +1 - u     ^T
                                                     ^Ht - p     T
                                                            Ht + Ht



            ^T
        and p      T
              Ht  PHt /PHt - 1 is the percentage deviation of the price of home produced tradeables,

        relative to the home consumer price level, from its steady state value of 1.




                                                   42
· The home Euler equation is:


                  ^Ht - µ-1 n
                  c                   ^H,t+1 - µ-1 n
                            ^ Ht = Et c            ^ H,t+1 - c (^n
                                                                rt - Et H,t+1 )


· The Backus-Smith condition is:


                          ^Ht - µ-1 n
                          c                ^F t - µ-1 n
                                    ^ Ht = c          ^ F t + c (pF t - pHt )


· The foreign non-tradeable Phillips Curve is:

                              N        N
                              F                        ^N
                                               ^ F t - p
                                t = Et F,t+1 + n
                                                               N
                                                         F t + F t



· The foreign tradeable Phillips Curve is:

                              T        T
                              F                        ^T
                                               ^ F t - p
                                t = Et F,t+1 + n
                                                              T
                                                        F t + F t



· Definitions of inflation:
                                         Ht = pHt - pH,t-1

                                         F t = pF t - pF,t-1

                                         N
                                         Ht = pN     N
                                               Ht - pH,t-1

                                         T
                                         Ht = pT     T
                                               Ht - pH,t-1

                                         N      N      N
                                         F t = pF t - pF,t-1

                                         T      T      T
                                         F t = pF t - pF,t-1

                                      N      H T      F T
                               Ht = N Ht + T H Ht + T H F t

                                         N       H T      F T
                                F t = N  F t + T F Ht + F F F t


· The home resource constraint in the non-tradeable sector is:


                                     ^N
                                     n      ^Ht -  pN
                                       Ht = c       Ht - pHt




                                               43
· The foreign resource constraint in the non-tradeable sector is:


                                        ^N
                                        n      ^F t -  pN
                                          Ft = c        F t - pF t



· The home resource constraint in the tradeable sector is:


                  ^T      ^Ht -  pT          ^            ^F t -  pT
                  n Ht =  c       Ht - pHt + Ht + (1 -  ) c        Ht - pF t



· The foreign resource constraint in the tradeable sector is:


                  ^T      ^Ht -  pT           ^             ^F t -  pT
                  n Ft =  c       F t - pHt + F t + (1 -  ) c        F t - pF t



                                                                                         N 
· Define total labor in the non-tradeable and tradeable sectors, in the home region, as NHt
    1 N                T       1 T
   0 NHt (z )dz   and NHt     0 NHt (z )dz   respectively. Aggregate labor in the home region then
  satisfies the log-linear equations.


                                         n        ^N
                                         ^ Ht = N n        ^T
                                                    Ht + T n Ht



· Aggregate labor in the foreign region satisfies


                                         n         ^N
                                         ^ F t = N n         ^T
                                                     F t + T n Ft



· Monetary policy is
                                 n
                               r
                               ^t  =  (t -           nt - n
                                           ¯t ) + n (^    ¯ t ) + rt


· Aggregate employment satisfies


                                        n     ^ Ht + (1 -  ) n
                                        ^t =  n              ^F t


· Aggregate inflation satisfies
                                         ^t =  ^Ht + (1 -  ) ^F t




                                                 44
   · The deviation of unemployment from its steady state value is


                                                    ^t = -n
                                                    u     ^t


We simulate the model in Dynare.


A.1.2   Regional Phillips Curve Derivation

One can rewrite equation (15) around the zero inflation and balanced trade steady state as

                                                 N  (z )                       N
                                                PHt                           PH,t +k
                                N
                  k Et MHt,t+k YH,t +k (z )      N
                                                         -    M C N
                                                                  H,t+k ( z )  N
                                                                                        = 0,    (29)
                                                PH,t-1     -1                 PH,t-1
            k=0


         N
where M CH,t            N           N
             +k (z ) = SH,t+k (z )/PH,t+k is real marginal cost in the non-tradeable sector. A first

order expansion of equation (29) around the zero inflation and balanced trade steady state yields

                                          
            pN          N
             Ht (z ) - pH,t-1 = (1 -  )         ( )k Et mcN             N        N
                                                          H,t+k (z ) - pH,t+k - pH,t-1     ,    (30)
                                          k=0


where mcN
        H = -µ and µ = log (/ ( - 1)) . Rearranging equation (30) yields


                                          N                            N
                  pN          N                         N                   N
                   Ht (z ) - pH,t-1 = Et pH,t+1 (z ) - pHt + (1 -  ) mcHt + Ht .                (31)


Then note that to a first order approximation around the zero inflation and balanced trade steady
state, we have
                                  N              
                                  Ht = (1 - ) pN          N
                                               Ht (z ) - pH,t-1 .                               (32)

Substituting equations (31) and (32) yields

                                      N       N          N
                                      Ht = Et H,t +1 + mcHt



where
                                                (1 - ) (1 -  )
                                        =                      .
                                                      

By an analogous series of steps, we have

                                      T       T          T
                                      Ht = Et H,t +1 + mcHt ,                                   (33)


                                                     45
      T = pT - pT
where Ht   Ht   H,t-1 is producer price inflation in the home tradeable sector.

   Then from equation (14) we have


                            mcN           N     N
                              Ht = wHt - pHt - zHt                                        (34)

                                  = (wHt - pHt ) + pHt - pN     N
                                                          Ht - zHt                        (35)

                                  = -1 nHt + pHt - pN     N
                                                    Ht - zHt                              (36)


where in the third line we use the labor supply curve (9) and the definition of home CPI (12).
Therefore

                          N       N          N
                          Ht = Et H,t +1 + mcHt

                                    N         -1
                               = Et H,t +1 +   n        ^N
                                                 ^ Ht - p       N
                                                          Ht - zHt

                                    N        -1
                               = Et H,t +1 +  n        ^N
                                                ^ Ht - p       N
                                                         Ht - zHt

                                    N
                               = Et H,t             ^N
                                             ^ Ht - p
                                        +1 + n
                                                           N
                                                      Ht + Ht                             (37)


      N = -z N ,  = -1 . Equation (37) is the regional non-tradeable Phillips Curve.
where Ht    Ht

   Next, from equation
                                   T       T          T
                                   Ht = Et H,t +1 + mcHt


and


                            mcT           T     T
                              Ht = wHt - pHt - zHt

                                  = (wHt - pHt ) + pHt - pT     T
                                                          Ht - zHt

                                  = -1 nHt + pHt - pT     T
                                                    Ht - zHt



again using the labor supply curve (9). Therefore

                           T       T          T
                           Ht = Et H,t +1 + mcHt

                                    T         -1
                               = Et H,t +1 +   n        ^T
                                                 ^ Ht - p      T
                                                         Ht - zHt

                                    T
                               = Et H,t             ^T
                                             ^ Ht - p
                                        +1 + n
                                                          T
                                                     Ht + Ht


      T = -z T .
where Ht    Ht




                                               46
A.1.3   Aggregate Phillips Curve Derivation

                                            N =  N + (1 -  )  N satisfies
Therefore aggregate non-tradeable inflation t   Ht           Ft


                         N       N
                         t =  Et H,t             ^N
                                          ^ Ht - p
                                     +1 + n
                                                        N
                                                   Ht + Ht

                                         N
                            + (1 -  ) Et F,t              ^N
                                                  ^ F t - p
                                             +1 + n
                                                                  N
                                                            F t + F t

                                 N            N
                            = Et t      ^ t + t
                                   +1 + n          ^N
                                                -  p              ^N
                                                     Ht + (1 -  ) pFt



and aggregate tradeable inflation satisfies

                        T       T
                        t =  Et H,t             ^T
                                         ^ Ht - p
                                    +1 + n
                                                      T
                                                 Ht + Ht

                                         T
                            + (1 -  ) Et F,t              ^T
                                                  ^ F t - p
                                             +1 + n
                                                                 T
                                                           F t + F t

                                 T            T
                            = Et t      ^ t + t
                                   +1 + n          ^T
                                                -  p             ^T
                                                    Ht + (1 -  ) pFt .



Then aggregate inflation satisfies

                            N      T
                      t = N t + T  t
                                N            N
                         = N Et t      ^ t + t
                                  +1 + n          ^N
                                               -  p              ^N
                                                    Ht + (1 -  ) p Ft

                                T            T
                         + T Et t      ^ t + t
                                  +1 + n          ^T
                                               -  p              ^T
                                                    Ht + (1 -  ) p Ft

                         = Et t+1 + n
                                    ^ t + t

                         -     ^N
                               p              ^N
                                 Ht + (1 -  ) p      ^T
                                               F t + p             ^T
                                                      Ht + (1 -  ) pFt


           N +   T . Then it is easy to verify that
where t  N t   T t



                            ^N
                            p              ^N
                              Ht + (1 -  ) p      ^T
                                            F t + p             ^T
                                                   Ht + (1 -  ) pFt = 0



so aggregate inflation satisfies
                                       t = Et t+1 + n
                                                    ^ t + t .


A.1.4   Steady State Equations

At the steady state the real wage is
                                              W   -1
                                                =    .
                                              P   



                                                 47
Note that, although the price level is not stationary and does not have a well defined value at the
steady state, the real wage is stationary, so we omit time subscripts on the real wage.
   Then
                                               N
                                              CH = N CH

                                             TH     H
                                            CH  = T H CH

                                             TF     F
                                            CH  = T H CH

and
                                           N    N
                                          NH = CH = N C

                                       T    TH            TH
                                      NH = CH  + (1 -  ) CF



                                  T     H               H
                               = NH = T H CH + (1 -  )T F CF

                                     T       H                 1- H
                                  = NH = T C H +                 
                                                                 F

                                       T                       1-
                                    = NH = T C  +                 
                                                                
                                               T
                                            = NH = T C,

using CF = CH = C .


A.1.5   Deriving the Other Log-Linearized Equations

From now on, we set supply shocks to zero: the only shock is to tradeable demand for home
production. The dll [·] operator denotes taking the log deviation from the steady state.
   The home Euler equation is

                                      uc (CH,t+1 , NH,t+1 ) PHt    1
                               Et                                = n.
                                          uc (CHt , NHt ) PH,t+1  Rt

Then log-linearising yields

                                                                           PHt              n
           Et dll [uc (CH,t+1 , NH,t+1 )] - dll [uc (CHt , NHt )] + dll            = -dll [Rt ]
                                                                          PH,t+1




                                                    48
                   ucc C          ucn N           ucc C       ucn N                   n
        = Et             ^H,t+1 +
                         c              ^ H,t+1 -
                                        n               c
                                                        ^Ht +       ^ Ht - H,t+1 = -r
                                                                    n               ^t
                    uc             uc              uc          uc

                ucc C       ucn N           ucc C          ucn N             n
          =           ^Ht +
                      c           ^ Ht = Et
                                  n               c
                                                  ^H,t+1 +       ^ H,t+1 + r
                                                                 n         ^t  - Et H,t+1
                 uc          uc              uc             uc

                       ucn N                    ucn N            uc
            = c
              ^Ht +          ^ Ht = Et c
                             n         ^H,t+1 +       ^ H,t+1 +
                                                      n               rn - Et H,t+1 )
                                                                     (^
                       ucc C                    ucc C           ucc C t

                         ucn                    ucn            uc
             = c
               ^Ht +         ^ Ht = Et c
                             n         ^H,t+1 +     ^ H,t+1 +
                                                    n               rn - Et H,t+1 ) .
                                                                   (^
                         ucc                    ucc           ucc C t

Next, we have

                                                            1+     -1    - -1 -1
                       ucc C     - -1 C         C-        N
                                                          1+-1
                             =                                      - -1
                        uc                                1+-1
                                            C - N
                                                1+-1
                                                                    -1       -1
                                       -1               N 1+
                               = -          C       C -
                                                        1 + -1
                                                                             -1      -1
                                       -1           -1        N 1+
                               = -              C         C -
                                                              1 + -1
                                                                        -1                -1 -1
                               = - -1 1 - C -1 N 1+                          1 + -1
                                                              -1                                  -1
                                       -1                 C              -1              -1 -1
                               = -              1-                 N              1+
                                                          N
                                                              -1                             -1
                                       -1                 C            -1          -1 -1
                               = -              1-                 µ         1+
                                                          N
                                                                             -1 -1
                               = - -1 1 - µ-1 1 + -1                                 ,


where we use the steady state condition from labor supply that

                                                -1                           
                                        N                = µ-1     µ=           .
                                                                             -1

Then

                                                     -1    - -1 -1
                          -1        N 1+                                                       -1
                ucn = -         C -                                     ×-           1 + -1 N 
                                    1 + -1                                    1+ - 1

                                  -1
                   = -ucc N 

                   = -ucc µ-1 .



                                                              49
Therefore

                                                                                             -1
                    ucc µ-1                    ucc µ-1                               ucc C          n
            ^Ht -
            c                         ^H,t+1 -
                            ^ Ht = Et c
                            n                          ^ H,t+1 +
                                                       n                                          (^
                                                                                                   rt - Et H,t+1 )
                      ucc                        ucc                                  uc

                                                                                                   -1
      ^Ht - µ-1 n
    = c                                ^ H,t+1 -  1 - µ-1 1 + -1
                          ^H,t+1 - µ-1 n
                ^ Ht = Et c                                                                             (^n
                                                                                                         rt - Et H,t+1 )

                      ^Ht - µ-1 n
                    = c                   ^H,t+1 - µ-1 n
                                ^ Ht = Et c            ^ H,t+1 - c (^n
                                                                    rt - Et H,t+1 )

                                    -1
where c =  1 - µ-1 1 + -1                   . Solving forward the Euler equation yields

                                                    
                     ^Ht - µ-1 n
                     c         ^ Ht = -c Et                r
                                                           ^tn
                                                              +j - Et H,t+1+j
                                                   j =0
                                                                            
                                                            n
                                    = -c Et               r
                                                          ^t +j   + c Et           H,t+1+j
                                                   j =0                     j =0
                                                                             
                                                            n
                                    = -c Et               r
                                                          ^t +j + c Et             (pH,t+1+j - pH,t+j )
                                                   j =0                     j =0
                                                    
                                                            n
                                    = -c Et               r
                                                          ^t +j - c pHt .
                                                   j =0


Similarly, for foreign households we have

                                                                     
                                            -1                               n
                                 ^F t - µ
                                 c               ^ F t = -c Et
                                                 n                         r
                                                                           ^t +j - c pF t
                                                                    j =0


                             ^Ht - µ-1 n
                           = c                        ^F t - µ-1 n
                                       ^ Ht + c pHt = c          ^ F t + c pF t

                            ^Ht - µ-1 n
                          = c                ^F t - µ-1 n
                                      ^ Ht = c          ^ F t + c (pF t - pHt ) ,

which is the Backus-Smith condition.
   Next, we have the consumer demand functions and prices


                                         ^N
                                         c     ^Ht -  pN
                                          Ht = c       Ht - pHt



                                    ^T    ^    ^Ht -  pT     T
                                    cHt = Ht + c       Ht - pHt


                                     ^T     ^     ^Ht -  pT      T
                                     cF t = F t + c       F t - pHt




                                                             50
and
                                    ^N
                                    c     ^F t -  pN
                                     Ft = c        F t - pF t


                                    ^T
                                    c  H
                                          ^F t -  pT
                                     Ft = c        Ht - pF t


                                   ^T
                                   c  F
                                         ^F t -  pT
                                    Ft = c        F t - pF t .


Note that
                                          Ht + F t = 1

                                     = ^Ht  H + ^F t  F = 0
                                           H         H
                                                       H
                                       = ^F t = - H ^
                                                  F Ht
                                                  H

                                      = ^F t = -   ^Ht .
                                                1-

Also
                                     N      H T      F T
                              Ht = N Ht + T H Ht + T H F t

and similarly
                                      N       H T      F T
                              F t = N F t + T F Ht + T H F t .


Note that without supply shocks
                                            N     N
                                           YHt = NHt

                                            T     T
                                           YHt = NHt

                                            N      N
                                           YF t = NF t

                                            T      T
                                           YF t = NF t .


Then we have
                                              N     T
                                       NHt = NHt + NHt ,

that is, total labor supplied by households in the home region equals total labor demanded by
firms (the  term reflects that NHt is household labor supply). So,




                                                51
                                        NN      N       NT
                             n
                             ^ Ht =           ^
                                              n Ht +          ^T
                                                              n
                                      NN + NT        N N + N T Ht
                                     ^N
                                 = N n        ^T
                                       Ht + T n Ht



and
                                       n         ^N
                                       ^ F t = N n         ^T
                                                   F t + T n F t.


Aggregate employment is
                                      Nt = NHt + (1 -  ) NF t


                                     N                 (1 -  ) N
                       = n
                         ^t =                  n
                                               ^ Ht +               n
                                                                    ^F t
                                 N + (1 -  ) N        N + (1 -  ) N
                                ^ Ht + (1 -  ) n
                              = n              ^F t.


where N is steady state household labor supply, equal across the two regions at the symmetric
steady state. We have market clearing conditions in the non-tradeable sector

                                             N     N
                                            NHt = CHt


                                              ^N
                                              n      ^N
                                                Ht = cHt


                                   ^N
                                 = n             ^N
                                          ^Ht -  p
                                     Ht = c        Ht - p
                                                        ^Ht

and
                                              N      N
                                             NF t = CF t


                                              ^N
                                            = n      ^N
                                                Ft = cFt


                                   ^N
                                 = n      ^F t -  pN
                                     Ft = c        F t - pF t


and in the tradeable sector we have

                    T     TH            TH
                   NHt = CHt + (1 -  ) CF t
                                           T    -                           T     -
                            H             PHt                   H          PF t
                        = T Ht CHt                  + (1 -  ) T F t CF t
                                          PHt                              PF t



                                                  52
and so
                ^T      ^Ht -  pT          ^            ^F t -  pT
                n Ht =  c       Ht - pHt + Ht + (1 -  ) c        Ht - pF t          .

Similarly
                ^T      ^Ht -  pT           ^             ^F t -  pT
                n Ft =  c       F t - pHt + F t + (1 -  ) c        F t - pF t      .

We also have


             ^ Ht = log NHt - log NH  (NHt - 1) - (NH - 1) = -(uHt - uH ) = -u
             n                                                               ^Ht .


A.2      The Importance of Non-Tradeable Inflation

Here, we show that the slope of the regional Phillips Curve for overall regional consumer price
inflation is smaller than the slope of the aggregate Phillips Curve, by a factor equal to the expen-
diture share on non-tradeable goods. For simplicity, we present this derivation with all supply
shocks t set to zero.
   Consider the Phillips curves for home non-tradeables, home tradeables, and foreign trade-
ables:
                                 N       N
                                 Ht = Et H,t +1 - u     ^N
                                                  ^Ht - p Ht

                                 T       T
                                 Ht = Et H,t +1 - u     ^T
                                                  ^Ht - p Ht

                                 T        T
                                 F t = Et F,t+1 - u       ^T
                                                  ^ F t - pF t.


Substituting these three equations into the definition for home consumer price inflation

                                      N      H T      F T
                               Ht = N Ht + T H Ht + T H F t


yields

                            H
      Ht = Et H,t+1 - N + T H u        ^N
                              ^Ht -  N p        H T       F
                                                  ^Ht - T H
                                         Ht + T H p
                                                                     F T
                                                            ^F t - T H
                                                            u          p
                                                                       ^F t .


An analogous derivation yields the following Phillips curve for foreign consumer prices

                             F
      F t = Et F,t+1 - N + T F u          ^N
                               ^ F t -  N p         F T        H
                                                      ^F t - T F
                                            F t + T F p
                                                                         H T
                                                                 ^Ht - T F
                                                                 u         p
                                                                           ^Ht .


                                                                                           H =
Subtracting the second of these last two equations from the first (and using the fact that H

                                                53
H =  ) yields
F


           Ht - F t =  (Et H,t+1 - Et F,t+1 ) - N  (^                  ^N
                                                          ^ F t ) - N  p
                                                    uHt - u                   ^N
                                                                         Ht - p Ft .             (38)


The coefficient in a regional panel regression corresponds to the coefficient in a differenced equa-
tion like this one. Notice that the coefficient on unemployment is N  rather than . In other
words, the coefficient differs from the coefficient in the aggregate Phillips curve by the factor N .


A.3   The Role of GHH Preferences

The key feature of GHH preferences that we exploit is that, with GHH preferences, there are
no wealth effects on labor supply either at the aggregate or the regional level. In contrast, with
separable preferences, wealth effects on labor supply are an important determinant of marginal
cost and therefore influence the Phillips curve.
   To see this more clearly, consider the non-tradeable regional Phillips curve under separable
preferences:
                        N
                        Ht      N
                           = Et H,t      ^Ht +  -1 c
                                    +1 - u               ^N
                                                   ^Ht - p      N
                                                           Ht + Ht ,                             (39)

and the aggregate Phillips Curve under separable preferences:


                                              ^t +  -1 c
                                 t = Et t+1 - u        ^t + t .                                  (40)


Relative to the GHH case, both the non-tradeable regional Phillips curve and aggregate Phillips
curve include a consumption term. These terms appear because of wealth effects on labor sup-
ply affect marginal cost in this model. These wealth effects complicate the comparison between
the regional and aggregate Phillips curve because the relationship between employment and con-
sumption is different at the aggregate level than at the regional level. At the aggregate level,
c    ^ t + zt . This implies that we can replace the c
^t = n                                               ^t term with n
                                                                  ^ t + zt in equation (40) and get
a consolidated coefficient of  +  -1 on unemployment. At the regional level, however, this is
not possible because risk-sharing across regions implies that c     ^ Ht + zHt . This difference
                                                              ^Ht = n
implies that the slope of the non-tradeable regional Phillips curve will differ from the slope of the
aggregate Phillips curve when preferences are separable.




                                                   54
A.4   Time Aggregation

Here, we derive equation (25). In particular, we show how time aggregation results in the factor of
4 showing up in the denominator of that equation. Recall that our empirical specification involves
cumulative inflation over four quarters, while our model is written in terms of quarterly inflation.
   Consider the non-tradeable regional Phillips Curve--equation (18) from the main text:

                                       
                         N
                         Ht = -Et            j u        ^N
                                               ~H,t+j + pH,t+j + Et t+ ,                        (41)
                                     j =0


                                                  N equal to zero. We start by approximating
where for simplicity we have set the supply shock Ht
^N
p Ht by a driftless AR(1) with autoregressive coefficient p
                                                          ^N . This yields
                                                                   H


                                       
                        N                                       
                        Ht = -Et            j u
                                              ~H,t+j -              ^N
                                                                    p Ht + Et t+
                                                            1 - p^N
                                     j =0                           H



or equivalently

                                             
                                                                     
                    pN     N
                     Ht - pH,t-1 = -Et              j u
                                                      ~H,t+j -           ^N
                                                                         p Ht + Et t+ .
                                                                 1 - p^N
                                             j =0                       H



We can write this equation out for four consecutive periods

                                       
                                                                
                  pN     N
                   Ht - pH,t-1 = -Et         j u
                                               ~H,t+j -             ^N
                                                                    pHt + Et t+
                                                            1 - p^N
                                       j =0
                                           
                                                                       
             pN        N
              H,t-1 - pH,t-2 = -Et-1               j u
                                                     ~H,t+j -1 -           ^N
                                                                           p H,t-1 + Et-1 t+
                                                                   1 - p^N
                                            j =0
                                             
                                                                       
             pN        N
              H,t-2 - pH,t-3 = -Et-2               j u
                                                     ~H,t+j -2 -           ^N
                                                                           p H,t-2 + Et-2 t+
                                                                   1 - p^N
                                            j =0
                                             
                                                                       
             pN        N
              H,t-3 - pH,t-4 = -Et-3               j u
                                                     ~H,t+j -3 -           ^N
                                                                           p H,t-3 + Et-3 t+
                                                                   1 - p^N
                                            j =0




                                                       55
Summing the preceding four equations together yields

                                                                          
                 pN
                  Ht   -   pN
                            H,t-4   = - (Et            u
                                                       ~H,t+j + Et-1
                                                        j
                                                                              j u
                                                                                ~H,t+j -1
                                               j =0                      j =0
                                                                             
                                      + Et-2          j u
                                                        ~H,t+j -2 + Et-3          j u
                                                                                    ~H,t+j -3 )
                                               j =0                        j =0
                                            
                                      -         ^N
                                                p      ^N
                                                  Ht - p         ^N
                                                         H,t-1 - p         ^N
                                                                   H,t-2 - p H,t-3
                                        1 - p^N


                                      + Et t+ + Et-1 t+ + Et-2 t+ + Et-3 t+ .


Taking expectations at time t - 4 then yields

                                                                                 
              Et-4 pN     N
                    Ht - pH,t-4 = - (Et-4                     j u
                                                                ~H,t+j + Et-4          j u
                                                                                         ~H,t+j -1
                                                  j =0                          j =0
                                                                                 
                                                      j
                                        + Et-4               u
                                                             ~H,t+j -2 + Et-4          j u
                                                                                         ~H,t+j -3 )
                                                 j =0                           j =0
                                                
                                        -                ^N
                                                    Et-4 p      ^N
                                                           Ht - p        ^N
                                                                 H,t-1 - p        ^N
                                                                          H,t-2 - p H,t-3
                                            1 - p^N


                                        + 4Et-4 t+ .


Adding and subtracting pN
                        Ht yields

                                                                                
                   pN
                    Ht   -   pN
                              H,t-4   = - (Et-4               u
                                                              ~H,t+j + Et-4
                                                               j
                                                                                       j u
                                                                                         ~H,t+j -1
                                                  j =0                          j =0
                                                                                 
                                                      j
                                       + Et-4            u
                                                         ~H,t+j -2 + Et-4              j u
                                                                                         ~H,t+j -3 )
                                                 j =0                           j =0
                                             
                                       -                     4    3
                                                             ^N + p
                                                                  ^N + p
                                                             p
                                                                       2
                                                                       ^N + p  ^N
                                                                            ^N pH,t-4
                                         1 - p^N

                                       + 4Et-4 t+ - Et-4 pN     N
                                                          Ht - pHt .                                   (42)


Comparing equation (42) to equation (23), both equations have cumulative inflation over four
quarters on the left hand side. We can see that:

                                                        ^N
  1. The third line of equation (42) corresponds to the p H,t-4 term in equation (23).


  2. The first term in the fourth line of equation (42) corresponds to the time fixed effect
     in equation (23)


                                                              56
   3. The second term in the fourth line of equation (42) is an expectational error,
        uncorrelated with uH,t-4 by the law of iterated expectations.

This implies that  in equation (23) is given by

                                                         
           = Cov(Et-4            j u
                                   ~H,t+j + Et-4                j u
                                                                  ~H,t+j -1
                          j =0                           j =0
                                                                                             
                                                                 j
                                            + Et-4               u
                                                                 ~H,t+j -2 + Et-4                j u
                                                                                                   ~H,t+j -3 , u
                                                                                                               ~H,t-4 ),   (43)
                                                         j =0                             j =0


where the covariance is conditional on the variables in the third and fourth lines of equation (42).
To simplify this expression, we make the following simplifying assumption:

                                                                       
                                                    j
                                    Et-4            u
                                                    ~H,t+j =                 j u
                                                                               ~H,t+j -4 .
                                            j =0                      j =0


                                                j~
This approximation is accurate if          j =0  u H,t+j        has similar dynamics to a driftless random walk.
We present empirical evidence supporting this in section A.4.1 below. With this approximation,
equation (43) simplifies to
                                                                                          
                                                        
                                    = 4Cov                     j u
                                                                 ~H,t+j -4 , u
                                                                             ~H,t-4  .
                                                        j =0


Finally, we make the approximation that

                                                                      T
                                            j u
                                              ~H,t+j -4 =                   j u
                                                                              ~H,t+j -4
                                     j =0                            j =0


for a sufficiently large T . In this case, we have that

                                                                 
                                                          =        ,
                                                                 4

                                                               T    j~
since  is the coefficient from a regression of                 j =0  u H,t+j -4     on u
                                                                                       ~H,t-4 .


A.4.1    Studying the Dynamics of the Present Value of Unemployment

The relationship between ,  , and  derived above made the simplifying assumption that
       j~
  j =0  u H,t+j   follows a driftless random walk. We can assess the accuracy of this assumption

                                                                57
             Table A.1: Is the Present Value of State Unemployment a Random Walk?
                                               No Fixed    No Time
                                                                       Baseline
                                                 Effects    Effects
                                                           (1)                 (2)                (3)
                Lagged Present Value                      0.997               0.996              0.994
                                                         (0.003)             (0.005)            (0.003)
                State Effects
                Time Effects
           Note: We regress T       j
                               j =0  u~i,t+j on its lag, where u
                                                               ~i,t is unemployment in state i in quarter t.
           The sample period is 1978-2018. We set T = 20. Unemployment is in percentage points. The
           regression is unweighted. Standard errors are in parentheses. These are two-way clustered
           by date and state. The number of observations is 7378.


by running the following regression

                                 T                                T
                                       j u
                                         ~i,t+j = i + t +               j u
                                                                          ~i,t+j -1 +   i,t .
                                j =0                             j =0


As in the main text, we truncate the infinite sum at T = 20. Table A.1 presents results for this
regression. The coefficient on the first lag is very close to 1 in all specification. This is the case,
despite the Nickell (1981) downward bias for autoregressive coefficients in finite samples.


A.4.2   Procedure for Obtaining Correct Standard Errors for 

Next, we outline a simple procedure to obtain correct the standard errors for , using two stage
least squares. The reduced form equation is equation (23) from the main text:


                                       it = i + t - ui,t-4 - pN
                                                              i,t-4 + it .



The first stage equation is equation (24) from the main text:

                            T
                                  j ui,t+j -4 = ui,t-4 + pN
                                                          i,t-4 + i + t + i,t-4 .
                          j =0




                                                          58
The second stage equation, adapted from equation (42), is

                                                 T                         T
                         it = - (Et-4                   j ui,t+j + Et-4           j ui,t+j -1
                                                j =0                      j =0
                                            T                              T
                              + Et-4              j ui,t+j -2 + Et-4              j ui,t+j -3 )
                                          j =0                            j =0

                                ^N
                              - p H,t-4 + i + t + it
                                      T
                            = - 4            j ui,t+j -4 -  p
                                                            ^NH,t-4 + i + t + it ,
                                     j =0


where it is cumulative inflation over four quarters. So, -4 can be readily estimated by two
stage least squares, yielding the correct standard errors. In practice, to obtain a value of , one can
divide the outcome variable by -4.



B     Data Appendix

B.1   Sensitivity of the Phillips Curve Slope using Aggregate Data

Table B.1 presents estimates of the slope of the Phillips curve using aggregate data for several
different measures of inflation. We present estimates separately for the period 1978-1990 and
1991-2018. In each case, we run the regression


                                  t - Et t+ =  +  u
                                                  ~t-4 + t ,                                      (44)


with 10-year ahead inflation expectations from the Survey of Professional Forecasters serving as
a proxy for Et t+ , and the 4 quarter moving average of the CBO unemployment gap serving
as a proxy for u
               ~t . We present results for six measures of inflation: the Core CPI, the Median CPI
produced by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, the CPI for shelter, the PCE, the Core CPI
less shelter, and the Core CPI research series. These regressions are run on quarterly data.
    The results in B.1 show that the slope of the Phillips curve estimated using aggregate data is
highly sensitive to seemingly minor changes in the inflation measure used. This is particularly the
case in the pre-1990 sample where the slope estimates vary by roughly a factor of 10 from 0.182 to
1.624. The estimates for the post-1990 sample also vary a great deal, but somewhat less than the
pre-1990 estimates.


                                                            59
                         Table B.1: Slope of the Aggregate Phillips Curve
                                                      Pre-1990     Post-1990
                                                        (1)              (2)
                     Core CPI                          0.796            0.111
                                                      (0.120)          (0.027)
                     Median CPI                        0.386            0.250
                                                      (0.136)          (0.032)
                     Shelter CPI                       1.624            0.396
                                                      (0.350)          (0.050)
                     PCE                               0.416            0.034
                                                      (0.078)          (0.021)
                     Core less Shelter CPI             0.221            -0.084
                                                      (0.103)          (0.028)
                     Core CPI RS                       0.182            0.150
                                                      (0.108)          (0.028)



   Table B.1 also illustrates that inference about the degree to which the Phillips curve flattens
based on aggregate data is highly sensitive to the inflation measure used. For some measures, the
Phillips curve flattens a great deal (e.g., Core CPI and CPI for shelter). But for others it does not
flatten much at all (e.g., median CPI and Core CPI research series).
   There has been extensive discussion in the literature behind this. Stock and Watson (2019)
discuss how certain sub-indices -- such as shelter -- are more cyclical than others. Ball and
Mazumder (2019) argue that the Median CPI has advantages arising from the elimination of large
fluctuations in certain components of the CPI. The difference between CPI inflation and PCE in-
flation arises to a significant degree from differences in the treatment of housing services in the
early 1980s and the fact that the BLS does not revise the CPI, while the PCE is revised.


B.2   CPI Inflation Using Pre- and Post-1983 Housing Methodology

The BLS made a significant change to the methods used to calculate inflation for owner-occupied
housing in 1983. This was important given the sizable weight of owner-occupied housing in the
CPI (22.8%). Before 1983, the component of the CPI having to do with owner-occupied housing
was constructed from a weighted average of changes in house prices and mortgage costs (i.e.,
interest rates). More specifically, it was made up of home purchases (9.9 percentage points); mort-



                                                 60
                                                                         Pre-1983 Methods
                                                                         Post-1983 Methods
            15



            10



              5



              0



             -5
                  1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
                                                       Date
            Figure B.1: CPI Inflation Using Pre- and Post-1983 Housing Methodology
   Note: This figure plots overall CPI inflation in the US (gray line) and our attempt at estimating what CPI
   inflation would have been had the BLS not changed the methodology for calculating the shelter component
   in 1983 (black line). We present these results for the sample period 1972 to 2018. The difference between
   the gray and the black line before 1983 gives a sense for how accurately we can replicate the BLS's pre-1983
   methodology.


gage interest cost (6.5 percentage points), other financing, taxes and insurance (2.7 percentage
points); and maintenance and repairs (3.7 percentage points). For further discussion, see Bureau
of Labor Statistics (1982) and Poole, Ptacek, and Verbrugge (2005).
   In 1983, the BLS shifted to using changes in rents as a proxy for inflation of owner occupied
housing. Figure B.1 plots CPI inflation from 1972 to 2018 (gray line). It also plots our attempt
at estimating what CPI inflation would have been had the BLS not changed the methodology for
calculating the shelter component in 1983 (black line). Evidently, the pre-1983 methodology yields
a much more variable (and cyclical) measure of inflation over the last few decades. The difference
between the gray line and the black line in Figure B.1 prior to 1983 gives a sense for how accurately
we can replicate the BLS's pre-1983 methodology.




                                                       61
B.3     Price Index Construction

Here we discuss several details of our procedure for constructing state-level price indexes.


B.3.1    Sample Restrictions

We restrict the sample we use in several ways. First, we exclude from our sample price relatives
involving a product replacement when the size of the new product is unobserved. This reduces
sampling error in our price indexes. Second, we Winsorize price relatives that are larger than 10
or smaller than 0.1. Third, we drop quote lines that include collected prices that are smaller than
a tenth of a cent. A quote line includes all versions of a particular "quote-outlet" pair. Recall that
a "quote-outlet" pair represents a specific product in a specific location, such as a 2L bottle of Diet
Coke from the Westside Market at 110th Street in New York City.
   Fourth, we drop observations associated with clearance sales at the end of a quote line. Intu-
itively, if products systematically go on sale, and then disappear from the data, this can lead to
a sharply declining price index (e.g., for women's dresses) unless the product that exits is linked
with a new comparable product (next season's similar women's dress). To be precise, we drop ob-
servations when they are flagged as on temporary sale and are not observed with a regular price
afterwards. In contrast, if we observe a price for the same quote line at a later point following the
sale, we will include the sale observations even if there has been a version change. In the case of a
version change, we compute the effective price change by adjusting for quality as in equation (45)
below.


B.3.2    Quality Adjustments

When a BLS price collector identifies a version change of a particular product (e.g., a new version
of the same rain coat), they determine whether the substitution is "comparable." If they deem it
to be comparable, they assess whether a quality adjustment is necessary. Specifically, the price
collector uses the code CP for a comparable substitution, the code QC for a substitution that is
considered comparable after quality adjustment, and SR for non-comparable substitutions. For
observations that are considered QC, the analyst will record a quality adjustment factor. This
information is then used in the construction of the price relative for that product.
   We follow an analogous procedure. We include price relatives at the time of version changes
in our index construction only if the version change is comparable (i.e., CP or QC). In the case of


                                                  62
QC substitutions, we make use of the reported quality adjustment using the formula

                                                                         1/
                                                       Pit
                                      rit =                                   ,                   (45)
                                              Pi,t-   + QAi,t-,t

where QAi,t-,t is the quality adjustment entered for the substitution.


B.3.3    Aggregation

Armed with these price relatives, we first aggregate to the product category level (ELI) within
each state using a simple geometric average


                                              Rj,x,t =          ri,t ,
                                                         ij,x


where j is an ELI and x is a state.
   Finally, we aggregate the ELI price relatives Rj,x,t within sectors in each state using a weighted
geometric average
                                Rs,x,t =         (Rj,x,t )Wj /       ms,x   Wm
                                                                                  ,

where s denotes sector, and Wj is the expenditure weight of each ELI. These sectors can be defined
broadly as all of non-tradeables or even the entire non-shelter CPI. We use expenditure weights
that are constant across states and time. Specifically, we use the CPI expenditure weights for 1998.


B.4     Definition of Non-Tradeables Inflation

Below we list the ELIs that we categorize as non-tradeables. We define non-tradeables in a rela-
tively conservative manner since including tradeable goods in our definition of what constitutes a
non-tradeable good can lead to attenuation in the slope of the Phillips curve (if tradeable goods are
price nationally). Our definition of non-tradeables is similar to the BLS service aggregation. It dif-
fers in two ways. First, we include ELIs in the Food Away from Home category as non-tradeables.
Second we exclude several ELIs in Transportation Services, Utilities, and Truck Rentals. An impor-
tant example is airline tickets. These have highly variable prices and are collected using a different
procedure than other services in the CPI Research Database. See Nakamura and Steinsson (2008)
for more discussion of the behavior of transportation services prices.

   · education services


                                                      63
    ­ college tuition and fixed fees

    ­ elementary and high school tuition and fixed fees

    ­ day care and nursery school

    ­ technical and business school tuition and fixed fees

· telephone services

    ­ main station charges

    ­ interstate telephone services

· food away from home

    ­ lunch

    ­ dinner

    ­ candy, gum, etc.

    ­ breakfast or brunch

    ­ full service meals and snacks

    ­ limited service meals and snacks

    ­ food at employee sites and schools

    ­ food from vending machines and mobile vendors

    ­ board, catered events, and other food away from home

    ­ beer, ale, and other alcoholic malt beverages away from home

· other personal services

    ­ beauty parlor services for females

    ­ legal fees

    ­ funeral expenses

    ­ household laundry and dry cleaning, excluding coin-operated

    ­ shoe repair and other shoe services

    ­ clothing rental

    ­ replacement of setting for women's rings

                                            64
     ­ safe deposit box rental

     ­ ax return preparation and other accounting fees

     ­ care of invalids, elderly and convalescents in the home

· housing services

     ­ housing at school, excluding board

     ­ lodging while out of town

     ­ tenants' insurance

     ­ electricity

     ­ utility natural gas service

     ­ residential water and sewer service

     ­ garbage/trash collection

     ­ gardening or lawn care services

     ­ moving, storage, freight express

     ­ repair of household appliance

     ­ reupholstery of furniture

     ­ inside painting and/or papering

· medical services

     ­ general medical practice

     ­ dentures, bridges, crowns, implants

     ­ optometrists/opticians

     ­ services by other medical professionals

     ­ hospital room inpatient

     ­ nursing and convalescent home care

· recreational services

     ­ community antenna or cable tv

     ­ prerecorded - video tapes and discs

                                             65
    ­ other entertainment services

    ­ pet services

    ­ veterinarian services

    ­ photographer's fees

    ­ film processing

    ­ fees for participant sports

    ­ admission to movies, theaters, and concerts

    ­ admission to sporting events

    ­ fees for lessons or instructions

· transportation services

    ­ used cars

    ­ truck rental

    ­ other vehicle rental

    ­ painting entire automobile

    ­ vehicle inspection

    ­ automotive brake work

    ­ automobile insurance

    ­ drivers license

    ­ local automobile registration

    ­ vehicle tolls

    ­ automobile service clubs

    ­ intercity bus fare

    ­ intercity train fare

    ­ passenger ship fares

    ­ intracity mass transit

    ­ taxi fare



                                          66
References
A DAM , K. AND M. PADULA (2011): "Inflation Dynamics and Subjective Expectations in the United
  States," Economic Inquiry, 49, 13­25.
B ABB , N. AND A. K. D ETMEISTER (2017): "Nonlinearities in the Phillips Curve for the United
  States: Evidence Using Metropolitan Data," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-070.
  Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
B ALL , L. AND S. M AZUMDER (2011): "Inflation Dynamics and the Great Recession," Brookings
  Papers on Economic Activity, 2011, 337­381.
------ (2019): "A Phillips Curve with Anchored Expectations and Short-Term Unemployment,"
  Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 51, 111­137.
B ARNICHON , R. AND G. M ESTERS (2019): "Identifying Modern Macro Equations with Old
  Shocks," Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
B ARTIK , T. J. (1991): "Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies?" WE
  Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
B ERAJA , M., E. H URST, AND J. O SPINA (2019): "The Aggregate Implications of Regional Business
   Cycles," Econometrica, 87, 1789­1833.
B ERNANKE , B. S. (2007): "Inflation Expectations and Inflation Forecasting," speech given at the
   NBER Summer Institute, July 2007.
B IANCHI , F. AND C. I LUT (2017): "Monetary/Fiscal Policy Mix and Agents' Beliefs," Review of
   Economic Dynamics, 26, 113­139.
B LANCHARD , O. (2016): "The Phillips Curve: Back to the '60s?" American Economic Review: Papers
   and Proceedings, 106, 31­34.
B UREAU OF L ABOR S TATISTICS (1982): BLS Handbook of Methods, no. v. 1-2 in BLS Handbook of
  Methods, U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.
C ALVO , G. A. (1983): "Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework," Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 12, 383­398.
C HODOROW-R EICH , G. AND J. W IELAND (2019): "Secular Labor Reallocation and Business Cy-
  cles," Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
C HRISTIANO , L., M. E ICHENBAUM , AND M. T RABANDT (2015): "Understanding the Great Reces-
  sion," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7, 110­167.
C OGLEY, T. AND A. M. S BORDONE (2008): "Trend inflation, Indexation, and Inflation Persistence
  in the New Keynesian Phillips curve," American Economic Review, 98, 2101­26.
C OIBION , O. AND Y. G ORODNICHENKO (2012): "What Can Survey Forecasts Tell Us about Infor-
  mation Rigidities?" Journal of Political Economy, 120, 116­159.
------ (2015a): "Information Rigidity and the Expectations Formation Process: A Simple Frame-
  work and New Facts," American Economic Review, 105, 2644­78.
------ (2015b): "Is the Phillips Curve Alive and Well After All? Inflation Expectations and the
  Missing Disinflation," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7, 197­232.


                                               67
C OIBION , O., Y. G ORODNICHENKO , AND R. K AMDAR (2018): "The Formation of Expectations,
  Inflation, and the Phillips curve," Journal of Economic Literature, 56, 1447­91.
D EL N EGRO , M. (1998): "Aggregate Risk Sharing Across US States and Across European Coun-
  tries," Working Paper, Yale University.
D EL N EGRO , M., M. P. G IANNONI , AND F. S CHORFHEIDE (2015): "Inflation in the Great Recession
  and New Keynesian Models," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7, 168­196.
D EL N EGRO , M., M. L ENZA , G. E. P RIMICERI , AND A. TAMBALOTTI (2020): "What's Up With
  the Phillips Curve," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, forthcoming.
D UPRAZ , S., E. N AKAMURA , AND J. S TEINSSON (2020): "A Plucking Model of the Business Cy-
  cle," Working Paper, University of California, Berkeley.
E RCEG , C. J. AND A. T. L EVIN (2003): "Imperfect Credibility and Inflation Persistence," Journal of
   Monetary Economics, 50, 915­944.
F ITZGERALD , T. J. AND J. P. N ICOLINI (2014): "Is There a Stable Relationship between Unemploy-
   ment and Future Inflation? Evidence from US Cities," Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of
   Minneapolis.
F RIEDMAN , M. (1968): "The Role of Monetary Policy," American Economic Review, 58, 1­17.
F UHRER , J. C.   AND   G. M OORE (1995): "Inflation Persistence," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110,
   127­159.
G ALI , J. (2008): Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle, Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univer-
  sity Press.
G ALI , J. AND M. G ERTLER (1999): "Inflation Dynamics: A Structural Econometrics Analysis,"
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 44, 195­222.
G EEROLF, F. (2019): "The Phillips Curve: A Relation between Real Exchange Rate Growth and
  Unemployment," Working Paper, UCLS.
G ILCHRIST, S., R. S CHOENLE , J. S IM , AND E. Z AKRAJ S EK (2017): "Inflation dynamics during the
   financial crisis," American Economic Review, 107, 785­823.
G OODFRIEND , M. AND R. G. K ING (2005): "The Incredible Volcker Disinflation," Journal of Mone-
  tary Economics, 52, 981­1015.
G ORDON , R. (1982): "Inflation, Flexible Exchange Rates, and the Natural Rate of Unemployment,"
  in Workers, Jobs, and Inflation, ed. by M. N. Baily, Washington, DC: Brookings Institute, 89­158.
G REENWOOD , J., Z. H ERCOWITZ , AND G. W. H UFFMAN (1988): "Investment, Capacity Utiliza-
  tion, and the Real Business Cycle," American Economic Review, 78, 402­417.
H OOPER , P., F. S. M ISHKIN , AND A. S UFI (2019): "Prospects for Inflation in a High Pressure
  Economy: Is the Phillips Curve Dead or is It Just Hibernating?" NBER Working Paper No.
  25792.
I RELAND , P. N. (2007): "Changes in the Federal Reserve's Inflation Target: Causes and Conse-
   quences," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 39, 1851­1882.
J ORGENSEN , P. L. AND K. J. L ANSING (2019): "Anchored Inflation Expectations and the Flatter
   Phillips Curve," Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.


                                                    68
K ILEY, M. T. (2015): "Low Inflation in the United States: A Summary of Recent Research," FEDS
   Notes, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
K LENOW, P. J. AND O. K RYVTSOV (2008): "State-Dependent or Time-Dependent Pricing: Does It
  Matter for Recent U.S. Inflation," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123, 863­904.
M AVROEIDIS , S., M. P LAGBORG -M ØLLER , AND J. H. S TOCK (2014): "Empirical Evidence on In-
  flation Expectations in the New Keynesian Phillips Curve," Journal of Economic Literature, 52,
  124­88.
M C L EAY, M. AND S. T ENREYRO (2019): "Optimal Inflation and the Identification of the Phillips
  Curve," NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 34, 199­255.
M IAN , A. AND A. S UFI (2014): "What Explains the 2007­2009 Drop in Employment?" Economet-
  rica, 82, 2197­2223.
M ISHKIN , F. S. (2007): "Inflation Dynamics," International Finance, 10, 317­334.
M ONTIEL O LEA , J. L. AND M. P LAGBORG -M OLLER (2020): "Local Projection Inference is Simpler
  and More Robust Than You Think," Working Paper, Columbia University.
N AKAMURA , E. AND J. S TEINSSON (2008): "Five Facts About Prices: A Reevaluation of Menu
  Cost Models," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123, 1415­1464.
------ (2014): "Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evidence from US Regions," American Eco-
  nomic Review, 104, 753­92.
N AKAMURA , E., J. S TEINSSON , P. S UN , AND D. V ILLAR (2018): "The Elusive Costs of Inflation:
  Price Dispersion during the US Great Inflation," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133, 1933­1980.
N EFTC¸ I , S. (1984): "Are Economic Time Series Asymmetric over the Business Cycle?" Journal of
  Political Economy, 92, 307­328.
N GUYEN , H. (2014): "Demand-Driven Propagation: Evidence from the Great Recession," Work-
  ing Paper, World Bank.
N ICKELL , S. (1981): "Biases in Dynamic Models with Fixed Effects," Econometrica, 49, 1417­1426.
N ISHIZAKI , K. AND T. WATANABE (2000): "Output-Inflation Trade-Off at Near-Zero Inflation
  Rates," Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 14, 304­326.
O BSTFELD , M. AND K. R OGOFF (1983): "Speculative Hyperinflations in Maximizing Models: Can
  We Rule Them Out?" Journal of Political Economy, 91, 675­687.
P HELPS , E. S. (1967): "Phillips Curves, Expectations of Inflaiton and Optimal Unemployment
  over Time," Economica, 34, 254­281.
P HILLIPS , A. W. (1958): "The Relation between Unemployment and the Rate of Change of Money
  Wage Rates in the United Kingdom, 1861-1957," Economica, 25, 283­299.
P OOLE , R., F. P TACEK , AND R. V ERBRUGGE (2005): "Treatment of Owner-Occupied Housing in
  the CPI," Working Paper, Bureau of Labor Statistics.
R OBERTS , J. M. (1995): "New Keynesian Economics and the Phillips Curve," Journal of Money,
  Credit and Banking, 27, 975­984.
R OTEMBERG , J. J. AND M. W OODFORD (1997): "An Optimization-Based Econometric Framework



                                                 69
  for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy," NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 12, 297­346.
R UDD , J. AND K. W HELAN (2005): "New Tests of the New-Keynesian Phillips Curve," Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 52, 1167­1181.
S AMUELSON , P. AND R. S OLOW (1960): "Analytical Aspects of Anti-Inflation Policy," American
   Economic Review, 50, 177­194.
S ARGENT, T. J. (1982): "The Ends of Four Big Inflations," in Inflation: Causes and effects, University
   of Chicago Press, 41­98.
S BORDONE , A. M. (2002): "Prices and Unit Labor Costs: A New Test of Price Stickiness," Journal
   of Monetary Economics, 49, 265­292.
S ICHEL , D. (1993): "Business Cycle Asymmetry: A Deeper Look," Economic Inquiry, 31, 224­236.
S TOCK , J. H. AND M. W. WATSON (2007): "Why Has US Inflation Become Harder to Forecast?"
   Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 39, 3­33.
------ (2019): "Slack and Cyclically Sensitive Inflation," NBER Working Paper No. 25987.
W OODFORD , M. (1998): "Doing without Money: Controlling Inflation in a Post-Monetary World,"
 Review of Economic Dynamics, 1, 173­219.
------ (2003): Interest and Prices, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.




                                                  70
