                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         IMPACT OF CONSEQUENCE INFORMATION ON INSURANCE CHOICE

                                           Anya Samek
                                         Justin R. Sydnor

                                       Working Paper 28003
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28003


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2020




This project was funded by the BRITE Lab at the University of Wisconsin-Madison and the USC
Roybal Center for Health Decision Making and Financial Independence in Old Age, under grant
5P30AG024962. The hypothetical choice surveys described in this paper rely on data from
surveys administered by the Understanding America Study (UAS) which is maintained by the
Center for Economic and Social Research (CESR) at the University of Southern California. The
content of this paper is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent
the official views of USC, CESR, or UAS. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Anya Samek and Justin R. Sydnor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Impact of Consequence Information on Insurance Choice
Anya Samek and Justin R. Sydnor
NBER Working Paper No. 28003
October 2020
JEL No. D81,D83,G22,I13

                                         ABSTRACT

Insurance choices are often hard to rationalize by standard theory and frequently appear sub-
optimal. A key reason may be that people are unable to map the cost-sharing features of plans to
their distribution of financial consequences. We develop and experimentally test a decision aid
that provides this mapping to simplify comparisons of plan options. In two experiments
mirroring typical health insurance decisions, we find that when people choose plans using
standard feature-based information, they violate dominance at high rates. Our distribution-based
decision aid substantially reduces dominance violations, and also changes choice patterns in
situations where there is no dominant option. Choice patterns under feature-based menus can be
most easily rationalized by models of heuristic choices, such as minimizing premium or
deductible. With the decision aid, though, significantly more people have choice patterns that are
better explained by expected utility theory. We compare our distribution-based approach to an
alternative of providing estimates of the expected value of costs, which is the most common
decision-support available in most insurance markets. Providing expected values affects choices
in a similar direction as our consequence-based approach, but in a more muted fashion, and is
only about half as effective at reducing dominance violations.


Anya Samek
University of California, San Diego
Rady School of Management
Wells Fargo Hall
9500 Gilman Drive #0553
La Jolla, CA 92093-0553
and NBER
anyasamek@gmail.com

Justin R. Sydnor
Wisconsin School of Business, ASRMI Department
University of Wisconsin at Madison
975 University Avenue, Room 5287
Madison, WI 53726
and NBER
jsydnor@bus.wisc.edu
1     Introduction

Many recent studies have documented patterns of sub-optimal insurance choices that are difficult to

reconcile with standard economic theories of insurance demand.1 Consumers' poor understanding of

insurance products are a likely driver of some of these patterns (Johnson et al., 2013; Loewenstein et al.,

2013; Bhargava et al., 2017b; Handel et al., 2020). These challenges with understanding insurance

call into question the value of expanding individuals' choice sets in insurance markets, which has been

especially common in many health insurance markets (Ericson and Sydnor, 2017).

    Typical insurance-choice environments are "feature based" in that they provide people with tables

that show cost-sharing features, such as premiums, deductibles, co-insurance rates and maximum-out-

of-pocket costs. However, standard theory suggests that to make a utility-maximizing choice, people

need to know the distribution of final wealth outcomes for each plan. This requires a potentially

cognitively challenging exercise of mapping plan features to out-of-pocket costs for some subjective

distribution of beliefs about losses. (Bhargava et al., 2017b) suggest that this difficulty in mapping

underlies some errors in plan choice. They show that providing people with information about the

maximum and minimum spending in health plan options can reduce dominance violations.

    In this study, we directly evaluate the extent to which errors are driven by the inability to map

features to consequences and explore how decision aids can improve choice patterns. To do this,

we develop and experimentally test a simple decision aid ­ a "consequence graph" ­ that does the

mapping for people. We build and test the approach for the setting of health insurance, where much

of the recent literature on insurance choice quality has focused, though the approach can generalize

to other insurance settings. The graph plots the spending (premiums plus out-of-pocket costs) the

individual can expect for each quantile of the ex-ante distribution of medical costs they face. For each

plan a consequence graph is simply a line, which makes it possible to display the distributions for

multiple plans on the same graph. The quantile approach provides information about the distribution

of consequences for plans in a simplified way that does not require people to simultaneously integrate

information about probabilities and consequences.

    In two separate experiments, we present subjects with menus of plan options and vary whether

we provide only feature-based information or include a graphical mapping of features to financial

consequences. To assure that all subjects in our studies have common beliefs, subjects in all groups
   1 See for example: (Frank and Lamiraud, 2009), (Heiss et al., 2010), (Sydnor, 2010), (Abaluck and Gruber, 2011),

(Schram and Sonnemans, 2011), (Sinaiko and Hirth, 2011), (Ericson and Starc, 2012), (Kling et al., 2012), (Zhou
and Zhang, 2012), (Handel, 2013), (Johnson et al., 2013), (Loewenstein et al., 2013), (Atanasov and Baker, 2014),
(Marzilli Ericson, 2014), (Handel and Kolstad, 2015), (Bhargava et al., 2017a), (Bhargava et al., 2017b), (Handel et al.,
2020)




                                                           1
first see a distribution of medical spending possibilities. Hence, in theory, no new information is

contained in the consequence information decision aid. An insurance-savvy participant should be able

to generate a mapping from feature-based information to the consequence information.

   We first conduct an incentivized laboratory experiment in which university student subjects make

decisions on behalf of a fictitious person and receive payments based on the realized wealth minus

medical spending of this person. This lab setting allows for a significant degree of control and limits

the extent to which individual characteristics (such as liquidity constraints and subjective beliefs)

affect choices. Next, we field a hypothetical-choice survey experiment with a representative sample

of Americans in which subjects choose from more realistic menus of health insurance options with

spending distributions estimated from their personal health-risk characteristics. The survey experi-

ment relinquishes some control but includes a representative group of Americans (who are more likely

to have experienced making health insurance decisions) and allows for a more natural investigation

of preferences for health insurance. In both experiments, we included a number of menus where a

higher-deductible option dominates. This situation is common in employer-sponsored health insur-

ance settings and has been used as a test of choice quality in past literature (Handel, 2013; Bhargava

et al., 2017b; Liu and Sydnor, 2018). We also include menus with no dominant options.

   We find a dramatic difference in choice patterns by treatment in both studies. When subjects get

only feature-based information about plans, they violate state-wise and second-order stochastic domi-

nance at high rates. Providing information about consequences dramatically reduces these violations.

In the laboratory experiment, violations of state-wise dominance drop from 40-60% under feature-

based information to 10-20% under consequence information, and the changes are more pronounced

for subjects with low health insurance literacy. In the survey experiment, consequence information

reduces violations of state-wise dominance from 50% down to 24%, which is about as effective as

increasing numeracy of subjects by 2.5 standard deviations.

   We also introduce menus of options where the high-deductible option does not dominate but should

be attractive for those without very high levels of risk aversion. Here the consequence information

again has a strong effect on choice patterns, increasing the share choosing the high-deductible option

by 19 percentage points. This is in line with (Handel and Kolstad, 2015) who found that more informed

individuals are more likely to select a high deductible option. These results show that consequence

information has an impact on choice even beyond the relatively simple case of highlighting situations

of dominance.

   There was one more surprising result that we had not anticipated. Our second experiment included

a few menus where the lower deductible option provided substantially better risk protection and had


                                                  2
lower expected spending for many people. In these cases most subjects in all treatments selected the

lower deductible option. However, we find that the consequence graph treatment actually decreased

the share of people selecting the lower-deductible option. This suggests that for a subset of subjects,

the decision aid generated behavior that appears more risk loving.

    The experimental results show that the decision aid reduced violations of dominance and broadly

affected choice patterns, but was this because it really helped people compare options more fully or did

it simply bias people toward options with lower premiums? To investigate this question, we explore the

extent to which the choices individuals made across the ten menus of options in our second experiment

can be rationalized by different models of insurance choice. We consider simple heuristic decisions,

such as choosing the option with lowest deductible or choosing the option with lowest premium. We

also consider expected utility models with differing levels of constant-absolute-risk-aversion utility.

    We find that our decision aid substantially changed which decision models are most consistent with

choice patterns, shifting people from heuristic decision models toward choices consistent with risk-

averse expected utility. With feature-based information, the majority had choice patterns consistent

with simple heuristics, with the most common being choosing the lowest deductible or maximum out

of pocket limit. With the consequence-graph decision aid, the fraction categorized as using heuristics

falls sharply and the most common categorization becomes choices most consistent with some level of

risk-averse expected utility. Among those who appear to be using a heuristic, the decision aid shifted

people away from the coverage-based heuristic and toward a lowest-premium heuristic. Ultimately the

results suggest that some people may have been biased toward lowest-premium choices by the decision

aid, but that the dominant effect was to generate choices that were responsive to both premiums and

coverage in a way that is more consistent with standard theory.

    We also associate plan choice with risk preferences. In the laboratory experiment, we elicit risk

preferences using a separate incentivized task. We find that measured risk preferences are completely

uncorrelated with insurance decisions when subjects get only feature-based information about plans.

When subjects get consequence information, there is a weak positive correlation.2

    Our study is timely since the past several years has seen an increase in interest from both aca-

demics and employers in improving health insurance decisions. The most common approach is to

provide expected value predictions. These are available in the Medicare Part D market and also on

the Healthcare.gov exchanges that were set up as part of the Affordable Care Act.3 Expected value
   2 We note, however, that even in the case of consequence information the correlation is very weak, which is consistent

with a recent study by Jaspersen et al., 2019 showing that lottery-based measures of risk aversion correlate very poorly
with insurance choices even in laboratory settings.
   3 See https://www.healthcare.gov/glossary/total-cost-estimate/




                                                           3
predictions were evaluated in (Kling et al., 2012), who found that providing consumers with person-

alized information about costs based on their expected prescription drug use increased plan switching

for Medicare Part D participants.

    To evaluate how consequence-graphs compare to expected-value predictions, we conduct a third

treatment. In the hypothetical-choice survey, we evaluate the impact of showing the expected total

health spending for each plan along with the standard feature table. We find that this treatment

always affects choices in the same direction as the consequence graphs, but does about half as well

in helping subjects avoid making sub-optimal choices. Similarly, we find that the decision models

most consistent with choice patterns move in the same direction, but less sharply, with expected-value

predictions than with consequence graphs. These results suggest that people respond to information

about risk and the distribution of consequences for insurance more than they react to simple expected-

value comparisons.

    Our approach is related to another method of providing insurance decision aids that uses expected

utility models to provide plan recommendations. A leading practical example of this approach is the

company Picwell, which combines advanced predictions of the distribution of medical needs with an

expected utility model to create personalized scoring for plans. (Bundorf et al., 2019) and (Gruber

et al., 2020) show that this approach appears to improve Medicare plan decisions, particularly when

the decision aid is provided to insurance agents. Relative to the Picwell-style approach of creating

expected utility scores, our approach does not require us to make assumptions about individual risk

preferences and displays only the information that theory assumes subjects need to make an informed

decision.4 Research will be needed to disentangle the relative benefits of these approaches and the

extent to which they complement each other. Our results show, though, that it is feasible to provide

individual-level decision aids that clarify risk consequences for insurance consumers.5

    An important policy question is whether providing decision aids for insurance choices increases

adverse selection (see Handel, 2013). Decision aids can increase adverse selection if they help to

highlight the differential benefits of plan options by risk type, but they could also decrease it by making

it easier for people to consider how plans interact with their risk preferences. The participants in our

hypothetical-choice survey experiment had substantial variation in their medical spending risk and

were provided personalized information about their likely distribution of spending needs. Consistent
   4 We are not aware of a commercial application that leverages this idea as fully as we do, but examples such as ALEX

from Jellyvision go in this direction by providing personalized recommendations that show a few scenarios for spending
possibilities.
   5 Our study is also related to a strand of literature that seeks to reduce complexity in other types of financial choices

using decision aids. For example, (Brown et al., 2019) and (Samek et al., 2019) find that consequence information helps
people value annuities. (Samek et al., 2016) shows that displaying interactive tables improves decisions in multi-attribute
choice tasks.



                                                             4
with prior research, we find adverse selection under feature-based information: every $1,000 increase

in expected total medical spending is associated with a 1.4 percentage point reduction in the likelihood

of selecting the high deductible plan (relative to a mean probability of choosing the high deductible

of 0.27). When we provide consequence information, we estimate that this slope more than doubles,

though the interaction term is not precisely estimated. These findings complement the results of

Gruber et al. (2020) who find a similar result when utility-model decision aids are provided to expert

insurance agents. Consistent with Handel's (2013) conjectures, our results provide potentially the first

empirical evidence that an individual-level decision aid increases adverse selection in health insurance.

    An additional contribution of our paper is to systematically show that people have difficulty map-

ping cost-sharing features of plans to their consequences, even when they are given direct incentives

to do so. These results drive home the point made in prior studies that observations of insurance

choices in field data may not be directly informative about underlying risk preferences if people find

insurance too complex, an argument that has been made in recent studies (Sydnor, 2010; Barseghyan

et al., 2013; Handel, 2013; Handel and Kolstad, 2015; Baicker et al., 2015; Spinnewijn, 2017; Bhar-

gava et al., 2017b). If choices with feature-based information were informative about underlying risk

preferences over final wealth outcomes, then showing the final wealth outcomes directly should not

affect choices. The fact that displaying consequence information without providing explicit plan rec-

ommendations substantially alters choices is strong evidence that insurance decisions are affected by

a failure to understand how choices map to consequences.

    In what follows, Section 2 explains the construction of our consequence information treatment.

Section 3 describes the design and results of the first experiment. Section 4 discusses the design and

results of the second experiment. Section 5 concludes.



2     Approach to Providing Information About Consequences

Consider an individual i who faces potential loss shocks s (e.g., total medical bills), with an individual-

specific ex-ante cumulative density function F i. An insurance plan j is associated with a premium

cost cj and a series of cost-sharing features that map the loss shocks into uninsured (i.e., "out of

pocket") costs j (s). The standard insurance demand model assumes that the individual's expected

utility under a plan is given by:

                                    Ujs =   ui (wi - ci - j (s))dFi (s)

where wi denotes the individual's background wealth and ui is a concave Bernoulli utility function

over final wealth at the end of the contract term.

                                                     5
    In the case of a setting like health insurance, calculating this expected utility requires an un-

derstanding of both the distribution of potential medical bills and the mapping of those shocks to

out-of-pocket costs given plan features. Our approach to simplifying the information about insurance

plan consequences is to provide the individual with information about their expected spending within

each quantile of their ex-ante spending distribution. Let N denote a number of quantiles (e.g., N =

10 for deciles) and µn,i,j the expectation of the out of pocket costs for person i under plan j within

the nth quantile of their shock distribution. For simplicity, we include the premium costs cj so that

the µ values give the individual's expected total uninsured losses and costs if they end up in the nth

quantile of their shock distribution. If we provide the individual with this information, it allows for

an approximation of the expected utility:

                                                    N   1
                                          Uij =     n=1 N ui (wi   - µn,i,j )

As N gets large and the quantiles become small, the approximation will converge to the true utility.

The practical value of this approach is that it allows us to provide the individual with N equally

likely values of expected spending that provide an approximation to the distribution of total costs the

individual can expect under the plan. This eliminates the need to integrate both varying cost sizes

and probabilities. As we show in Section 4 and 5, we use simple graphs, which we call "consequence

graphs" to represent these distributions for different plans. In a consequence graph, the x-axis denotes

the (equally likely) quantiles and the y-axis gives the µn,i,j values associated with that quantile for

the individual.6



3     Laboratory Experiment with Incentivized Choice

3.1     Experimental Design

We conducted the laboratory experiment at the Behavioral Research Insights through Experiments

(BRITE) lab at the University of Wisconsin, Madison in 2016. Instructions (available in Appendix B)

were displayed on the screen and subjects moved through them at their own pace. Subjects were told

to consider a fictional young adult named Jamie, who just started a new job and needed to select a

health insurance plan from a menu of options provided by Jamie's employer. To exclude complexities

related to differences in health network quality, subjects were instructed that all plan options provided

the same access to doctors and hospitals. All subjects saw the information shown in Figure 1, which
   6 When describing these graphs to subjects in our experiments, we avoid the technical terms of quantiles and expec-

tations and use more natural language to describe the graph.




                                                          6
                                                             Figure 1: Distribution of Underlying Medical Bills in the Experiment




                                    8000 10000 12000 14000
      Average Total Medical Bills
                                    6000
                                    4000
                                    2000
                                    0




                                                              1st    2nd     3rd    4th     5th     6th    7th     8th    9th       10th
                                                                               Spending Group (10% in each Group)


Notes: This information was shown to all subjects in the laboratory experiment prior to introducing
the insurance choices. This displays average total medical bills for a young adult like Jamie split into
10 deciles (excluding premiums)



provides the distribution of total medical bills from which Jamie's total medical spending would be

drawn.

   The figure uses data for men and women ages 21-25 in the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey

(MEPS) for years 2012 and 2013 and shows spending levels in deciles (excluding premiums).7

   All subjects made choices from 4 different insurance plan menus twice. Half of the subjects

(randomized at the individual level) first saw 4 insurance plan menus under the feature-table display

and then under the consequence-graph display. The other half received the reverse order (consequence-

graph display followed by feature-table display). This design allows us to evaluate choices both between

subjects (using observations from the first display subjects saw) and within subjects (comparing

decisions of the same subject for the same menu across displays).

   Menus consisted of 4-6 plans, and either included one strictly dominant option, one second order
    7 MEPS (https://www.meps.ahrq.gov/mepsweb/) is commonly used source for analyzing the distribution of poten-

tial medical spending. Other work in this literature uses data from commercial claims databases, such as Truven
MarketScan R and OptumLabsTM. See (Zuvekas, 2017) for a discussion of and comparison of expenditure estimates
using these different data sources.



                                                                                              7
stochastically dominant option, or had no dominant options but all choices were rationalizable by

standard theory (see Appendix A for plan details). The feature-tables showed features of each plan,

including premium, deductible, coinsurance rate, and maximum out-of-pocket spending. Subjects also

had the option of sorting the tables by up to two features. The consequence-graphs showed the total

health spending for Jamie for each plan across the 10 expected total health spending deciles in Figure

1. Plans were represented as lines on the graph so they could be compared. Plans were labeled with

colors or shapes, randomized across the two formats.8

    Figure 2 shows an example of the information that was displayed for Menu 1, which had 4 plans

and a state-wise dominant option (plan Purple). For the feature table, participants were shown the

features of each plan. The consequence graph for this Menu shows that with the dominant Purple

plan, the individual's costs are lower than all other plans in every scenario. In contrast, the Black

plan in this example is dominated by all other plans. The Red and Blue plans in this example cross

between the 6th and 7th decile of spending and do not have a clear dominance relationship to each

other.

    Subjects were incentivized based on Jamie's wealth level at the end of the year, which consisted

of Jamie's salary (randomized between-subjects as either $40,000 and $60,000) minus the health

insurance premium paid by Jamie (based on the subject's plan choice) minus any out-of-pocket medical

spending Jamie had to pay for the year (determined via a random draw from Jamie's distribution

of possible medical spending, and based on the subject's plan choice).9 One of the 8 choices about

health insurance was randomly selected to determine the payout. Jamie's wealth was translated to the

subjects' payment as $2 for every $1,000 of Jamie's wealth.At the end of the experiment, we elicited

risk aversion using the Eckel-Grossman risk elicitation task (Eckel and Grossman, 2002). Subjects

selected one of 6 gambles (shown in Table A2 in Appendix A) that each had a 50% chance of having

a better or worse outcome from two possible outcomes. Subjects were also asked 2 insurance literacy

questions in which they were shown a plan menu and asked to manually calculate expected out-of-

pocket spending for one medical spending quantile for one of the plans. They received $0.50 for each

correct answer. Finally, subjects indicated which display format they preferred and answered a short

demographic questionnaire. Subjects earned $24 on average for sessions that lasted about 30 minutes.
   8 In this way, a subject who selected say the "Black" plan in Menu 1 in table format may not be aware that this was

the same plan as the "Diamond" plan in Menu 1 in the graph format. We further randomized the order of the menus
the subjects saw within each of the display formats. We detect no effects of these randomizations.
   9 We randomized the size of the salary because ex-ante it was not clear whether the salary level would affect how

people viewed the insurance options and the level of risk aversion the subjects would display. In practice, we detect
zero difference in choice patterns across the salary level for any choice. As such, throughout we present results pooling
across the two salary levels.




                                                           8
                                                                                    Figure 2: Displays in Experiment


                                                                                              Feature-Table

                                                     Plan Name   Annual Premium      Annual Deducible    Coinsurance Rate   Maximum Out of Pocket
                                                     Purple*          $817                $1,000                10%                 $3,500
                                                     Blue            $1,321                $750                 10%                 $3,250
                                                     Red             $1,419                $500                 10%                 $3,000
                                                     Black           $1,957                $250                 10%                 $2,750
                                                 * Denotes the dominant option (Not shown to subjects)

                                                                                          Consequence Graph
                                             $5000
Jamie's Total Health Spending for the Year
                                             $4000
                                             $3000
                                             $2000
                                             $1000




                    Min     1st                                     2nd       3rd       4th        5th    6th     7th       8th     9th      10th     Max
                  Spending                                                                                                                          Spending
               (Premium Only)
                                                                      Spending Group (Expect even chance of being in each group)


                                                                                         Black Plan                Red Plan
                                                                                         Blue Plan                 Purple Plan

                                                 Notes: This figure displays the feature-table (top panel) and consequence-graph (bottom panel) dis-
                                                 played to subjects in the laboratory experiment for Menu 1




                                                                                                     9
3.2     Experiment Results

Two hundred and one university students participated in the laboratory experiment. Table A1 in

Appendix A shows that we were balanced on subject observables (age, gender, and GPA) across the

randomized order of whether the subject saw the feature-table or consequence-graph display first.

   Figure 3 provides a bar chart that demonstrates the key finding of the experiment: the dominant

option is chosen significantly more often under the consequence-graph display than under the feature-

table display. Figure 3 reports on the probability of choosing the dominant option across the 3 menus in

the experiment where a dominant option was available. For example, menu 1 was a 4-plan menu with

a strictly dominant option, menu 2 was a 6-plan menu with a strictly dominant option and menu 3 was

a 6-plan menu with a second-order stochastically dominant option.10 The figure includes observations

only from the first set of choices that subjects made (i.e., this is between-subjects analysis). We

see that the consequence-graph statistically significantly increased the probability of choosing the

dominant option from all menus. For example, in menu 1, only 39% of subject selected the dominant

option under the feature-table display. In contrast, 93% of subjects selected the dominant option

under the consequence-graph display. Similar patterns are observed for menus 2 and 3. Appendix A,

Figures A1, A2, A3 and A4, provide detailed information about the distribution of choices for each

menu.

   In Table 1, we present regression analysis to quantify the magnitude and statistical significance

of the differences in the choice patterns and explore interactions of display format with our measure

of insurance literacy. The dependent variable is an indicator for selecting the dominant option from

the menu versus the alternative of selecting any one of the other plans. We run simple ordinary least

squares regressions separately for each menu and regress the indicator for dominant plan choice on

a dummy variable for whether the choice was made in the consequence-graph display format. Here

we use all of the data, i.e., two choices for each subject (one in each display format) for a total of

402 choices for 201 subjects. We account for the repeated measures by clustering the standard errors

at the subject level. We also create an indicator variable low insurance literacy, which is equal to 1

for those (35% of subjects) who answered both insurance literacy questions incorrectly. Specifications

(2), (4) and (6) include a control for insurance literacy and an interaction term of insurance literacy

with display format.

   As can be seen in Table 1, the coefficient on consequence-graph is positive and statistically signifi-

cant (0.25-0.54, p-values<0.01) in all regressions, confirming that the consequence-graph statistically
  10 Another difference between menu 1 and menu 2 is that menu 1 kept the same co-insurance and out-of-pocket

spending above the deductible, while menu 2 varied the co-insurance and out-of-pocket spending above the deductible
across plans. Hence, we consider menu 2 more complex than menu 1


                                                        10
                                                               Figure 3: Choosing Dominant Option in the Experiment




                                                    1
      Probability of Choosing the Dominant Option
                                                    .8
                                                    .6
                                                    .4
                                                    .2
                                                    0




                                                         Menu 1 (4 Plans, FOSD)   Menu 2 (6 Plans, FOSD)   Menu 3 (6 Plans SOSD)

                                                                                    Table             Graph


Notes: This figure provides the probability of choosing the dominant option in the 3 menus in the
experiment where one was available. Menu 1 includes 4 plans with one first order stochastically
dominant option, Menu 2 includes 6 plans with one first order stochastically dominant option and
Menu 3 includes 4 plans with one second order stochastically dominant option. The analysis is
between-subjects and uses only the first time the menu is seen. Includes 95% confidence intervals.



significantly increases the likelihood of choosing the dominant option. The coefficient on low insur-

ance literacy is negative (-0.11 to -0.22) and statistically significant (p-values<0.01 in menus 2 and

3, p-value of <0.10 in menu 1), implying that low insurance literacy is associated with a reduction

of about 10-20 percentage points in the likelihood of selecting the dominant option. The reduction

is lowest in menu 1, which is not surprising since this is also the menu that we anticipated would be

the least complex. Since insurance literacy in our study is measured as ability to map features to

consequences, this result also supports our hypothesis that people who have trouble with this mapping

are least likely to be able to choose the dominant option, especially as the menu choices become more

complex.

   We also ask whether the consequence-graph treatment can help overcome low insurance literacy.

The coefficient on the interaction term for low insurance literacy and consequence-graph display is

positive (0.20 to 0.22) and statistically significant in menus 2 and 3 (p-values<0.05). This brings us to


                                                                                         11
                                  Table 1: Regression Results for Experiment

                                                    Menu 1                   Menu 2                    Menu 3
                                                4 Plans, FOSD            6 Plans, FOSD             6 Plans, SOSD
                                                 (1)       (2)           (3)        (4)            (5)        (6)
 Graph Display                                 0.54***     0.51***     0.50***      0.43***      0.25***      0.18***
                                                (0.05)      (0.06)      (0.02)       (0.04)       (0.03)       (0.04)
 Low Literacy                                               -0.11*                 -0.19***                  -0.22***
                                                            (0.06)                   (0.06)                    (0.07)
 Low Ins. Literacy * Graph Display                           0.07                   0.20**                     0.22**
                                                            (0.07)                   (0.08)                    (0.08)
 Constant                                      0.39***     0.43***     0.38***      0.45***      0.63***      0.70***
                                                (0.05)      (0.05)      (0.02)       (0.03)       (0.02)       (0.03)
 Number Choices                                  402         402         402          402          402          402
 Number Participants                             201         201         201          201          201          201
Notes: This table shows the results of an Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regression where the dependent variable is
the indicator for choosing the dominant plan. This is a panel regression in which each individual appears twice and
we cluster standard errors at the individual level. Participants were given two incentivized questions asking them to
calculate out-of-pocket spending for a given plan and medical bill scenario ­ we define low insurance literacy as getting
neither question right. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01


 an important result: when low insurance literacy is a problem, the consequence graph display appears

 to entirely off-set any disadvantage that this causes for plan choice. Further, this implies that the

 largest effects of the consequence-graph are concentrated among subjects with low insurance literacy.

     For our final (fourth) menu in experiment 1, we moved away from having a natural benchmark for

 choice based on economic theory and instead presented a menu in which all options were rationalizable.

 This menu was designed so that each option would be preferred by an expected-utility-of-wealth

 maximizer with a constant absolute risk aversion (CARA) utility function for some range of risk

 aversion given the distribution of medical bills Jamie faced. There are two main take-aways from the

 results from this menu. First, as shown in Appendix A, the distributions of plan choices are similar

 across the feature-table and consequence-graph display (Wilcoxon Mann-Whitney test of distributions

 p-value=51). Second, although the overall choice shares are similar for the two display formats, only

 half of subjects selected the same plan across the two displays. Most of the others selected a plan

 that was one or two spots up or down the coverage-level ranking in this menu when comparing across

 display formats.

     Differences in plan choice at the individual level raise the question of whether either of the two

 display formats correspond more closely to a stable underlying preference for risk coverage. One po-

 tentially instructive exercise is to investigate how choices from this menu correlate with risk aversion

 that we elicited separately using the Eckel-Grossman gamble choice. As shown in Table A2 in Ap-

 pendix A, there is substantial variation in the level of risk aversion (indicated by choice of gamble)

 that subjects displayed in the risk task.


                                                            12
    We next correlate risk aversion as measured in the Eckel-Grossman gamble choice (with lower

gamble choices implying higher risk aversion) with the level of coverage selected in menu 4 (where

options with higher premiums have more coverage).11 Under the feature-table display, we find a near

zero correlation of risk aversion and choice (Spearman correlation coefficient:-0.02, p-value=0.78). In

contrast, under the consequence-graph display, we detect a modest positive and statistically significant

correlation between risk aversion and choice (Spearman correlation coefficient: 0.12, p-value=0.08).

This implies that the difference in choices subjects made when choosing from the graph display

versus the table display may have moved them in the direction of greater correspondence with their

risk aversion as measured by the gamble choice. This also suggests that the observed changes in

choice between feature-table and consequence-graph formats in this menu are not likely to be due to

measurement error alone.

    Finally, after subjects had made their choices, but before they found out their earnings, they

were asked whether they preferred to make choices using the feature-table or the consequence-graph.

Seventy-five percent of subjects stated that they preferred to make choices using the consequence-

graphs, while the other 25% preferred the feature-tables.



4     Survey Experiment with Hypothetical Choices

The results of the incentivized laboratory experiment show that people can use the consequence graph

information to avoid dominated options. We designed our survey experiment to expand on these results

in a number of ways. First, we wanted to know whether the consequence graphs change behavior in

a broader population. Second, we wanted to move to a more naturalistic choice environment because

the incentivized laboratory experiment may abstract from important real-world motives that people

have when selecting insurance plans. For example, while the standard insurance demand model

outlined in Section 3 assumes that people have preferences only over the distribution of final wealth

outcomes under insurance contracts, in reality people may also have preferences for the flow of spending

throughout the year (see for example, Ericson and Sydnor, 2018). Third, while consequence graphs are

a natural tool for helping people spot situations of state-wise dominance, there is a broader question

of whether providing consequence information changes decisions in other cases where there are no

dominant options. The hypothetical-choice survey experiment described in this section is designed to

allow us to address all of these issues.
  11 While choices from this menu can, in theory, be mapped to a specific level of risk aversion under an assumption

about the underlying utility, we prefer to remain agnostic about the specific utility function that best represents choice
patterns. Instead, we use the choice from this table as a way of rank-ordering subjects by risk aversion.




                                                           13
4.1      Survey Design

We conducted the survey in 2017 using the Understanding America Study (UAS), which is a nationally-

representative online panel managed at the University of Southern California.12 Survey respondents

earned $7 for approximately 13 minutes of their time. Instructions (available in Appendix C) were

displayed on the screen and subjects moved through them at their own pace. Respondents were asked

to imagine that they were choosing a health insurance plan for themselves. They were assured that all

plans have the same access to doctors and hospitals, so the quality of care would be the same across

plans.

    We customized the information about medical risk for the respondents. They were first asked for

their gender, age and self-reported health status. This information allowed us to classify individu-

als into one of 50 categories of risk types based on their combinations of age bracket, gender and

health status.13 Just as in the laboratory experiment, they next viewed a graph of their distribution of

potential medical spending derived from MEPS data for people with this same categorization of age

group, gender and self-reported health status. Participants were told (truthfully) that the distribution

showed the frequency of different total amounts of medical bills for people in their same categories

along these three dimensions.

    When making their choices, all respondents saw a feature-table, since this is the most likely practi-

cal scenario for health insurance choice. By ensuring that subjects always have access to the insurance

plan features, we also make it possible for subjects to express preferences over insurance features even

when they are given consequence information in a way that our incentivized laboratory experiment

design did not allow.

    We randomized respondents to one of three treatments: feature-table only, feature-table plus

consequence-graph and feature-table plus expected-value.14 Respondents participated in only one of

the three treatments. Prior to participation, all respondents received a short training exercise in

which we showed examples of plans in the display format the respondent would ultimately see, asked
  12 In keeping with the recent norms in the profession of pre-registering field experiments,                 we pre-
registered this survey with AsPredicted.org (see pre-registration plan 5372, anonymized link here:
https://aspredicted.org/blind.php?x=m9ni37).
  13 We included 2 genders, 5 age brackets and 5 health statuses. Health status was split by the answer to the question

"In general, compared to other people your age, would you say that your health is excellent, very good, good, fair or
poor?"
  14 We attempted to create balance across the three treatments such that each of the 50 categories (age/gender/health

status) of respondents was represented in each treatment. To do this, respondents were assigned sequentially within
their category to each of treatments as they entered the survey. About 2/3 through the survey, new respondents were
invited and the sequential order of assignment was reversed. This gave us about equal numbers of participants in each
treatment, and allowed us to have at least one participant from each group in each treatment for most groups. We
recognize that random assignment rather than sequential would have been preferred, however, this was not done due
to a communication error with the programmer. The sequential assignment should not pose a problem, since as we
document in the next section there are no major differences in the average demographic characteristics across groups.




                                                          14
                                                     Table 2: Plan Choices in Survey

                                               Lower Deductible Plan (LD)                          Higher Deductible Plan (HD)
 Analysis Menu
   Number                 Menu          Premium       Deductible      Coins.    MOOP        Premium       Deductible      Coins.    MOOP
         1              HD SWD             1944          1000          15%        2500          516           2500          5%        3500
         2              HD SWD             1536           250          20%        2000          504           1300         20%        3000
         3             HD SOSD             1794          750           20%        2750          816           2600          0%        2600
         4             HD SOSD             1572          250           15%        1250          456           1600         20%        2100
         5            Intermediate         1176          750           15%        2000          408           1750         20%        3000
         6            Intermediate         1296          1000          20%        3000          540           2500         20%        5000
         7            Intermediate         1860          500           20%        3500          576           3000         35%        6350
         8            Intermediate         1920          500           20%        4000         1296           2000         30%        6000
         9             LD SOSD             1392          750           10%        1200         1092           2500         25%        2750
        10             LD SOSD             1884            0           15%        3750         1140           5000         20%        6350
Notes: This table describes the plan choices available to participants. Participants were shown each menu (with one low and one high deductible
plan) in random order


             questions about the plans, and provided the correct answers to the questions. In the treatment with

             consequence graphs, these questions verified that people were reading the graph correctly.

                 Respondents were asked to make decisions in 10 menus with 2 plans in each menu. The order of

             the menus and the names of the plans were randomized. Each menu featured an option with a higher

             deductible/lower premium and an option with a lower deductible/higher premium. We selected plan

             pairs using actual cost-sharing designs and employee premium costs of plans in employer sponsored

             menus from the Kaiser Family Foundation Survey of Employer Health Benefits based on a recent paper

             by Liu and Sydnor (2018). Our plans are not a representative sample of employer-sponsored health

             plan menus, but are realistic options that span the types of tradeoffs present in these menus. Table

             2 provides a summary of the features of the plans and Figure 4 provides examples of consequence

             graphs for each type of menu. In menus 1-2 the high deductible plan was state-wise dominant. In

             menus 3-4 the high deductible plan was second order stochastically dominant for each of the 50 risk

             types. The example in Figure 4 shows that for these plans the premiums, maximum total spending,

             and expected spending were all lower with the HD option but there were some specific levels of total

             spending where the individual could save money with the LD plan. In menus 5-8 both choices were

             rationalizable, which resulted in a consequence graph where the two plan lines cross. In menus 9-

             10 the low deductible plan had substantially lower maximum out of pocket spending than the high

             deductible plan and therefore second order stochastically dominated for many risk types with at least

             modest expected total spending amounts.




                                                                       15
               Figure 4: Consequence-Graph Examples for Different Menus in Survey




Notes: This figure shows what the consequence (premium plus out of pocket costs for each group and
plan) graphs for menus 1, 3, 6 and 9 looked like for a "woman, between 40 and 49, with self-reported
`good' health." In menu 1, HD strictly dominates. In menu 3, HD is the second order stochastically
dominant option. In menu 6, both options are rationalizable. In menu 9, LD is the second order
stochastically dominant option.


   At the end of the survey, we elicited risk aversion using a hypothetical question about how much

respondents would be willing to pay to avoid the chance of $3,000 worth of engine damage to a car

worth $10,000. Due to time constraints, we were unable to elicit insurance literacy as we did in the

laboratory experiment. However, because UAS respondents regularly answer surveys about a variety

of topics, we supplemented our data with an existing measure of numeracy to proxy for insurance

literacy. We also linked our data with UAS data on household demographic and socio-economic

status, and to a separate incentivized risk elicitation previously fielded on the UAS.




                                                  16
4.2     Survey Results

4.2.1      Respondent Characteristics

Six hundred and ninety two respondents participated fully in the survey.15 Table 3 describes the

characteristics of the respondents by treatment and compares them to the Current Population Survey

(CPS) of the same year. As seen in the left panel of Table 3, about half of the respondents were

female and the average age of respondents was 45. Our sample is comparable to the CPS and we

have a wide distribution of educational attainment levels and household incomes. Fifteen percent of

respondents reported that their health status is excellent, 71% reported that their health status was

good or very good, and 14% reported that their health status is poor. The right panel of Table 3

shows that for none of these characteristics could we reject the null hypothesis of equal means across

randomized groups. However, we do see that those in the table-only were a little less likely to report

excellent health and a little more likely to report poor health. Throughout our analysis below we

include risk-group fixed effects, which should ensure that these slight imbalances are not affecting our

results.


4.2.2      Treatment Effect Analysis

Figure 5 displays the share of high deductible plan choices, by menu and treatment, including 95%

confidence intervals. The plans are ordered based on the relative attractiveness of the high deductible

plan for an expected-utility maximizer with moderate risk aversion. We see that the share choosing

the high deductible plan is mostly decreasing in menu number. In the feature-table only treatment,

the high deductible plan is chosen about 50% of the time when it is the dominant plan, 27% of

the time when there is no dominant option and only 10% of the time in the cases where the low-

deductible option sometimes second-order stochastically dominates. This general downward slope in

high deductible plan choice suggests people were responding to the parameter of plan options in the

expected direction, meaning that participants were engaging thoughtfully with the options presented

in the survey experiment.16

    Our main result, clearly visible in Figure 5, is that the treatment adding the consequence-graph

substantially increases the share choosing the high-deductible plan relative to the feature-table only

   15 The UAS panel consists of over 6,000 members. Our pre-registered goal for sample size was 600 respondents, evenly

split between treatments (https://aspredicted.org/blind.php?x=m9ni37). Programmers selected 970 members to be
invited to the survey, and 721 members responded to the survey in some capacity (74% response rate). 20 respondents
started but did not complete the survey. We drop a further 9 respondents who did not give a choice for each of the 10
choice pairs (of these 7 did not have recorded choices for any of the 10 pairs).
   16 The spike of high deductible choice in menu 3 for the feature-table only group could be due to the fact that this is

the only case where the maximum out of pocket is higher for the low deductible versus the high deductible plan. This
is likely a further sign that people were paying attention when making these choices.


                                                           17
                                            Table 3: Summary Statistics and Comparison to the CPS


                                                                                                  UAS Study
                                                      (1)            (2)           (3)              (4)         (5)                        (6)
      Variable                                     Total:UAS      Total:CPS     Table Only     Table+Graph Table+Exp Val             F-test P-Value

      Female                                           0.54          0.53           0.55             0.53               0.53               0.91
      Age(Years)                                      45.19         46.78           45.24           45.45              44.87               0.88
                                                      (0.46)        (0.05)         (0.749)          (0.82)             (0.83)
      Educ: HS Degree or Less                          0.27          0.41           0.26             0.28               0.28               0.95
      Educ: Some College / No Degree                   0.22          0.19           0.22             0.23               0.21               0.89
      Educ: Associate Degree                           0.14          0.10           0.14             0.14               0.14               1.00
      Educ: Bachelor's Degree                          0.23          0.20           0.25             0.23               0.21               0.53
      Educ: Master's or Professional Degree            0.14          0.10           0.13             0.13               0.17               0.32
18




      HH Income < $35K                                 0.32          0.23           0.30             0.33               0.34               0.60
      HH Income $35K-$75K                              0.32          0.53           0.33             0.34               0.30               0.61
      HH Income > $75K                                 0.35          0.48           0.37             0.33               0.36               0.59
      Currently Working                                0.71          0.63           0.71             0.71               0.72               0.94
      Currently Married                                0.59          0.56           0.59             0.60               0.58               0.96
      Household Size*                                  2.83          3.13           2.76             2.94               2.79               0.36
                                                      (0.05)        (0.00)         (0.09)           (0.10)             (0.09)
      Excellent Self-reported Health Status            0.15          0.26           0.14             0.16               0.16               0.84
      Very Good Self-reported Health Status            0.37          0.32           0.36             0.37               0.36               0.96
      Good Self-reported Health Status                 0.34          0.28           0.33             0.35               0.35               0.89
      Fair Self-reported Health Status                 0.10          0.10           0.11             0.09               0.09               0.76
      Poor Self-reported Health Status                 0.04          0.04           0.06             0.03               0.04               0.25
      Expected Total Medical Spending ($)            3966.79                      4207.34         3788.30            3880.75               0.31
                                                     (115.96)                     (217.07)        (177.55)           (201.72)
      Number of Observations                           692          135715           246             225                221
      Notes: Column 1 shows the demographic characteristics of respondents in our baseline sample from the Understanding America Study.The UAS
     data throughout the paper are unweighted. The Current Population Survey data is tabulated in Column 2. The CPS data comes from the 2017
     Annual Social and Economic Supplement and are weighted. The sample is limited to non-institutionalized respondents age 18 and older. Standard
     errors in parenthesis for non-binary variables. The p-value reported in Column 6 is from an F-test of joint significance of the treatment arms i.e
     Column 3 = Column 4 = Column 5. *Household size was not reported by 20 individuals. Therefore total observations used to calculate the means
     and standard errors for this variable is 672 (6 observations missing from column 3, 2 observations missing from column 4 and 12 observations
     missing from column 5).
                                 Figure 5: Share Choosing High Deductible Plan in the Survey




                1
                .8
         Share Choosing HD
             .4 .2
                0    .6




                             0    1       2       3      4     5        6       7       8      9      10
                                                              Menu
                                       Table Only (Control)                         Graph Treatment
                                       Expected Spending Treatment

Notes: This figure shows the share choosing the high deductible plan in the survey, by treatment and
menu. Standard error bars represent 95% confidence intervals.



treatment. Table 4 provides additional support for this result.

    In Table 4, we display the results of regressions in which the choice of high deductible plan is

regressed on treatment dummies and age-gender-health status category fixed effects. The feature-

table plus consequence-graph treatment increases the probability of choosing the high-deductible plan

by 26 percentage points when the high deductible state-wise dominates and by 24 percentage points

when it second-order-stochastically dominates. These effects are statistically significant at the 1%

level.

    The feature-table plus expected-value treatment also increases the likelihood of choosing the high-

deductible plan relative to the feature-table only treatment. The effects are also statistically significant

at the 1% level, but the magnitude is about half that of the feature-table plus consequence-graph

treatment (15 percentage points when it state-wise dominates and 10 percentage points when it second-

order-stochastically dominates). Post-estimation tests comparing the feature-table plus expected-value

treatment to the feature-table plus consequence-graph treatment are statistically significant at the 1%

level. This suggests that while simpler decision aids are useful, displaying the full distribution of



                                                             19
                         Table 4: Regressions of Treatment Effects in Survey

                                                               Chose HD Plan
                                        Menus 1 & 2       Menus 3 & 4 Menus 5 - 8            Menus 9 & 10
 Graph Treatment                           0.26***            0.24***         0.19***           0.09***
                                            (0.03)             (0.03)          (0.03)            (0.03)
 Expected Spending Treatment               0.15***            0.10***         0.12***             0.03
                                            (0.03)             (0.03)          (0.03)            (0.02)
 Health Group Fixed Effects?                 Yes                Yes             Yes               Yes
 Control Group Mean                          0.50               0.53             0.27             0.10
 Observations                               1384               1394             2768               384
 Number of Individuals                       692                692              692               692
 Adjusted R2                                0.085              0.050            0.086             .038
Notes: This table shows the results of OLS regressions with choice of high-deductible plan as the de-
pendent variable. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level. We include health-group fixed
effects since each health-group saw a different version of the graphs and expected spending levels based
on the MEPS data.* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01


outcomes provides substantial additional value.

   Our interventions affected choice patterns even when there was no dominant option. In menus 5-8

where both the high- and low-deductible plans were rationalizable, the feature-table plus consequence

graph and feature-table plus expected-value treatments increase the choice of high-deductible plan by

19 and 12 percentage points respectively. These results suggest that both types of information make

people more comfortable accepting the tradeoff of somewhat higher variance in spending for lower

expected spending with the high deductible plan.

   The results for menus 9-10 show a pattern we did not anticipate whereby the consequence graph in-

creased the share of subjects selecting the high-deductible option. In these menus, the high-deductible

option has substantially more risk and we anticipated that the consequence graph might help people

better identify this differential. Instead, the consequence graph increased the share selecting the high

deductible option by an average of 9 percentage points. The expected-value treatment also went in

the same direction, increasing the fraction choosing the high deductible by an estimated 3 percentage

points, but in that case we cannot reject the null hypothesis of no change relative to the feature-table

only control group. These results could be consistent with some fraction of subjects having more

risk-loving preferences and a desire to avoid premiums that they express more reliably when they

have consequence information. Yet they might also suggest that the consequence graphs bias some

participants towards focusing on minimizing premiums.17

   Taken together, the results show that the consequence-graph treatment substantially altered choice
 17 For example, some users rather than comparing the entire line in a consequence graph across plans may pick a spot
toward the left or middle and make a point-wise comparison of plans. That type of behavior will typically bias people
toward selecting plans with lower premiums.




                                                         20
patterns relative to feature-table only information, but leave open some questions about whether the

changes represent an "improved" consideration of options. The results on avoidance of dominance

provide the most straight-forward normative test of the decision aids and suggest that in these cases

the consequence graphs may substantially improve choices. In the next subsections, we explore the

results more fully to try to better understand how the decision aids affected choice patterns.


4.2.3   Interactions with Numeracy and Risk Aversion

In this section, we consider how our treatments interact with numeracy and risk preferences. The

results on numeracy are presented in Table 5, which regresses choice of high-deductible plan on numer-

acy score (standardized) and numeracy-treatment interaction terms. First, we find that numeracy is

positively associated with the likelihood of choosing the high-deductible plan by 10 percentage points

in menus 1-4 when it is the dominant plan and by 7 percentage points in menus 5-8 when both the

high- and low- deductible plans are rationalizable (both p-values<0.01). This suggests that in general,

greater numeracy is associated with greater likelihood of choosing the dominant plan.


                  Table 5: Regressions with Interactions for Numeracy in Survey

                                                                Chose HD Plan
                                                Menus 1 - 4     Menus 5 - 8 Menus 9 & 10
           Graph Treatment                         0.26***         0.20***          0.09***
                                                    (0.03)          (0.03)           (0.03)
           Expected Spending Treatment             0.13***         0.12***             0.03
                                                    (0.03)          (0.03)           (0.02)
           Numeracy (Z-Score)                      0.10***         0.07***            0.00
                                                    (0.02)          (0.03)           (0.02)
           Numeracy * Graph                          -0.05           -0.02            -0.03
                                                    (0.03)          (0.04)           (0.03)
           Numeracy * Expected Spending              -0.01           -0.03          -0.06**
                                                    (0.03)          (0.03)           (0.03)
           Health Group Fixed Effects?                Yes             Yes              Yes
           Control Group Mean                        0.52            0.27             0.10
           Observations                             2768            2768              1384
           Number of Individuals                     692             692               692
           Adjusted R2                              0.097           0.096             .046
          Notes: This table shows the results of OLS regressions with choice of high-deductible
         plan as the dependent variable. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level. We
         include health-group fixed effects since each health-group saw a different version of the
         graphs and expected spending levels based on the MEPS data. Numeracy is measured
         in a prior survey. We transform numeracy to a z-score so that the coefficient can be
         interpreted as the effect of a one-standard-deviation increase in numeracy. * p < 0.10,
         ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                    21
     Table 6: Regressions with Interactions for Risk Aversion When Both Plans are Rational-
     izable in Survey


                                                      Chose HD Plan: Menus 5 - 8
                                                       Measure of Risk Aversion:
                                               WTP for Repair    Max WTP
                                                  Repair       (Losing Token) Combined
      Graph Treatment                               0.19***             0.20***         0.20***
                                                     (0.03)              (0.04)          (0.04)
      Expected Spending Treatment                   0.11***             0.13***         0.13***
                                                     (0.03)              (0.04)          (0.04)
      Risk Aversion (Z-Score)                       -0.05**               -0.01          -0.07*
                                                     (0.02)              (0.02)          (0.03)
      Risk Aversion * Graph                           -0.04               -0.04           -0.04
                                                     (0.03)              (0.04)          (0.05)
      Risk Aversion * Expected Spending               -0.03                0.04           -0.02
                                                     (0.03)              (0.04)          (0.06)
      Health Group Fixed Effects?                      Yes                 Yes             Yes
      Control Group Mean                              0.27                0.26            0.26
      Observations                                   2768                2072            2072
      Number of Individuals                           692                 518             518
      Adjusted R2                                    0.105               0.115           0.127
      Notes: This table shows the results of OLS regressions with choice of high-deductible
     plan as the dependent variable. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level.
     We include health-group fixed effects since each health-group saw a different version of
     the graphs and expected spending levels based on the MEPS data. In each of Columns
     1-3, we use a different measure of risk aversion: 1) the hypothetical wilingness to pay for
     insurance elicited in the survey, 2) the incentivized willingness to pay elicited in a related
     experiment and appended to the data and 3) an average of the two methods. * p < 0.10,
     ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01


   The coefficients on the numeracy-treatment interaction term are slightly negative and only one is

statistically significant, which provides suggestive evidence that our treatments are more effective for

low numeracy respondents. This is in line with the laboratory experiment, where we saw a much more

robust heterogeneous treatment effect.

   In Table 6, we next look at the association of plan choice with risk preferences in menus 5-8

where either plan choice was rationalizable by some level of risk aversion. Similar to the laboratory

experiment, here we are interested in whether risk preferences are predictive of plan choice. In Table

6, we report on three regressions in which the dependent variable is high-deductible plan choice.

The independent variables are treatment dummies, risk preference (standardized) and risk preference-

treatment interaction terms. Across the three columns, we vary whether we measure risk preferences by

1) the hypothetical willingness to pay for a repair elicited in our survey, 2) the incentivized willingness

to pay for insurance in a related experiment previously fielded on the survey panel, and 3) an average


                                                    22
of these two measures. As expected, we find suggestive evidence that greater risk aversion leads to

a decreased likelihood of choosing the high deductible plan. The interaction with the information

treatments generally goes in the same direction we found in the lab experiment where the information

treatment strengthens the correlation between risk aversion and choice. However, that interaction is

not precisely estimated and we cannot reject a null hypothesis of no interaction with measured risk

aversion.


4.3    Interactions with Selection by Health Status

We next consider how the information treatments interacted with selection into health plans based on

health status (i.e., adverse selection). A major advantage of the hypothetical choice survey is that it

used a representative panel of consumers and therefore had decent variation in health status and age.

In Table 7 we estimate how selection of the high-deductible option correlated with baseline expected

total medical spending, determined by the individual's age, gender and self-reported health status,

and how that correlation was affected by the information treatments.

   Consistent with patterns of adverse selection documented in prior literature, under feature-based

information respondents with greater expected health spending were less likely to select the high de-

ductible option. This is especially true in menus 5-8 where both options are potentially rationalizable.

The effect size for those menus implies that a $10,000 increase in expected spending (essentially going

from very low to very high expected health spending) is associated with a 14 percentage point reduc-

tion in the likelihood of selecting the high deductible option. If we translate this into a dollar effect, we

estimate that in these menus those who selected the high-deductible option had around$800 lower ex-

pected total spending than those who selected the low-deductible option. There is much more modest

adverse selection for those seeing feature-based information in menus 1-4 where the high-deductible

option dominated and no pattern of selection by health type in menus 9-10.

   The provision of consequence information systematically increased the degree of selection by health

type, as evidenced by the negative coefficients for the interaction terms in Table 7. In menus 5-8 where

there was meaningful adverse selection in the baseline feature-only display, we see that the correlation

between expected health spending and deductible choice more than doubles, though the estimated

interaction term is not precisely estimated. When translated to a dollar effect, we estimate that

there is around a $150 greater differential in expected spending between those choosing low and high

deductible plans under the consequence information, though the confidence interval on this difference

is very large. The effects for the expected-value treatment go in similar directions but are somewhat

less pronounced than the effects of the consequence-information treatment.


                                                     23
               Table 7: Regressions with Interactions for Expected Spending in Survey

                                                                       Chose HD Plan
                                                         Menus 1 - 4    Menus 5 - 8 Menus 9 - 10
         Graph Treatment                                  0.27            0.26         0.18
                                                           (0.05)          (0.06)       (0.05)
         Expected Spending Treatment                      0.16            0.17            0.03
                                                           (0.05)          (0.05)       (0.05)
         ES ($ 10,000s)                                     -0.05         -0.14          -0.00
                                                           (0.06)          (0.06)       (0.05)
         ES * Graph Treatment                               -0.06          -0.20      -0.23
                                                           (0.10)          (0.10)       (0.08)
         ES * Expected Spending Treatment                   -0.10           -0.11         0.01
                                                           (0.09)          (0.09)       (0.10)
         Control Group Mean                                  .52             .27           .10
         Observations                                       2768            2768         1384
         Number of Individuals                               692             692          692
         Adjusted R2                                       0.049           0.049        0.019
            p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01
         Notes: This table shows the results of OLS regressions with choice of high-deductible
        plan as the dependent variable. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level.
        We include a measure for expected spending (ES) as measured by the expected
        spending of the individual's health-group (in ten thousands).



         Table 8: Probability of Choosing the HD plan in menus 9 and 10 where LD is often
         SOSD in Survey

                                                     Expected   Savings with LD plan instead of HD
                                                     Overall      <0      0-250   250-500 > 500
          Graph Treatment                            0.09***    0.20** 0.16***     0.08*       0.00
                                                      (0.03)    (0.08)   (0.05)    (0.04)    (0.04)
          Expected Spending Treatment                  0.04       0.09     0.06     0.03      -0.01
                                                      (0.03)    (0.07)   (0.05)    (0.04)    (0.04)
          Control Group Mean                            .10        .12      .10      .10       .10
          Observations                                 1384       180      378      379        447
          Adjusted R2                                 0.011      0.029    0.026    0.004     -0.004
         Notes: This table shows the results of regressing choosing the high deductible plan
         in menus 9 or 10 on the treatment variables, divided by the expected savings from
         choosing the low deductible plan over the high deductible plan. Results are based
         on the full analysis sample of 692 subjects. Standard errors are clustered at the
         individual level.* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01


   The other notable effect in Table 7 is that the consequence information generated substantial

selection by health status in menus 9-10. In Table 8 we explore this pattern further, looking at how

the information treatments affected selection of the high deductible option in these menus by splitting

the sample into subgroups with different expected cost differentials between the two options. We

find that the increased selection of the high deductible option in menus 9-10 is concentrated among



                                                         24
healthier individuals whose expected savings with the low deductible is small or negative. For less

healthy individuals, where selecting the high deductible option would likely be a large mistake, there

is no effect of the information treatment. These patterns help clarify the puzzling findings of a positive

effect of the consequence information on high-deductible choice in menus 9-10. The fact that there

was no effect for those with high expected spending suggests that the information treatment was not

simply biasing everyone toward choosing premium-minimizing plans.


4.4     Analysis of Decision Models that Best Fit Choice Patterns

The choices subjects made across 10 different menus of options in this study also give us the ability

to analyze which decision models are most consistent with choice patterns. This allows us to further

analyze the way in which the information treatments shifted choices by mapping them to changes in

decision models.

    We consider a number of possible decision models. First, people may be employing simple heuris-

tics, such as choosing the plan with the lowest deductible or lowest out of pocket limit or choosing the

plan with the lowest premium. These heuristics will generate choice patterns that are not responsive

to the variation in attractiveness of the options across our 10 choice menus. Second, people may be

choosing in ways that are responsive to coverage and prices and are broadly consistent with expected

utility theory for some level of risk aversion. At different levels of risk aversion, individuals will be

predicted to switch from selecting high-deductible to low deductible options at different points across

the 10 menus, with the switch point dependent both on risk aversion and on the individual's risk

type. Finally, people may be randomly choosing between the two options in each case, which would

create a prediction of fifty percent likelihood of choosing each option regardless of the menu. The fact

that we have decisions across ten menus for each person means that we can analyze which of these

models is most consistent with patterns at the individual level. Of course, real choices will likely not

perfectly align with any of these model predictions, but our interest is knowing which of these is most

consistent with choice patterns and how this varies across our treatments.

    We operationalize this by generating the set of predicted probabilities of selecting the high de-

ductible option across the ten menus for each individual in each decision model. All of the models,

except random choice, are deterministic and generate a probability of 1 or 0 for choosing the high

deductible option, while the predicted probability is equal to 0.5 for each menu in the random-choice

model. For the heuristic models the predictions do not vary across individuals.18 For expected utility,
  18 The only variation across menus in the heuristic models we consider comes for the heuristic of choosing the lowest

out-of-pocket limit, which predicts choosing the higher-deductible option in menu 3 but the lower-deductible in all other
menus. The deductible heuristic predicts always choosing the lower deductible, while the premium heuristic predicts



                                                           25
we generate predictions at the individual level under different levels of risk aversion. We use a constant

absolute risk aversion (CARA) utility function and consider absolute risk aversion coefficients ranging

from strong risk aversion to risk neutrality (i.e., expected-value maximization) to strong risk-loving

preferences.19

    We then calculate the mean absolute error between the individual's actual choice of the higher

deductible option and the model's predicted probabilities across the ten menus. The model with the

lowest mean absolute error is the one we consider most consistent with the individual's choice patterns.

The different levels of CARA risk aversion often make the same predictions for the individual, so we

bundle them together and simply consider whether some level of CARA risk aversion is the best fitting

model. There are also at times ties between different models at the individual level. To simplify the

exposition we break ties by prioritizing across models in the following order: risk neutrality, some level

of risk aversion in the CARA model, lowest out-of-pocket limit heuristic, lowest deductible heuristic,

lowest premium heuristic, some level of risk lovingness in the CARA model, and random choice.

The distribution of "best fitting model" is slightly sensitive to these assumptions, but the qualitative

findings across our treatments are the same regardless of the ordering used for tie breaking.

    Figure 6 and Table 9 show the distribution of best fitting decision models across the experimental

treatment groups. None of the subjects in any treatment are best described by the random-choice

model. Subjects who saw the feature-table only had choice patterns that most often could be best

explained by heuristics (56.5%, see Figure 6), typically the heuristics for minimizing out-of-pocket

limit (28%, see Table 9) or deductible (25%, see Table 9). Around 32% of these subjects had choice

patterns most consistent with some level of risk aversion and another 9% were best described as risk

neutral.

    The consequence-graph treatment dramatically shifted the best fitting models, reducing the share

best described by heuristic models to 29% and increasing the share best described by risk-averse

expected utility to 45% and expected-value maximization to 19%. Within the heuristics, we see the

consequence graph shifting people away from the coverage-based heuristics and toward the lowest-

premium heuristic. An increased share of people in the consequence-graph treatment have patterns

consistent with risk-loving preferences. All of these directional patterns are the same for subjects in the

table plus expected-spending treatment, but just more muted than what we see for the consequence-

graph treatment.
always choosing the higher deductible.
  19 We consider CARA risk aversion coefficients ranging from 0.009 (strong risk aversion) to -0.009 (strong risk loving)

in steps of 0.001.




                                                           26
Table 9: Decision Model that Minimizes Absolute Errors Between Predicted Choice and Observed Choice in Survey


                                                                                                                               Treatment Group
                                                                                                Table Only (%)         Table + Graph (%) Table + Expected Spending (%)
Risk Neutral (Lowest Expected Value)                                                                 8.54                    19.11                            17.19
Some Risk Averse CARA Level                                                                         31.71                    44.89                            40.27
Heuristic: Lowest Out-Of-Pocket Limit                                                               28.46                    11.11                            16.29
Heuristic: Lowest Deductible                                                                        24.80                     8.00                            15.84
Heuristic: Lowest Premium                                                                            3.25                     9.78                             5.43
Some Risk Loving CARA Level                                                                         3.25                      7.11                             4.98
Random Choice                                                                                        0.00                     0.00                             0.00
 Notes: This table shows the results of OLS regressions with choice of high-deductible plan as the dependent variable.
Standard errors are clustered at the individual level. We include health-group fixed effects since each health-group
saw a different version of the graphs and expected spending levels based on the MEPS data. In each of Columns
1-3, we use a different measure of risk aversion: 1) the hypothetical wilingness to pay for insurance elicited in the
survey, 2) the incentivized willingness to pay elicited in a related experiment and appended to the data and 3) an
average of the two methods


                                                                    Figure 6: Share for Whom Decision Model Best Fits Choice Patterns in Survey
              % for Whom Decision Model Best Fits Choice Patterns
                                                                    60




                                                                           56.5



                                                                                                                                         44.9
                                                                                                                                  40.3
                                                                    40




                                                                                  37.6

                                                                                                                          31.7
                                                                                         28.9



                                                                                                                19.1
                                                                    20




                                                                                                         17.2


                                                                                                   8.5
                                                                                                                                                            7.1
                                                                                                                                                      5.0
                                                                                                                                                3.3
                                                                    0




                                                                             Heursitics            Risk Neutral            Risk Averse          Risk Loving
                                                                                    Table Only (Control)                         Expected Spending Treatment
                                                                                    Table + Graph

        Notes: This graphs shows the fraction of subjects whose choice patterns across the ten menus of
        options in the survey experiment can be best described by each of the decision model categories.
        Categorization is based on selecting the model with the lowest average absolute error between predicted
        probability of selecting the higher-deductible option and the actual decision. The Heuristics category
        includes the following heuristics: select lowest out-of-pocket limit, select lowest deductible, and select
        lowest premium. The Risk Averse category includes CARA utility models with absolute risk aversion
        coefficients of 0.001 to 0.009 in steps of 0.001. The Risk Loving category includes CARA utility models
        with absolute risk aversion coefficients of -0.001 to -0.009 in steps of 0.001.
                                                                                                                 27
Table 10: Mean Absolute Errors Between Predicted Choice and Observed Choice by Treatment As-
signment in Survey


                                                                Treatment Group
                                            Table Only    Table + Graph Table + Expected Spending
Individual-Level Best Model                    .10             .09                      .10
Risk neutral (lowest expected value)           .48             .32                      .38
Risk Averse CARA Level: r = 0.0004             .39             .29                      .32
Risk Averse CARA Level: r = 0.001              .34             .30                      .33
Heuristic: Lowest Out-Of-Pocket Limit          .30             .46                      .40
Heuristic: Lowest Deductible                   .33             .53                      .44
Heuristic: Lowest Premium                      .67             .47                      .56
Risk Loving CARA Level: r = -0.0004            .56             .38                      .46
Risk Loving CARA Level: r = -0.001             .64             .45                      .54
Random Choice                                  .50             .50                      .50
Notes: This table shows the mean average absolute error between predicted and observed choice of the
high deductible option across the 10 menus in the survey experiment for different decision models. The
individual-level best model corresponds to the categorizations in Table 9. This table can be interpreted
as showing the fraction of decisions that the model predicts incorrectly across individuals.


   In Table 10 we show the average mean absolute error both when we give each person their best

fitting model and when we instead impose a particular model across all individuals. We show results

here for moderate risk aversion (CARA r = 0.0004), which is similar to what has been estimated in

prior studies of insurance choice (e.g,. Handel 2013) and high risk aversion (CARA r = 0.001) as well

as the same negative (risk loving) r values.

   On average, the best fitting models have absolute error rates of 10%, implying that they make a

wrong prediction in one of the ten choice menus. The average error rates across each of the models

are naturally higher if imposed on the entire population. For those who saw the feature table only, the

lowest average mean absolute error comes from the lowest out-of-pocket limit heuristic (30%), then the

lowest deductible heuristic (33%), but is also followed closely by the very high risk aversion (CARA

r = 0.001) model at 34%. For subjects in the consequence-graph treatment, the lowest average mean

absolute error comes from the moderate risk aversion (CARA r = 0.0004) at 29%, followed closely by

higher risk aversion and risk neutrality.

   Overall, we conclude from this analysis that the consequence-graph treatment shifted choice pat-

terns away from heuristic choices focused on lower deductibles and out-of-pocket limits and toward

decisions consistent with risk aversion or risk neutrality. There was also a subset of people for whom

seeing the consequence-graphs appeared to bias them toward lower premium options, but the dominant

effect was to move people toward patterns more consistent with standard expected utility theory.




                                                     28
5     Conclusion

We conducted an incentivized laboratory experiment and a hypothetical choice survey to evaluate

the value of decision-aids that automatically map plan features to their financial consequences. We

found substantial differences in choice patterns when study participants had access to the consequence-

graphs. Without access to the consequence-graphs, respondents made substantial mistakes, choosing

dominated plans even when a state-wise dominant plan was available. On the other hand, the par-

ticipants who viewed consequence-graphs were significantly less likely to violate dominance. In our

second study we also documented that overall patterns of choices under consequence graphs are more

consistent with expected utility theory.

    Our results contribute to a growing body of literature exploring how poor understanding of insur-

ance affects choice patterns in health insurance. Relative to the prior literature, our study provides

the clearest evidence yet that insurance choices in standard display formats ­ where options are almost

always presented as a menu of plan features ­ are affected by subjects having a low ability to map

plan features to a distribution of final wealth consequences. If people were able to do that mapping,

we should not have seen differences in plan choice across display formats.

    A growing literature on insurance choice uses naturally occurring data on insurance choice to infer

consumers' risk preferences. This literature relies on the standard assumption that utility is measured

over final wealth states, our result that individuals cannot do this mapping illustrates a fundamental

flaw in this body of work. Namely, unless we help people better understand the consequences of their

health insurance choices, they are not making selections based on utility over the distribution of final

wealth states.

    The consequence-graph approach we introduce in this paper may provide a way of simplifying and

clarifying health insurance options in settings where people are asked to select between plans with

different cost-sharing tradeoffs. The primary challenge to using this approach in practice is that it

requires one to use a distribution of expected medical spending, and hence the consequence-graph

will be specific to the individual. However, choice platforms for health insurance are already making

some headways in this regard. The benefit of the consequence graph approach relative to approaches

that provide only expected spending levels is that it allows the decision-maker to see the distribution

of spending consequences they face, and hence retains and clarifies information about the amount

of variance in spending and not just the average spending level. As we see from the results of our

hypothetical choice survey, providing the expected spending amount without information about the

variance is only half as effective at improving choice.



                                                   29
   There are some reasons for caution in using consequence graphs and some limitations to our study.

For example, our results suggest that the concerns raised by Handel (2013) that decision aids could

increase adverse selection are likely relevant for choices with consequence graphs. The magnitude of

these adverse selection effects is hard to pin down with the smaller samples in our study and will

depend on the exact menu of options being considered in practice. The ultimate welfare effects of

reducing choice errors with decision aids relative to leaving standard choice menus or removing choice

entirely will depend on the setting and are beyond the scope of our paper.

   Another potential issue with consequence graphs for health insurance choice in the field is that

they clarify the distribution of final wealth states people face, but not the flow of spending. Although

most models of insurance choice in the economics literature use the expected-utility-of-final-wealth

formulation, it is likely that the flow of spending is also of import to consumers. If consequence graphs

push people toward decisions based on final wealth states, they could be detrimental to welfare if true

preferences incorporate features that depend on not just the overall level of spending for the year but

also the flow of that spending. This may be especially important for people with liquidity constraints,

behavioral hazard that causes them to under-utilize medical services that require out-of-pocket costs

(Baicker et al., 2015), or whose experienced utility incorporates reference dependence (Koszegi and

Rabin, 2007). We see this as an important area for future research.

   Finally, drawing practical implications of this approach likely requires testing further adaptations

to the consequence-graph display. For example, it may be that different display formats or instructions

could reduce the bias toward selecting minimum-premium plans that appears to arise for a smaller

subset of participants. In settings other than health insurance, where people face small chances of

largrickson losses (e.g., property insurance) the use of quantile-based graphs may also not be optimal.

We believe our study highlights that decision aids that focus on effectively displaying the distribution

of consequences people face with insurance options are a positive direction for practical applications

and continued research.




                                                   30
References

Abaluck, J. and Gruber, J. (2011). Choice inconsistencies among the elderly: Evidence from plan

  choice in the medicare part D program. American Economic Review, 101(4):1180­1210.

Atanasov, P. and Baker, T. (2014). Putting health back into health insurance choice. Medical Care

  Research and Review, 71(4):337­355.

Baicker, K., Mullainathan, S., and Schwartzstein, J. (2015). Behavioral hazard in health insurance.

  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(4):1623­1667.

Barseghyan, L., Molinari, F., O'Donoghue, T., and Teitelbaum, J. C. (2013). The nature of risk

  preferences: Evidence from insurance choices. American Economic Review, 103(6):2499­2529.

Bhargava, S., Loewenstein, G., and Benartzi, S. (2017a). The costs of poor health (plan choices) &

  prescriptions for reform. Behavioral Science & Policy, 3(1):1­12.

Bhargava, S., Loewenstein, G., and Sydnor, J. (2017b). Choose to lose: Health plan choices from a

  menu with dominated option. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(3):1319­1372.

Blais, A.-R. and Weber, E. U. (2006). A domain-specific risk-taking (dospert) scale for adult popula-

  tions. Judgment and Decision making, 1(1).

Brown, J. R., Kapteyn, A., Luttmer, E. F., Mitchell, O. S., and Samek, A. (2019). Behavioral

  impediments to valuing annuities: Complexity and choice bracketing. Review of Economics and

  Statistics, pages 1­45.

Bundorf, K., Polyakova, M., and Tai-Seale, M. (2019). How do humans interact with algorithms?

  Experimental evidence from health insurance. National Bureau of Economic Research, Working

  Paper No. 25976.

Eckel, C. C. and Grossman, P. J. (2002). Sex differences and statistical stereotyping in attitudes

  toward financial risk. Evolution and human behavior, 23(4):281­295.

Ericson, K. M. and Starc, A. (2012). Heuristics and heterogeneity in health insurance exchanges:

  Evidence from the massachusetts connector. American Economic Review, 102(3):493­97.

Ericson, K. M. and Sydnor, J. (2017). The questionable value of having a choice of levels of health

  insurance coverage. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 31(4):51­72.




                                                 31
Ericson, K. M. and Sydnor, J. R. (2018). Liquidity constraints and the value of insurance. National

  Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 24993.

Frank, R. G. and Lamiraud, K. (2009). Choice, price competition and complexity in markets for

  health insurance. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 71(2):550­562.

Gruber, J., Handel, B. R., Kina, S. H., and Kolstad, J. T. (2020). Managing intelligence: Skilled

  experts and AI in markets for complex products. National Bureau of Economic Research, Working

  Paper No. 27038.

Handel, B., Kolstad, J., Minten, T., and Spinnewijn, J. (2020). The social determinants of choice

  quality: Evidence from health insurance in the netherlands. National Bureau of Economic Research,

  Working Paper No. 27785.

Handel, B. R. (2013). Adverse selection and inertia in health insurance markets: When nudging hurts.

  American Economic Review, 103(7):2643­82.

Handel, B. R. and Kolstad, J. T. (2015). Health insurance for" humans": Information frictions, plan

  choice, and consumer welfare. American Economic Review, 105(8):2449­2500.

Heiss, F., McFadden, D., and Winter, J. (2010). Mind the gap! Consumer perceptions and choices

  of medicare part d prescription drug plans. In Research findings in the economics of aging, pages

  413­481. University of Chicago Press.

Jaspersen, J. G., Ragin, M. A., and Sydnor, J. R. (2019). Predicting insurance demand from risk

  attitudes. National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 26508.

Johnson, E. J., Hassin, R., Baker, T., Bajger, A. T., and Treuer, G. (2013). Can consumers make

  affordable care affordable? The value of choice architecture. PloS one, 8(12).

Kling, J. R., Mullainathan, S., Shafir, E., Vermeulen, L. C., and Wrobel, M. V. (2012). Comparison

  friction: Experimental evidence from medicare drug plans. The quarterly journal of economics,

  127(1):199­235.

Koszegi, B. and Rabin, M. (2007). Reference-dependent risk attitudes. American Economic Review,

  97(4):1047­1073.

Liu, C. and Sydnor, J. R. (2018). Dominated options in health-insurance plans. National Bureau of

  Economic Research, Working Paper No. 24392.



                                                 32
Loewenstein, G., Friedman, J. Y., McGill, B., Ahmad, S., Linck, S., Sinkula, S., Beshears, J., Choi,

  J. J., Kolstad, J., Laibson, D., et al. (2013). Consumers' misunderstanding of health insurance.

  Journal of Health Economics, 32(5):850­862.

Marzilli Ericson, K. M. (2014). Consumer inertia and firm pricing in the medicare part d prescription

  drug insurance exchange. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(1):38­64.

Rothschild, M. and Stiglitz, J. (1978). Equilibrium in competitive insurance markets: An essay on

  the economics of imperfect information. In Uncertainty in economics, pages 257­280.

Samek, A., Hur, I., Kim, S.-H., and Yi, J. S. (2016). An experimental study of the decision process

  with interactive technology. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 130:20­32.

Samek, A., Kapteyn, A., and Gray, A. (2019). Using vignettes to improve understanding of social

  security and annuities. National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 26176.

Schram, A. and Sonnemans, J. (2011). How individuals choose health insurance: An experimental

  analysis. European Economic Review, 55(6):799­819.

Sinaiko, A. D. and Hirth, R. A. (2011). Consumers, health insurance and dominated choices. Journal

  of Health Economics, 30(2):450­457.

Spinnewijn, J. (2017). Heterogeneity, demand for insurance, and adverse selection. American Eco-

  nomic Journal: Economic Policy, 9(1):308­43.

Sydnor, J. (2010). (Over) insuring modest risks. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,

  2(4):177­99.

Winter, J., Balza, R., Caro, F., Heiss, F., Jun, B.-h., Matzkin, R., and McFadden, D. (2006). Medicare

  prescription drug coverage: Consumer information and preferences. Proceedings of the National

  Academy of Sciences, 103(20):7929­7934.

Zhou, C. and Zhang, Y. (2012). The vast majority of medicare part D beneficiaries still don't choose

  the cheapest plans that meet their medication needs. Health Affairs, 31(10):2259­2265.

Zuvekas, S. (2017). Comparing MEPS use and expenditure estimates for the privately insured to

  Truven MarketScan R and OptumLabs claimsT M data, 2008-2013. MEPS AHRQ, Working paper.




                                                 33
Appendix A: Additional Tables and Figures for the Labora-
tory Experiment

                         Table A1: Summary Statistics for Experiment


                                                     (1)         (2)        (3)          (4)
   Variable                                         Tables      Graphs     Total       P-Value
   Age                                              21.173      21.363    21.259       0.222
                                                    (0.092)     (0.125)   (0.076)
   Female                                            0.773       0.681     0.731       0.151
                                                    (0.040)     (0.049)   (0.031)
   GPA                                               3.414       3.370     3.394       0.400
                                                    (0.035)     (0.039)   (0.026)
   Expects to Use Some Healthcare Next Year          0.536       0.549     0.542       0.854
                                                    (0.048)     (0.052)   (0.035)
   Number of Individuals                              110         91        201

   Notes: The table reports the mean background characteristics of the participants in the
   two groups. The p-value reported in the last column is from a t-test of the difference in
   means for those who saw the the standard display first i.e Column 1 versus those who saw
   consequence graph display first i.e Column 2. Order of first display type was randomized.
   Standard errors reported in parenthesis.


                                 Table A2: Eckel-Grossman Results


  Choice (50-50 Gamble)     Low Payoff     High Payoff      Implied CRRA range      Percent Choosing
           (1)                 (2)             (3)          (4)                             (5)
            1                   7               7           3.46<r                        13.43
            2                   6               9           1.16<r<3.46                   17.91
            3                   5              11           0.71<r<1.16                   28.86
            4                   4              13           0.50<r<0.71                    6.97
            5                   3              15           0<r<0.50                       20.9
            6                  0.5            17.5          r<0                           11.94
      Observations                                                                         201
 Notes : This table reports the Eckel-Grossman risk elicitation task results. The gambles are arranged
 in linearly ascending order of expected returns. Column 4 shows the relative risk aversion bounds
 where the utility function is assumed to be a constant relative risk aversion utility function of the
                  1-r
 form U (x) = x  1-r where x is the wealth of the individual and r corresponds to the coefficient of
 relative risk aversion. Column 5 shows the percentage of the total sample that selected each of the
 gambles.
Figure A1: Plan Choices and Results of Menu 1 (State-wise Dominant Option, Four Plan Choices)


                                              Feature-Table Display


 Plan Name    Annual Premium               Annual Deductible    Coinsurance Rate      Maximum Out of Pocket
  Purple*                        $817            $1,000                10%                   $3,500
   Blue                         $1,321            $750                 10%                   $3,250
   Red                          $1,419            $500                 10%                   $3,000
   Black                        $1,957            $250                 10%                   $2,750
* Denotes the dominant option (Not shown to subjects)



                                           Consequence Graph Display




                                               Results for Menu 1

                                100.00%
                                                                      Feature Table

                                80.00%                                Consequence Graph
               Share Choosing




                                60.00%


                                40.00%


                                20.00%


                                 0.00%
                                          Purple*        Blue          Red           Black
                                            Plan Options from Lowest to Highest Premium
Figure A2: Plan Choices and Results of Menu 2 (State-wise Dominant Option, Six Plan Choices)


                                                Feature-Table Display


 Plan Name    Annual Premium                 Annual Deductible    Coinsurance Rate   Maximum Out of Pocket
   Black *                       $851              $1,000                10%                    $2,500
   Orange                        $932              $1,500                20%                    $2,500
   Brown                        $1,177              $750                 10%                    $2,250
    Blue                        $1,231              $500                 20%                    $2,500
   Purple                       $1,616             $1,000                 5%                    $2,250
    Red                         $1,635              $250                 10%                    $1,750
* Denotes the dominant option (Not shown to subjects)



                                             Consequence Graph Display




                                                  Results for Menu 2

                                100.00%

                                                                          Feature Table
                                80.00%
                                                                          Consequence Graph
               Share Choosing




                                60.00%


                                40.00%


                                20.00%


                                 0.00%
                                          Black * Orange Brown         Blue     Purple    Red
                                               Plan Options from Lowest to Highest Premium
Figure A3: Plan Choices and Results of Menu 3 (Second Order Stochastically Dominant Option,
Six Plan Choices)

                                                Feature-Table Display


 Plan Name    Annual Premium                Annual Deductible     Coinsurance Rate     Maximum Out of Pocket
    Red                           $863             $1,500                20%                     $4,000
    Blue                          $913             $2,750                10%                     $3,750
  Brown *                         $988             $1,250                10%                     $2,750
  Orange                         $1,317            $1,000                20%                     $3,500
   Black                         $1,589             $750                 10%                     $2,250
   Purple                        $2,113             $500                 10%                     $2,000
* Denotes the dominant option (Not shown to subjects)



                                            Consequence Graph Display




                                                 Results for Menu 3

                                100.00%

                                                                            Feature Table
                                80.00%
                                                                            Consequence Graph
               Share Choosing




                                60.00%


                                40.00%


                                20.00%


                                 0.00%
                                          Red      Blue     Brown*      Orange    Black       Purple
                                                Plan Options from Lowest to Highest Premium
Figure A4: Plan Choices and Results of Menu 4 (Second Order Stochastically Dominant Option,
Six Plan Choices)

                                                Feature-Table Display


 Plan Name    Annual Premium                 Annual Deductible   Coinsurance Rate      Maximum Out of Pocket
  Orange                        $1,000               $75                 15%                    $2,525
   Red                          $1,059              $100                 12%                    $2,050
  Purple                        $1,119              $125                  9%                    $1,575
   Black                        $1,179              $150                  6%                    $1,125
   Blue                         $1,238              $175                 3%                      $675
  Brown*                        $1,295              $200                  0%                     $200
* Denotes the dominant option (Not shown to subjects)



                                             Consequence Graph Display




                                                 Results for Menu 4

                                100.00%

                                                                               Table    Graph
                                80.00%
               Share Choosing




                                60.00%


                                40.00%


                                20.00%


                                 0.00%
                                          Orange   Red       Purple  Black      Blue    Brown
                                              Plan Options from Lowest to Highest Premium
      Appendix B: Laboratory Experiment Instructions and Questions



Today's Study:      Simulation of Choosing Health Plan Options as a New
Employee

Thank you for participating in our study. Today we are going to ask you to take part in
a simulation about choosing health insurance as a new employee. You will be making
choices on behalf of a hypothetical person named Jamie. Your payment for the study will
depend partly on your decisions and partly on Jamie's health outcomes.

Jamie's situation: Jamie just graduated from college and has recently started a new job.
Jamie's job comes with health insurance benefits, but Jamie has a choice of health plan
options. The choices affect two types of payments for Jamie.

Premium: Jamie has to pay part of the cost for the health plan. This is the amount of
money Jamie pays for sure for the year for health coverage. These payments are made by
equal paycheck withdrawals over the course of the year.

Out-of-pocket costs: People with health insurance generally still have to pay for part of
the medical costs they generate when they go to the doctor. These payments are made
only if Jamie needs to get medical care, and come from insurance features such as co-pays
and deductibles.

Today you will see some information about options for Jamie in a few scenarios and will
be asked to make choices for Jamie.

Please read carefully. There are a few checks embedded in the survey to verify that you
are reading fully.

The Possible Medical Spending (Doctor and Hospital Bills) Jamie Might Have
for the Year

To make decisions for Jamie, it is helpful to know something about Jamie's possible
healthcare needs. We have collected data on recent annual (yearly) medical expenses for
a sample of young adults.

These total medical expenses include charges for doctors, hospitals, specialists, etc. This
amount includes both charges that get covered by insurance and those that have to be
paid out of pocket. However, insurance premiums are not included in this amount.

The graph below shows the annual medical expenses for this sample of young adults sorted
from lowest spending to highest spending. We have grouped people into 10 equal-sized
groups, so each group has 10% of the people. Each orange bar shows the average medical
expenses for people in that group.

 For example, the graph tells us that 40% of people (the bottom 4 groups) have basically
no medical expenses for the year, while 10% of people (the top group) have an average of
almost $13,000 in medical expenses.

For Jamie, we will randomly select one of the adults we have in our sample and Jamie
will have the same medical expenses as that randomly selected person.




Let's test to make sure the graph makes sense to you. If someone from the 9th group was
randomly selected, we would expect their medical expenses for the year to be around:
m $0 (1)
m $500 (2)
m $2,000 (3)
m It is not possible to tell (4)
m Not sure (5)

Answer: Yes, we would expect someone from group 9 to have about $2,000 in medical
expenses for the year. A copy of the graph is at your station for you to refer to throughout
this study.
How Jamie's Outcome and Your Payment Are Determined

Your payment for participating in the study today will be based on the amount of money
Jamie has at the end of the simulated year after taking into account salary and any
healthcare costs.

Jamie's income situation: Jamie will earn a salary of $${e://Field/salary_display} for
the year and have $${e://Field/budget_display} in spending that must be paid (rent and
other bills) leaving Jamie with $${e://Field/discretionary_display} in discretionary
income.

Jamie's health-care spending:

      Plan premium: From Jamie's discretionary income, Jamie will also have to pay
some amount of premium (cost) for health insurance. The premium Jamie pays will
depend on the plan you choose for Jamie.

        Out-of-pocket costs: Jamie may also have to pay out-of-pocket costs for some
health care. A random person from the sample of adults whose medical expenses are shown
in the graph at your station will be selected. Jamie will have the same medical expenses
(i.e., hospital/doctors bills) as that person. How much out-of-pocket cost these medical
expenses create for Jamie will depend on the health plan you chose for Jaime. Some plans
will have more insurance coverage than others and those plans will lead to smaller out-of-
pocket costs for Jamie.

How your payment is affected by Jamie's outcome: Your payment will be based
on Jamie's final discretionary money, after subtracting Jamie's total healthcare spending
(premiums + out of pocket spending) for the year. Specifically, for every $1,000 in
discretionary income Jamie has left over after paying for health care (premiums and out-
of-pocket costs), you will receive $2.

Example:        Again, Jamie starts with $${e://Field/discretionary_display} in
discretionary income. Suppose the plan you choose for Jamie has a premium of $1,000.
Further, suppose that due to the random draw of medical costs and the plan you chose,
Jamie ends up with an additional $800 in out-of-pocket spending for health costs. In that
case,    Jamie would      spend   $1,800     for   all    health    costs   and      have
$${e://Field/example_leftover} in final discretionary income. Since you earn $2 for every
$1,000 in final income, your payment would be: $${e://Field/example_leftover} * ($2 /
$1,000) = $${e://Field/example_display}

How your choices will count for payment: You will make several health insurance
decisions for Jamie, but only one of these decisions will be selected to be paid out at the
end of the study. We will randomly select one of the choices, so please make each choice
carefully, as each has a chance to be the one that determines your payment.
Q73 The Affordable Care Act or ACA contains a range of provisions, some of which have
broad support and others which are more controversial. This question, though, is not
about that. Instead it is simply a check to make sure you are still reading carefully. If
you are, please leave this question blank. That's right, do not select one of the options
and simply click the arrow to proceed to the next page.
m Strongly agree (1)
m Somewhat agree (2)
m Neutral (3)
m Somewhat disagree (4)
m Strongly disagree (5)

A Note About Plan Options

All plans have the same access to doctors/hospitals: When choosing a health insurance
plan for Jamie, remember that all plans offer the same access to doctors and hospitals and
coverage for procedures. So the quality of care will be the same for all of the plans. This
means that the only difference between the plans is their yearly cost (i.e, premium) and
the amount Jamie pays out-of-pocket for Jamie's medical expenses. Some plans may be
better values than others: Some plans may have good value because they have both low
premiums and cover most medical expenses. Other plans may have poor value because
they have high premiums and still leave Jamie exposed to a lot of out-of-pocket spending
when Jamie gets sick. Finally, others may present a mix with either low premium and
high out-of-pocket costs or high premium and low out-of-pocket costs. All amounts are
yearly amounts: When we describe the premium for a plan, we will give the total yearly
premium for the plan -- not a monthly amount. All other plan features are similarly
described at the yearly level. Keep that in mind when making your decisions, and
remember that your payment will be affected by the amount of total health spending
(premiums + out-of-pocket costs) Jamie must make for the year.
Which plan do you choose for Jamie?

The graph below shows four/six health plans. While these plans have different costs and
features, they all offer Jamie the same access to good doctors and hospitals.

What the graph shows:

1. Premium for the plan. This is the first dot in the graph for each plan and is the
minimum possible total health spending Jamie could have for the year if you choose that
plan for Jamie.
2. Expected total spending (premium + out of pocket) Jamie would have for each of the
10 groups of medical expenses Jamie could end up in. Each dot shows Jamie's premium +
out-of-pocket spending with that plan if Jamie has the average medical bills of people in
that group.
3. Maximum possible spending. This is the most Jamie could possibly have to pay in the
worst-case scenario (premium + maximum possible out-of-pocket spending) with that
plan.

[ PLAN DISPLAY HERE ]

Given the information above, which plan would pick for Jamie?
m Purple (1)
m Blue (2)
m Red (3)
m Black (4)

[ ITERATE THROUGH GRAPH/TABLE MENUS ]

Calculating Total Costs

Let's check your understanding of how the plans work. On this page we show you a
medical spending amount for Jamie and ask you to calculate how high Jamie's total costs
(premium plus out-of-pocket) would be for two different plans. These calculations can be
difficult, but please do your best. If you can accurately calculate the amounts, you will
get a bonus paid on top of your other earnings from today.

Suppose that Jamie experiences $10,000 in medical bills for the year. How much would
Jamie spend in total (premium plus out-of-pocket) if Jamie purchased a particular health
insurance plan? If your response is within $10 of the correct amount for that plan, you
will earn an additional $0.50 (per response).




Annual Premium: Your cost for insurance. You pay part of this cost with each
paycheck throughout the year.
Annual Deductible: Amount of medical bills you must pay for during the year before
insurance begins to pay.
Coinsurance: Your share of medical bills after your total spending has hit the
deductible. Insurance covers the remaining share.
Maximum Out of Pocket: This amount includes the deductible and shows the total
amount you could pay in the year out-of-pocket for medical bills.


If Jamie purchased the Black plan, how much would Jamie pay in total (premium plus
out-of-pocket)? Please only enter numbers (no commas, dollar signs, etc.).

If Jamie instead purchased the Orange plan, how much would Jamie pay in total
(premium plus out-of-pocket)? Please only enter numbers (no commas, dollar signs, etc.).


Choose a Gamble Option

The gamble options: In this part of the study you will select from among six different
gambles the one gamble you would like to play. The six different gambles are listed below.
You must select one and only one of these gambles. Each gamble has two possible
outcomes (Event A or Event B) with the indicated probabilities of occurring. Your
compensation for this part of the study will be determined by: 1) which of the six gambles
you select; and 2) which of the two possible events occur.

For example: If you select gamble 4 and Event A occurs, you will be paid $4. If Event
B occurs, you will instead be paid $13. For every gamble, each event has a 50% chance
of occurring.     Some participants will be randomly selected to play their chosen
gamble: At the end of the study, 1 out of every 4 participants will be randomly selected
by the computer to have their chosen gamble pay out. If you are one of the selected
participants for this section at the end of the study, the computer will select a random
number between 1 and 100 (each equally likely) to determine which event occurs. If the
random number is between 1 and 50, Event A will occur. If the number is between 51 and
100, Event B will occur.

Q112




Make your gamble selection below.
m Gamble 1 (1)
m Gamble 2 (2)
m Gamble 3 (3)
m Gamble 4 (4)
m Gamble 5 (5)
m Gamble 6 (6)
For each of the following statements, please indicate the likelihood that you would engage
in the described activity or behavior if you were to find yourself in that situation. Provide
a rating from Extremely Unlikely to Extremely Likely.
                                               Neither
                Extremely                                                     Extremely
                                Unlikely (2)   Likely nor      Likely (4)
                Unlikely (1)                                                  Likely (5)
                                               Unlikely (3)
 Betting     a
 day's income
 on        the
               m                m              m               m              m
 outcome of a
 sporting
 event. (1)
 Investing
 10% of your
 annual
              m                 m              m               m              m
 income in a
 new business
 venture. (6)
 Taking     a
 skydiving    m                 m              m               m              m
 class. (2)
 Bungee
 jumping off
                m               m              m               m              m
 a tall bridge.
 (3)



We would appreciate if you could share any thoughts on the strategy or strategies you
used to select insurance options in this survey. This question is optional, but may help us
to better understand how people make decisions.


How many economics experiments have you participated in before this one?

What is your age (in years)?

What is your gender?
m Male (9)
m Female (10)
m Other / prefer not to state (11)
Your primary major is associated with which school?
m College of Agriculture and Life Sciences (1)
m School of Business (2)
m School of Education (3)
m College of Engineering (4)
m   School of Human Ecology (5)
m   School of Journalism and Mass Communication (6)
m   College of Letters and Sciences (7)
m   School of Medicine and Public Health, School of Nursing, or School of Pharmacy (8)
m   School of Public Affairs (9)
m   School of Social Work (10)
m Undecided (11)

What is your approximate GPA?

Which of the following best reflects your expectations about your own healthcare usage
for the next year?
m No healthcare usage (1)
m Routine annual physical only (2)
m A few minor visits to primary care or specialists (3)
m Moderately frequent visits or costly procedures (4)
m Substantial healthcare needs (costly procedures, surgeries, or treatments) (5)



Your Payment

[ PROVIDE INFORMATION ABOUT EARNINGS IN ALL PARTS ]

   Appendix C: UAS Survey Experiment Instructions and Questions
                                 




                                                               




                                                            




                                                               




                                                               
   

   




   



   




   

      
   





   



