                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           BURY THE GOLD STANDARD? A QUANTITATIVE EXPLORATION

                                      Anthony M. Diercks
                                        Jonathan Rawls
                                           Eric Sims

                                      Working Paper 28015
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28015


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2020




We are grateful to Michiel De Pooter, Eric Engstrom, Robert Lester, Scott Schuh, David Wilcox,
and seminar participants at West Virginia University for helpful comments and suggestions. The
analysis and conclusions of this paper are those of the authors and do not represent the positions
of the research staff, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Anthony M. Diercks, Jonathan Rawls, and Eric Sims. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Bury the Gold Standard? A Quantitative Exploration
Anthony M. Diercks, Jonathan Rawls, and Eric Sims
NBER Working Paper No. 28015
October 2020
JEL No. E31,E32,E42

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper is one of the first to study the present-day properties of the gold standard in a
quantitative model commonly used in central banks. We incorporate gold into an otherwise
standard estimated New Keynesian model and compare the positive and normative implications
of adopting a gold standard to other more commonly advocated policies. We show that under
certain conditions, the gold standard is akin to a nominal GDP targeting framework and can at
times be considered an improvement. However, unlike more conventional policies, the gold
standard must react to shocks to the supply and demand for gold. We estimate the model for the
post-2000 period using a novel dataset on the supply of gold and find that following a gold
standard would result in dramatic increases in the volatilities of macroeconomic aggregates and a
significant deterioration in household welfare. This is because the estimated shocks to gold
supply and demand are significantly larger than for other more conventional aggregate shocks. In
the end, what buries the gold standard turns out to be instability in the dynamics of gold itself.

Anthony M. Diercks                              Eric Sims
Federal Reserve System                          Department of Economics
DC                                              University of Notre Dame
20551                                           3060 Jenkins Nanovic Hall
anthony.m.diercks@frb.gov                       Notre Dame, IN 46556
                                                and NBER
Jonathan Rawls                                  esims1@nd.edu
3060 Jenkins Nanovic Halls
Notre Dame, Indi 46556
United States
jrawls@nd.edu
1    Introduction
    The gold standard has been dormant in the United States and around the world for
close to fifty years. Yet in the popular press and various policy circles, it is very much
alive and well. The strengths of the gold standard cited by its proponents are its ability
to constrain the creation of new money while also discouraging large fiscal and trade
deficits. This tends to help ensure price stability over the very long-run, a fact that is
also acknowledged by the former Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke.1
    However, the strengths of the gold standard are often cited as its greatest weak-
ness: constraining monetary policy prevents stabilization of output and unemployment
in the midst of recessions. To say the latter view is widely held by central bankers and
economists alike would be an understatement: a University of Chicago survey of top aca-
demic economists from 2012 found that 100% of the respondents were against returning
to the gold standard.2 Such widespread agreement is remarkable, because a thorough
review of the optimal monetary policy literature3 shows that the vast majority of studies
(close to 100) find that zero inflation or price stability is optimal in the long-run, which
could possibly speak to one of the strengths of the gold standard.
    With these conflicting implications in mind, the objective of this paper is to move
the largely historical- and prose-based analysis of the strengths and weaknesses of the
gold standard toward a more formal modern quantitative framework commonly used
by central banks. In particular, we analyze the positive and normative implications
of the gold standard in the context of a New Keynesian model in conjunction with a
novel dataset of the supply and demand for gold. We then compare the quantitative
performance of the gold standard to other more commonly advocated policies, such as
a conventional Taylor rule or a nominal GDP targeting rule.
    To our knowledge, our study is the first to focus on the present-day implications
of the gold standard in a modern, quantitative macro model. Previous papers have
largely focused on how the gold standard performed while it was actually implemented
in the United States decades ago. For instance, Fagan et al. (2013) estimate a small New
Keynesian model for the time period 1879-1914 (classical Gold Standard period) and find
that moving to a more conventional Taylor rule would have reduced inflation volatility at
the expense of higher real-money and interest rate volatility. They determine that output
volatility would be largely unaffected so that the end result was no welfare improvement

   1. See    Lecture     Series  Lesson     1    https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/files/
bernanke-lecture-one-20120320.pdf.
   2. For more details, http://www.igmchicago.org/surveys/gold-standard/.
   3. For an overview, see Diercks (2019) and optimalinflation.com.

                                               2
when moving away from the gold standard.4 Although we employ a similar small-
scale New Keynesian model, unlike them our model explicitly includes gold as an asset
households may accumulate.5 Chen and Ward (2019) focus on a similar time period
as do Fagan et al. (2013) and estimate an open economy model for the U.K., Sweden,
and Belgium to show that flexible prices were the key channel through which output
was stabilized because the economy during this time period was largely agricultural.
In contrast to these studies, we focus on how the gold standard would perform in the
current environment within the United States by estimating structural parameters from
more recent data and allowing for a rich model specification with trend growth.
    The Great Depression is another time period in which the gold standard has been
heavily studied (e.g. see Bernanke and James (1991), Eichengreen (1995)). The consen-
sus from these historical accounts is that the gold standard restricted monetary policy's
ability to stabilize the economy, and therefore contributed to the severity of the De-
pression. Other studies have focused on determinacy and commitment under the gold
standard as in Barro (1979) and Bordo and Kydland (1995). Bordo et al. (2007) use a
two-sector real business cycle model to show that a strict inflation targeting framework
can also lead to price stability and potentially reduce inflation volatility in the short-run
relative to a gold standard. In contrast to these studies, we do a full welfare analysis
of competing monetary policy frameworks in a model with nominal rigidities and ex-
plicit costs associated with inflation. Furthermore, we introduce a novel gold dataset to
further quantify the potential dynamics under a gold standard.
    We modify an otherwise textbook New Keynesian model with price and wage rigid-
ity to include gold. Gold enters the budget constraint of households as an asset they can
accumulate. Households receive a utility flow from holding gold, with an exogenous
variable capturing variations in preference-based demand. Utility from gold is addi-
tively separable with respect to other choice variables. Gold production is exogenous,
with profits from new discoveries remitted lump-sum back to households. Gold is not
used as a factor of production in the output good. Altogether, these assumptions imply
that under a typically-assumed monetary rule (e.g. a Taylor rule), gold is irrelevant for
the equilibrium dynamics of macro variables. Under such rules, the price of gold fluctu-
ates in response to both gold supply and demand shocks, but also in response to other
macro shocks. The endogenous price of gold in the model allows us to study equilibrium
dynamics and household welfare under a classical gold standard. Under such a rule, the

    4. Their results suggest that welfare would have been slightly lower under a counterfactual Taylor rule
regime for this time period.
    5. Our setup also employs a second-order approximation for computing welfare, which helps capture
the costs of inflation and price dispersion, which are absent in the log-linearization of Fagan et al. (2013).

                                                      3
monetary authority adjusts the nominal interest rate to stabilize the price of gold, rather
than according to something like a Taylor rule or a different type of targeting rule (e.g.
an inflation target or nominal GDP target).
    Our first contribution is to show that under certain modeling assumptions, the gold
standard is isomorphic to a nominal GDP targeting rule. To our knowledge, the possible
similarities between a gold standard and a nominal spending rule are not well-known.
We show that in the absence of gold preference and supply shocks, the gold standard
implements policy such that nominal GDP is equated to a fixed ratio of the nominal
value of gold in equilibrium. Our simulations suggest that the gold standard will be
equivalent to a nominal GDP target mainly in response to supply shocks (e.g. stationary
productivity or labor supply shocks). Previous studies such as Gar´    in et al. (2016) have
shown that nominal GDP targeting performs well in a model with price and wage rigidi-
ties, which bodes well for the relative performance of the gold standard (conditional on
no gold-specific shocks).
    Our second contribution is to show that in the presence of a positive trend in produc-
tivity growth, the gold standard may in fact outperform nominal GDP targeting. Specif-
ically, any scenario in which productivity growth persistently deviates from trend will
imply fluctuations in inflation to offset movements in output under the nominal GDP
targeting framework. In contrast, the gold standard effectively builds in the change in
trend growth that the simple NGDP target does not. In this scenario, inflation will not
need to adjust in response to a positive productivity trend shock as output and the sup-
ply of gold rise together. Higher supply of gold is effectively met with higher demand.
    Our third contribution is to estimate a structural model with a novel quarterly dataset
of the gold supply over the past twenty years. This allows us to extract gold-specific
shocks which would be relevant under the gold standard. With realistic shocks to the
supply and demand of gold, we find a dramatic deterioration in household welfare in
comparison to more conventional policies such as Taylor rules or nominal GDP targeting.
The latter policies imply that gold supply and demand shocks are irrelevant for equi-
librium dynamics, whereas implementation of a gold standard dramatically elevates the
importance of these shocks. The intuition for the relative decline in welfare is two-fold:
(1) the volatility of gold-specific shocks in the data is much larger than the volatility of
other macroeconomic aggregates, and (2) by being forced to stabilize the price of gold
in response to these shocks, the volatility of output and inflation must notably increase.
Under the gold standard, a negative shock to gold supply requires the central bank to
engage in a contractionary action (raising the nominal rate) to keep the price of gold
from rising, which pushes output and inflation down. Likewise, the central bank has to


                                             4
engage in similar actions in response to a positive gold demand shock.
    We find that the inflation and output growth volatility under the Gold Standard
are almost an order of magnitude higher than under more conventional policies. We
construct a counterfactual historical simulation of aggregate variables using smoothed
shocks from our estimation under three different policy regimes ­ a Taylor rule, a nomi-
nal GDP targeting rule, and the gold standard. In these simulations, the quarterly output
growth volatilities under the Taylor rule and nominal GDP target are 0.61% and 0.43%,
respectively. These values are roughly consistent with what we observe in the data over
the past twenty years. In contrast, the output growth volatility during the same time
period under the gold standard is 3.63%, which is around 8.4 times more volatile.
    Likewise, inflation volatility is around 0.92% (annualized) under the Taylor rule and
1.62% (annualized) under nominal GDP targeting. In contrast, the inflation volatility
under the gold standard is 14.64% (annualized).6 These striking differences in volatilities
across policies imply a per period welfare loss in consumption equivalent units of about
3.5401% under the gold standard relative to the Taylor rule. This is an economically
significant disparity that translates into a permanent difference in real consumption per
capita of approximately $1,500 per year.7 In the latest quarter for which we have data
(2020Q1), our counterfactual simulation suggests that the level output would be roughly
10% lower under the gold standard compared to the Taylor rule.
    Overall, what buries the gold standard in our model turns out to be the instability
in the dynamics of gold itself. Gold supply and demand are not as well behaved as its
proponents would suggest. While we show the gold standard to have some potential
positives in that it can behave similarly to a nominal GDP target or even improve upon
it in certain cases, its weaknesses dominate its strengths. This is why it is important
to present arguments within a quantitative framework. Without it, a proper assessment
of the trade-offs cannot be formally established and the arguments will continue on
indefinitely.
    To provide some caveats, we should note that the gold standard studied in our frame-
work is in the context of a closed economy. The gold standard would also likely play an
important role from an open economy perspective as it would ensure a fixed exchange

    6. Upon first glance, the volatilities for the gold standard that we estimate may seem too extreme.
However, the values are not far off from the volatilities observed in the data for the time period 1879-
1914, in which the classical gold standard was in effect. For instance, as shown in Fagan et al. (2013), the
annualized standard deviation of inflation and quarterly standard deviation of output growth in the data
over this time period was 8.60% and 2.33%, respectively. While a number of factors could be playing a
role in the observed elevated volatility (e.g. large technology shocks) over this time period, we view our
results as not unreasonable given this context.
    7. Dollar value calculation based on real consumption per capita in 2012 dollars of $40,566 in 2019Q4.

                                                     5
rate. We also include gold in our model in a relatively simple way, with the explicit
intent of having gold be irrelevant for equilibrium dynamics under more conventional
monetary regimes such as a Taylor rule. This has the benefit of making the analysis
clean and comparable to more conventional models, but we admittedly abstract from
complementarities between the production of gold and the production of other goods.
Another potential objection could be that the estimated shocks to gold supply and de-
mand are not truly structural with respect to the monetary regime. In particular, under
a gold standard, perhaps gold-specific shocks would be far less volatile.8 Finally, our
model abstracts from central bank balance sheet policies and instead focuses on imple-
menting monetary policy by setting short-term interest rates. It is possible that allowing
for balance sheet policies would alter conclusions regarding the desirability of a gold
standard.9 With these potential caveats in mind, we nevertheless think that our analysis
provides a useful benchmark against which proponents of a return to the gold standard
must grapple.
    In Section 2, we discuss our novel dataset on the supply of gold that we later use
in our estimation. Section 3 presents our model and Section 4 discusses positive im-
plications of alternative monetary policies in the context of that model. In Section 5
we conduct quantitative historical counterfactuals and perform some normative analysis
about the relative desirability of different policies. Section 6 concludes.




2     Gold data
   The novel dataset we use for our analysis is based on gold supply provided by Gold
Field Mineral Services. Gold Field Mineral Services (GFMS) provides a survey of world
supply of gold on both a quarterly and annual basis. Although the Gold Survey has
been conducted in various forms since 1967, GFMS only provides quarterly data through

    8. While gold demand may depend more on the monetary regime and therefore be dubiously struc-
tural, we view the supply of gold as relatively less subject to this concern. We also study the situation in
which only gold supply shocks are active and continue to find that the gold standard performs poorly.
    9. While we focus on implementing the gold standard with monetary policy's influence over short-term
interest rates, an alternative approach would be for the central bank to use its balance sheet to manipulate
gold holdings to offset supply and demand shocks. There are several obvious problems with relying on
balance sheet dynamics to maintain the price of gold: (1) the Federal Reserve might run out of gold, which
is essentially what happened as gold flowed out of the United States in the financial crisis of 1933, (2) the
current gold-coverage ratio (nominal value of gold held by the U.S. government divided by total Federal
Reserve liabilities) is close to 7%, so any large-scale redemption of dollars for gold would wipe out the U.S.
government's gold supply, and (3) in a frictionless world in which gold shocks can be perfectly offset by
balance sheet manipulation, the gold standard would no longer constrain short-term interest rate policy,
which largely defeats its purpose.

                                                      6
             Figure 1: Gold Field Mineral Services (GFMS) Supply of Gold from 2000 to 2019
                 1400
                           Total Supply
                           Mine Production
                           Scrap
                           Net Hedging
                 1200




                 1000




                  800
Tonnes of Gold




                  600




                  400




                  200




                    0




                 -200
                    2000   2001      2002    2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009          2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015   2016   2017   2018   2019
                                                                                              Year

  Notes: The plot shows the total world supply of gold from 2000 to 2020 in tonnes. The supply of gold (solid
  blue) is divided into three categories, with mine production (dashed), scrap (dotted), and net hedging
  (solid gray). The data is based on Global Field Mineral Services Gold Survey of Refinitiv, Thomson
  Reuters.


  Thomson Reuters Eikon terminal dating back to 2000, giving us approximately 80 quar-
  ters in which to estimate supply and demand shocks when combined with gold prices.
      While the relatively short sample may be a potential concern, annual data dating
  back to 1980 shows similar volatility in the gold supply relative to the post-2000 period.
  Furthermore, compared to the post-2000 period, historical data dating back to 1801 im-
  plies that production based on mining is close to three times as volatile over the full 220
  year sample.10 This suggests that the time period that we focus on may be closer to a
  lower bound in terms of the historical volatility of the gold supply.
      The GFMS survey is the primary source for world physical gold supply. Their phys-
  ical gold supply figures (which we explicitly use in our analysis) are often cited in the
  Mineral Yearbook developed by the U.S. Geological Survey, which is a bureau of the
  United States Department of the Interior. According to GFMS, the informational con-
  tent of the survey is derived from visits and discussions with local traders, producers,
  refiners, fabricators and central bankers from countries around the world.
      Supply is broken down into three categories: (1) Mine Production, (2) Scrap, and

     10. Special thanks to the Metals Research team at Refinitiv for providing the annual data and the histor-
  ical mining data dating back to 1801.

                                                                                         7
             Figure 2: Quarterly Growth of Gold Supply and Real GDP from 2000-2019
    30
               Gold Supply Growth
               Real GDP Growth




    20




    10




     0
%




    -10




    -20




    -30
      2000     2001     2002        2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009          2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015   2016   2017   2018   2019
                                                                                     Year

Notes: The plot shows the growth in the total world supply of gold (solid blue) from 2000 to 2019 on a
quarterly basis in comparison to quarterly real GDP growth for the United States (solid black). The data
is based on Global Field Mineral Services Gold Survey of Refinitiv, Thomson Reuters.


(3) Net Hedging Supply. Mine production makes up the vast majority of new supply,
typically representing approximately 70 to 90% on an annual basis. It reflects the pro-
duction of new gold based on underground reserves. The top producing countries have
recently been China and Australia, which collectively make up about 20-25% of world
production.
    The scrap category captures recycling or mobilization of existing above-ground stocks
of metal. This typically makes up about 20 to 30% of overall supply on an annual basis.
It plays an important role due to the relatively large existing stock of gold in the form of
jewelry and electronics that use gold in their production. Net hedging supply measures
the effect of forward sales, loans, and options positions in the physical market for gold.
It can often have a negative effect on total supply, sometimes reducing supply by 10 to
15%.
    Figure 1 shows the various categories along with the total supply on a quarterly
basis from 2000 through 2019. A few items are worth noting. The average growth rate of
the gold supply over this time period is about 0.5% on a quarterly basis, which is very
close to average real GDP growth over a similar horizon. However, the volatilities of the
two series are dramatically different. Figure 2 shows the growth rate of the world gold


                                                                                 8
          Figure 3: Quarterly Growth of Gold Price and Inflation from 2000-2019
    20
                Gold Price Growth
                Quarterly Inflation Rate


    15




    10




     5
%




     0




     -5




    -10




    -15
      2000   2001   2002     2003     2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015   2016   2017   2018   2019
                                                                            Year

Notes: The plot shows the growth in the gold price (solid blue) from 2000 to 2019 on a quarterly basis in
comparison to quarterly inflation for the United States (solid black). The data is based on Global Field
Mineral Services Gold Survey of Refinitiv, Thomson Reuters.


supply on a quarter-over-quarter basis in comparison to the growth rate of real GDP for
the United States. The volatility of the gold supply is an order of magnitude higher. This
extreme volatility will play an important role in the welfare analysis that we do later in
the paper, as the gold standard will be forced to react to this sharp volatility to stabilize
the price of gold.
    Figure 3 shows the growth rate of the price of gold on a quarter-over-quarter basis
in comparison to the inflation rate for the United States. Similar to the previous figure,
the volatility of the gold price growth is relatively large, which will likely imply sizable
gold demand shocks when we estimate the model.




3         Model
   We present a New Keynesian model that facilitates a comparison between monetary
regimes including the gold standard, a nominal GDP target, and interest rate setting

                                                                           9
via a Taylor rule. The model features monopolistically competitive labor and final good
markets, nominal wage and price rigidities modeled via Calvo pricing, and nonstation-
ary productivity growth. Relative to the standard New Keynesian model, we include
gold as an asset the household may accumulate and from which it derives a utility flow.
Gold production is exogenous, with profits from new gold discoveries remitted back to
households lump-sum. In the subsections below, we describe the household problem,
the production and labor markets, and the conduct of monetary policy in detail.


3.A     Households
   There exists a representative household with separable preferences in consumption,
labor, and gold. The problem of the household can be written:

                                                                        1+ 
                                                                       N
                    max
              {Ct , Nt ,Gt , Bt }t0
                                      E0          t
                                                      t   log (Ct ) - t t
                                                                       1+
                                                                          + t ln ( Gt )
                                           t =0

subject to the following constraint:

(3.1)     Pt Ct + PG,t Gt + Bt  MRSt Nt + Rt-1 Bt-1 + PG,t Gt-1 +  R,t + G,t + U ,t

where t is an intertemporal preference (demand) shock, t is a labor supply preference
shock, and t is a gold demand shock. The discount factor is given by   (0, 1) and 
represents the inverse of the Frisch elasticity of labor supply.
   Constraint (3.1) is a standard flow budget constraint. A household enters the period
with a stock of bonds, Bt-1 , and can choose a new stock of bonds, Bt , which pays out
the gross nominal interest rate Rt in period t + 1. The household enters a period with
a previously chosen stock of gold, Gt-1 . It can accumulate more or less gold to take to
t + 1 via choosing Gt . The market price of gold is PG,t , which the household takes as
given. Consumption is denoted by Ct , and the price of the consumed good is Pt . The
household decides the amount of labor to supply, Nt , which earns the wage MRSt , the
nominal remuneration for supplying labor to labor unions.  R,t is the nominal dividend
from ownership in production firms, G,t is the nominal dividend from ownership in
the gold producer, and U ,t is the nominal dividend from ownership in labor unions.
   The household first order conditions are:


                                                              1
(3.2)                                                  Nt =      mrst
                                                              Ct


                                                             10
                                                   t+1 Ct
(3.3)                            1 =  R t Et              -
                                                          t +
                                                             1
                                                              1
                                                   t Ct+1



                                        t            Pt Ct
(3.4)                    PG,t = Pt Ct      +  E t +1        PG,t+1
                                        Gt      t Pt+1 Ct+1

where mrst is the real wage from supplying labor to unions. Equation (3.2) is a standard
labor supply equation, and (3.3) is a standard Euler equation. Equation (3.4) is the first
order condition with respect to gold holdings. It says that the cost of acquiring gold
today is equal to the marginal benefit today plus the marginal benefit in the future,
both in terms of utils of consumption. Given that gold is a stock with an intertemporal
return, this condition is a familiar asset pricing equation with a forward-looking gold
         +1 Pt Ct
price.  t t Pt+1 Ct+1
                      is the household's nominal stochastic discount factor. t = PP t
                                                                                  t -1
                                                                                       is the
gross inflation rate.


3.B     Labor Markets
   There are two dimensions to the labor market. The household supplies Nt to a con-
tinuum of labor unions indexed by h  [0, 1]. The unions differentiate labor and sell
the labor to a labor packer, which sells aggregated labor bundles to a representative
wholesale firm.

   1. Labor Packer The labor packer combines differentiated union labor, NU ,t (h), into
labor available to the wholesale firm. It pays Wt (h) for variety h of labor and sells
combined labor to the wholesale firm at Wt . The technology packing differentiated
union labor into final labor is:
                                                                           w
                                             1               w -1         w -1
(3.5)                        NP,t =              NU ,t (h)    w     dh
                                         0

with an elasticity of substitution w > 1. The packer is competitive and earns no profit.
Profit maximization gives rise to a demand curve for differentiated labor and a wage
index:
                                                               -    w
                                                   Wt (h)
(3.6)                          NU ,t (h) =                              NP,t
                                                    Wt


                                                    11
                                                             1
(3.7)                             Wt1-   w
                                             =                   Wt (h)1-    w
                                                                                 dh
                                                         0


    2. Unions The unions purchase labor from the households at the rate MRSt and sell
differentiated labor, LU ,t (h), to the labor packer at the rate Wt (h). The typical union's
nominal dividend is

(3.8)                    U ,t (h) = Wt (h) NU ,t (h) - MRSt NU ,t (h)

Labor unions are subject to a Calvo-style nominal rigidity. Each period, there is a 1 - w
probability that a union may adjust its wage, where w  [0, 1). Unions may index non-
updated wages to steady state trend inflation, , via the parameter w  [0, 1]. Unions
maximize their present discounted value of flow profits where discounting comes from
the household's stochastic discount factor. Solving the union maximization problem
reveals that all updating unions choose the same reset wage, wt . The real reset wage can
be expressed as:

                                                                  wf 1.t
(3.9)                                    wt =
                                                             w - 1 f 2,t

where

(3.10)                f 1,t = mrst wt w L P,t + w Et t,t+1 -                     w w
                                                                                       t+
                                                                                        w
                                                                                          1 f 1,t+1



                                                                                      w -1
(3.11)                f 2,t = wt w L P,t + w Et t,t+1 (1-                    w ) w
                                                                                     t+ 1 f 2,t+1

                                  t+1 Ct
In these expressions, t,t+1 =     t Ct+1     is the household's real stochastic discount factor.


3.C      Production
   Similar to the labor market, there are multiple layers to the production side of the
economy. There exists a continuum of retail firms that produce differentiated output
indexed by j  [0, 1], Yt ( j). Differentiated output is transformed into a final good, Yt ,
by a competitive final goods firm using the following technology:


                                                                               o
                                                     1                p -1   p -1
(3.12)                             Yt =                  Yt ( j)        p
                                                 0



                                                             12
where the parameter p > 1 measures the degree of substitutability among differentiated
output. The price of the final output is denoted by Pt and the prices of differentiated
outputs are Pt ( j). Profit maximization by the competitive firm gives rise to demand for
each differentiated output and an aggregate price index:


                                                               -   p
                                                 Pt ( j)
(3.13)                             Yt ( j) =                           Yt
                                                   Pt



                                    1-               1
                                                         Pt ( j)1- p dj
                                         p
(3.14)                            Pt         =
                                                 0


1. Retail Firms Retail firms buy output from a wholesale producer and differentiate it,
Yt ( j) = Yw,t ( j), where w indexes the wholesale firm. Wholesale output is purchased at
price Pw,t and is sold at Pt ( j) to the final goods firm. Nominal profit for the retail firm
is given by:



(3.15)                       R,t ( j) = Pt ( j) Yt ( j) - Pw,t Yw,t ( j)

Retail firms are not able to freely adjust their price in a given period a   ´ la Calvo. In
particular, there is a 1 -  p probability each period,  p  [0, 1], that a firm can adjust
its price, which we denote Pt ( j). Otherwise it charges the most recently chosen price.
Firms given the opportunity to adjust their price will do so to maximize the expected
present discounted value of profit returned to households. Non-updating firms may
index their prices to steady state trend inflation via  p  [0, 1]. It is straightforward to
show that all updating firms will choose a common reset price, Pt# . The reset price in
                  Pt#
real terms, p#t = Pt , may be written as



                                                         p x1,t
(3.16)                                   p#
                                          t =
                                                     p - 1 x2,t


where x1,t and x2,t are expressed as



                        x1,t = pw,t Yt +  p Et t,t+1 -                   t+1 x1,t+1
                                                                   p p      p
(3.17)



                                                 13
                                                              p -1
(3.18)                     x2,t = Yt +  p Et t,t+1 (1- p ) p t+1 x1,t+1

               Pw,t
where pw,t =    Pt    and may be interpreted as real marginal cost.


2. Wholesale Firms There is a representative wholesale firm that produces output ac-
cording to Yw,t = At L P,t . Its profit is:



(3.19)                               w
                                     t = Pw,t At L P,t - Wt L P,t


Profit maximization gives rise to the labor demand condition wt = pw,t At , where wt is
the real wage where At is the stochastic level of productivity with gross growth rate
Zt = AA  t
       t -1
            . The growth rate of productivity obeys the following process:



(3.20)                   ln ( Zt ) = (1 -  Z ) ln ( Z ) +  Z ln ( Zt-1 ) + Z   Z ,t


where  Z is the autoregressive parameter, Z is the known non-stochastic steady state
gross growth rate, and Z,t is an innovation drawn from a standard normal distribution.
The innovation is scaled by Z , which measures the standard deviation.


3.D      Gold Producing Firm
   There exists a firm that receives an exogenous change in the endowment of gold,
which it sells to households. Thus, the gold producing firm has no inputs. Nominal
profits are:



(3.21)                                G,t = PG,t ( Gt - Gt-1 )

    The gold producing firm receives profit on the new exogenous flow, which is redis-
tributed back to the household. The gold stock evolves according to:



(3.22)                                                ^t
                                              Gt = At G



                                                   14
where G ^ t is an exogenous stationary AR(1) process. To ensure balanced growth, the
stock of gold follows the economy's productivity trend but fluctuates around the trend
due to changes in G ^ t.


3.E      Monetary Policy
    The monetary authority can conduct monetary policy by setting nominal interest
rates through a Taylor Rule or have nominal interest rates react endogenously to support
a gold standard or nominal GDP target. In the case of the Taylor rule, we assume the
nominal rate follows:



(3.23)     log ( Rt ) = (1 -  R ) log ( R) +  R log ( Rt-1 ) + (1 -  R )  (t -  ) + R   R,t


where the autoregressive parameter  R governs interest rate smoothing,  governs the
reaction of the nominal interest rate to deviations in the inflation rate from steady state,
and R,t  N 0, R     2 is an i.i.d. monetary policy shock with a standard deviation of  .
                                                                                        R
    If the central bank instead follows a nominal GDP growth target, then the nominal
interest rate reacts endogenously to support a constant nominal GDP growth rate:

                                            Yt
(3.24)                                 t        = Z
                                           Yt-1

Alternatively, this rule can be expressed as:



(3.25)                    t + log (Yt ) - log (Yt-1 ) =  + log ( Z )

where t is the net inflation rate and  is the steady state net inflation rate. Under
a nominal GDP target, inflation plus real GDP growth equals the sum of steady state
inflation and trend productivity growth, which are both constant.
    If the central bank were to follow a gold standard, then the nominal rate would
endogenously adjust to ensure that the nominal gold price grows at a constant rate:


                                          PG,t
(3.26)                                          =
                                         PG,t-1

   If the net steady state inflation rate was zero, then a gold standard would commit the


                                             15
central bank to a constant gold price, PG .


3.F      Other Exogenous Processes
The labor supply shock, t , intertemporal preference shock, t , the gold preference
                                                 ^ t , all follow an AR(1) process with
shock, t , and the stationary gold supply shock, G
a known non-stochastic steady state:



(3.27)               ln (t ) = 1 -  ln () +  ln (t-1 ) +                  ,t




(3.28)                 ln (t ) = (1 -  ) ln () +  ln (t-1 ) +            ,t




(3.29)                 ln (t ) = (1 -  ) ln ( ) +  ln (t-1 ) +            ,t




(3.30)                 ^ t = 1 -  ^ ln G
                    ln G                         ^ t -1 +  ^
                                       ^ +  ^ ln G                             ^ ,t
                                 G         G              G                    G


The autoregressive parameters,  ,  ,  , and G         ^ , lie between zero and one. The in-
novations, ,t , ,t ,  ,t , and G
                               ^ ,t , are drawn from standard normal distributions. These
innovations are scaled by  ,  ,  , and G       ^ , which measure the standard deviation of
the innovations.


3.G      Equilibrium and Aggregation
   Aggregate inflation and the aggregate real wage are given by:


                                                                 p -1
(3.31)                           1 = 1 -  p (  t )1- p +  p  t


                                                 1-   w
                         -
(3.32)                w1
                       t
                             w
                                 = (1 - w ) w#
                                             t            + w t w -1 w1 - w
                                                                      t -1




                                                16
Market clearing in the goods market requires wholesale output to be equal to the sum
of retail output, taking the demand function as given:

                                              p
(3.33)                                    Yt vt = YW ,t

    Similarly, labor market clearing requires the labor supplied by households to be equal
to the labor used by the union.

(3.34)                                    L t = L P,t v w
                                                        t

                                      p
where price and wage dispersion, vt and vw
                                         t respectively, are defined as:



                              p                                     p
                            v t = 1 -  p (  t ) - p +  p  t v t -1
                                                                p
(3.35)



                                            -
                                      w#          w
                                                                 wt      w
(3.36)              vw
                     t   = (1 - w )    t
                                                      + w t w                vw
                                                                              t -1
                                      wt                        w t -1

   Bonds are in zero supply in equilibrium, Bt = 0. Therefore, the aggregate resource
constraint in the economy is:



(3.37)                                      Yt = Ct

    Given the stance of monetary policy, an equilibrium in our model consists of allo-
cations and prices such that the household maximizes its utility subject to its budget
constraint, firms maximize profits, markets clear, and aggregation holds.


3.H      Stationarizing the Model
    The model is driven by one non-stationary process, so most variables, excluding the
interest rate, inflation, real gold price, labor hours, and real marginal cost, will be trend-
ing. All grow at the common growth factor, At . Dividing the variables that grow over
time by the common growth factor ensures model stationarity. We note stationarized
versions of variables with a hat circumflex, e.g. Y ^t = Yt / At .




                                                  17
4       Implications of a Gold Standard
    This section highlights some implications of monetary policy under a gold standard.
We show, under certain conditions, that a gold standard is akin to a nominal GDP tar-
get. In particular, if shocks to gold supply and demand are absent, then a gold standard
is isomorphic to a nominal GDP target conditional on most shocks, and it may be bet-
ter than a nominal GDP target conditional on permanent shocks to trend productivity
growth. But, undesirably, a gold standard forces endogenous policy changes in response
to shocks to gold supply and demand. Depending on the magnitude of these shocks,
this could reduce the desirability of the gold standard relative to other policy rules.


4.A      Gold Standard Properties
    The gold pricing equation, (3.4), can be written:


                                      t                ^t
                                                    Pt Y
(4.1)                            ^t
                       PG,t = Pt Y       +  Et t +1        -1
                                                          Zt  PG,t+1
                                      ^
                                      Gt       t Pt+1 Yt+1 +1
                                                       ^

where variables denoted with the hat circumflex are stationarized. By iterating forward,
(4.1) can be written:


                                                        t+ j t+ j      j
                                       t
(4.2)                            ^t
                       PG,t = Pt Y
                                       ^t
                                       G
                                          + Et    j     t G  ^ t+ j    Zt-
                                                                         +k
                                                                           1
                                                 j =1                 k =1

                                                         t


    Let the bracketed term be denoted by t , which contains the exogenous gold de-
mand, supply, trend growth shocks, and intertemporal preference shocks. Equation (4.2)
                                    PG,t
states that the real price of gold, P t
                                         , is proportional to stationarized GDP, where the
proportionality term is t . t is itself a stochastic random variable. It can be written
recursively:


                                        t             1
(4.3)                           t =        +  Et t +1    t +1
                                        ^
                                        Gt       t Zt+1

   Log-linearizing (4.3) about the non-stochastic steady state, where xt = ln xt - ln x for
generic variable xt with non-stochastic steady state value x, we have:


                                                 18
                                    ^ t +  Et t+1 - t - Zt+1 +  Et t+1
(4.4)          t =   1-         t - G
                          Z               Z                    Z

    Other factors held constant, increases in t (the demand for gold) put upward pres-
sure on the price of gold, while increases in gold supply, G^ t , do the opposite. Anticipated
increases in productivity, Zt+1 , put downward pressure on the price of gold as house-
holds substitute from gold into the consumption good. Positive preference shocks, t ,
have a similar effect ­ households substitute from future consumption goods into current
goods, thereby substituting away from gold, resulting in a lower price of gold.
    A gold standard targets a fixed growth rate of the price of gold, equal to the steady
state inflation rate. Dividing equation (4.2) by its previous value, we have:


                                             Yt -1 t
(4.5)                                = t        Z
                                            Yt-1 t t-1

Taking logs:



(4.6)        t + log (Yt ) - log (Yt-1 ) =  + log ( Zt ) - (log (t ) - log (t-1 ))

    Targeting a constant growth rate of the price of gold, equal to the steady state inflation
rate, causes nominal GDP growth to equal the steady state trend inflation rate,  , plus
the net trend growth rate, log( Zt ), less log(t ) - log(t-1 ). It is useful to compare (4.6)
to a standard nominal GDP targeting rule, which would have:



(4.7)                     t + log (Yt ) - log (Yt-1 ) =  + log ( Z )

   (4.7) and (4.6) differ along two dimensions. First, in a conventional nominal GDP
target, the central bank targets a constant real growth rate of output, log( Z ), whereas in
the gold standard, the target growth rate of real output varies with shocks to potential,
log( Zt ). Second, relative to a nominal GDP target, the gold standard is perturbed by
log(t ) - log(t-1 ). Using (4.4), this may be written:


                                     
(4.8)   log(t ) - log(t-1 ) =   1-         t -  t -1 + G t - G t -1
                                     Z

                                              19
                                                               
 +      (Et t+1 - Et-1 t ) - (t - t-1 ) -   Et Zt+1 - Et-1 Zt + (Et t+1 - Et-1 t )
      Z                     Z             Z                    Z

    It is useful to discuss the conditions under which log(t ) - log(t-1 ) = 0. This will
be obtained if four requirements are met. First, the demand shifter for gold must be
constant, i.e. t = t-1 . Second, the gold supply shock must be constant, i.e. G  ^ t = G t -1 .
Third, the intertemporal preference shock must be constant, i.e. t = t-1 . Finally, trend
productivity must follow a random walk. It is not required that there be no shocks to
trend productivity growth, just that these shocks are i.i.d., so that Et Zt+1 = Et-1 Zt = 0.
If these four conditions are met, then t will be constant. In this circumstance, a gold
standard will be equivalent to a nominal GDP target, with the exception that the gold
standard adjusts for fluctuations in the economy's trend productivity growth, whereas a
conventional nominal GDP target does not.11


4.B     Economic Dynamics
    We argued above that a gold standard and a nominal GDP target may be similar
under certain assumptions, but that following a gold standard necessitates fluctuations
in nominal GDP due to shocks to gold supply and demand, among other factors. Here,
we assess the desirability of a gold standard relative to other rules by showing impulse
responses to different kinds of shocks.
    Table 1 shows the parameter values used to generate the results. The household
discount factor is chosen to match a steady state annual interest rate of 2 percent. The
goods and labor market elasticities are set such that there is a 10 percent markup over
marginal cost. The Calvo and Taylor rule parameters are standard. In the data, the
average value of the stock of gold to real GDP is 1 percent and we set the real gold price
of 10. The persistence and volatility of the exogenous processes are arbitrarily set to
plausible values. We estimate these parameters in the following section.
    We show the economic dynamics from various shocks in Appendix A. Figure 5 plots
the impulse responses to a shock to the growth rate of trend productivity. The economic
dynamics, specifically output and inflation, under the gold standard are quantitatively
similar to the Taylor Rule. This is not the case with a nominal GDP target. As discussed
above, the gold standard is similar to a NGDP target, but it adjusts for changes in trend
growth. Instead of targeting a constant growth rate, ln Z, nominal GDP adjusts with
changes in the growth rate, ln Zt , under a gold standard. Since nominal GDP under a


  11. An additional requirement, that we have built in to our preference specification, is that utility over
consumption be log; i.e. that the elasticity of intertemporal substitution be one.

                                                    20
                      Table 1: Model Parameters

    Parameter                           Description                  Value

                                household discount factor             0.99
                                  inverse frisch elasticity             1
         p               goods market elasticity of substitution       11
         w               labor market elasticity of substitution       11
       p                        calvo parameter - retailers           0.75
       w                     calvo parameter - labor unions          0.75
                             policy rate response to inflation        1.5
       ss              steady state quarterly gross inflation rate   1.005
       Zss              steady state quarterly gross growth rate     1.005
        G
        Y              steady state gold stock relative to output     0.01
       Pg,ss                steady state relative price of gold        10
        w                            wage indexation                    0
        p                            price indexation                   0

Exogenous Processes

        G                         gold supply persistence              0.9
                                 gold demand persistence               0.9
        Z                        trend growth persistence             0.75
        v                  intertemporal preference persistence        0.9
                           intratemporal preference persistence        0.9
        R                          Taylor rule persistence             0.8
        sG               standard deviation - gold supply shock       0.01
        s               standard deviation - gold demand shock        0.01
        sZ              standard deviation - trend growth shock       0.01
        sv              standard deviation - intertemporal shock      0.01
        s               standard deviation - intratemporal shock      0.01
        sR            standard deviation - monetary policy shock     0.0025




                                   21
NGDP target does not adjust to the trend, a permanent productivity shock that leads
to an expansion of output requires a greater decline in the price level. For permanent
productivity shocks, the results suggest that either the gold standard or a Taylor rule are
preferable to a NGDP target.12
    Figure 6 highlights the impulse responses to a shock to household preferences over
labor supply. Given that this shock does not affect t above, the nominal GDP target
and the gold standard are identical. The labor supply shock causes output to fall and
inflation to rise as households supply less labor to firms. Nominal interest rates rise
under the Taylor rule since the policy rate is responding to the rise in inflation. This
causes output to decline by more relative to a nominal GDP target or gold standard.
Under these two regimes, there is no change in the policy rate, as the decline in output
and the rise in the price level offset to keep nominal GDP at target.
    Next, we show the impulse responses to an intertemporal preference shock, shown
in Figure 7. This shock leads the household to value the present more relative to the
future. Consequently, there is an increase in aggregate demand, resulting in output and
inflation rising under a Taylor rule. Under this rule, the price of gold falls as households
substitute away from gold to consuming the output good. Under a nominal GDP target,
the nominal interest rate rises to offset the household's relative impatience, leaving infla-
tion and output unaffected. Under the gold standard, the central bank raises its policy
rate by less so as to keep the gold price fixed, which results in output expanding by
more relative to a nominal spending target.
    The shocks to demand and supply for gold are shown in Figures 8 and 9. Under a
Taylor rule or nominal GDP target, the shocks do not affect output nor inflation. Under
a gold standard, a shock to gold demand causes the central bank to engage in contrac-
tionary monetary policy. The nominal rate increases to keep the price of gold from rising
above target, which pushes output and inflation down. We see the opposite pattern after
a gold supply shock. When there is a shock to gold supply, the central bank engages
in expansionary monetary policy to keep the nominal price of gold fixed. The nominal
rate falls to keep the price of gold from falling below target, which pushes output and
inflation higher.
    In summary, conditional on shocks that do not affect the proportion of the price of
gold to nominal GDP, the gold standard is equivalent to a nominal GDP target. This
relationship breaks down when there are permanent changes to trend growth, intertem-
poral preference shocks that impact the utility valuation of the present relative to the

   12. Though we do not consider it, note that a stationary productivity shock would result in an equiva-
lence between the gold standard and a nominal GDP target.

                                                   22
future, or shocks to gold demand and supply. Conditional on a permanent productivity
shock, the gold standard performs better than a nominal GDP target, because nominal
GDP internalizes changes in the trend under a gold standard. However, a nominal GDP
target and the Taylor rule are both preferable to a gold standard conditional on gold de-
mand and supply shocks. When these shocks occur, the central bank is forced to engage
in contractionary or expansionary monetary policy to keep the nominal price of gold
pegged.




5    Quantitative Analysis
    Relative to other popular policy rules, a gold standard performs well conditional
on certain shocks and poorly conditional on others, particularly shocks to the demand
and supply of gold itself. The overall desirability of a gold standard therefore depends
upon the parameter values of the shock processes. In this section, we quantitatively
estimate the parameters related to shock processes using Bayesian methods. We use
the estimated model both to conduct a counterfactual historical simulation as well as
calculate conditional welfare metrics for different policy rules.
    We estimate the parameters of the model using standard Bayesian methods. For the
estimation, we assume that monetary policy has been conducted via a Taylor rule, which
is common in the macro literature. The parameters to be estimated include parameters
related to preferences, the parameters of the Taylor rule, and the parameters govern-
ing the exogenous processes. These parameters, along with the prior distributions, are
shown in Table 2. The prior distributions are chosen to be consistent with the existing
literature.
    The estimated model with the Taylor rule includes six exogenous shocks, so we need
at least six observables. Our observable variables include the growth rates of real GDP,
real wages, and gold supply, the inflation rate, the inflation rate for the price of gold (as
measured from the same data source that we use for gold supply), and the short-term
policy rate as measured by the effective Federal Funds rate. Our data is at a quarterly
frequency and the interval is from 2000 Q1 to 2020 Q1. To account for the zero lower
bound period in the sample, we use the Wu-Xia shadow rate in place of the effective
Federal Funds rate where relevant (Wu and Xia 2016). The steady state trend growth in
productivity and steady state inflation rate are not estimated, but are rather calibrated
to match the mean quarterly growth rates in output and the average inflation rate in the
data.


                                             23
                              Table 2: Model Estimation

                                   Prior                               Posterior
 Coefficient    Prior Density   Prior Mean      pstdev    Post. Mean     5%         95%

                     Beta           0.99         0.01       0.9994       0.9987    1.0000
                   Normal             1           0.2       0.5920       0.1768    1.0174
     p               Beta            0.6          0.1       0.5318       0.4401    0.6217
     w               Beta            0.6          0.1       0.2972       0.2135    0.3745
     p               Beta            0.5         0.25       0.4957       0.1103    0.9122
     w               Beta            0.5         0.25       0.4948       0.1009    0.8940
     G               Beta            0.5          0.2       0.7959       0.6997    0.8951
     Z               Beta            0.5          0.2       0.1168       0.0404    0.1893
                     Beta            0.5          0.2       0.9917       0.9896    0.9938
     v               Beta            0.5          0.2       0.9378       0.9132    0.9687
                     Beta            0.5          0.2       0.9950       0.9915    0.9990
     R               Beta            0.5          0.2       0.8091       0.7640    0.8546
                   Normal            1.5          0.1       1.7455       1.6082    1.8936
     G            I-Gamma            0.1        0.0033        0.1        0.0975    0.1021
     Z            I-Gamma           0.01        0.0033      0.0112       0.0094    0.0130
                  I-Gamma           0.15        0.0033      0.1501       0.1475    0.1526
     v            I-Gamma           0.01        0.0033      0.0147       0.0103    0.0197
                  I-Gamma           0.01        0.0033      0.0242       0.0162    0.0309
     R            I-Gamma          0.003        0.0033      0.0021       0.0017    0.0026


    The estimated parameters for the Taylor rule and the non-gold shock processes are
quite standard. In particular, there is substantial interest-smoothing and the policy rate
reacts strongly to inflation. Trend productivity growth is estimated to be close to a
random walk. The autocorrelation of gold demand preference shocks is estimated to be
quite high, and the standard deviations of innovations to gold demand and supply are
both estimated to be quite large.
    Using the sequence of shocks derived in the estimation, we perform a historical coun-
terfactual from 2000 Q1 to 2020 Q1. We compare the estimated model with a Taylor rule
to the cases where monetary policy supports either a gold standard or a nominal GDP
target. For each policy, we assume that the economy's initial state is 2000 Q1 and then
experiences the sequence of smoothed shocks that we estimate afterward.
    Figure 4 shows the path of non-stationary output and the shadow policy rate under
the various policies. The estimated Taylor rule model matches the data where output
rises until 2008, contracts during the Great-Recession, and rises afterward, without re-
versing back to the pre-Great-Recession trend. Under the nominal GDP target, there is a
much smoother and longer lasting decline in output during the Great-Recession period.

                                           24
                   Table 3: Inflation and Output Growth Volatility

                                                           Y          

                                  Taylor Rule             0.61       0.92

                            Nominal GDP Target            0.43       1.6

                                Gold Standard             3.63      14.64
Notes: The table contains the standard deviation of inflation and output growth in the estimated Taylor
model, nominal GDP target, and gold standard. Both measures are in terms of percent. The volatility of
inflation is annualized.


When monetary policy follows a gold standard, output is significantly more volatile,
and there is a much sharper decline during the Great Recession. At the end period, 2020
Q1, output under the gold standard is approximately 10 percent lower than output with
a nominal GDP target and Taylor rule.
    The shadow rate under the Taylor rule matches the data where it rises sharply prior
to 2008, falls significantly during and after the Great-Recession, and begins rising as the
Federal Reserve began to lift off from the zero lower bound and started to normalize
its balance sheet. The shadow rate under a nominal GDP target mimics the Taylor rule
behavior except with smaller downward and upward movements. During the Great-
Recession, the shadow rate stays above the zero lower bound, a potentially attractive
feature if the zero lower bound is especially costly. At 2020 Q1, the shadow rate is
approximately 150 basis points (annualized) greater under a nominal GDP target than
the Taylor rule. Under a gold standard, the shadow rate actually rises during the Great
Recession period, a contributing factor to the significantly greater decline in output.
Post-Great Recession, the gross shadow rate continues to stay around 1.05 (annualized)
until the end of the sample. At 2020 Q1, the shadow rate is approximately 400 basis
points (annualized) greater under a gold standard than the Taylor rule.
    Table 3 quantifies the volatility of inflation and output growth under the three mon-
etary policies. The Taylor rule matches the data, where in the last 20 years, the annual
standard deviation of inflation was 0.92% and the quarterly standard deviation of output
growth was 0.61%. The standard deviation of output growth with a nominal GDP target
is 0.43%, which is smaller than the Taylor rule. However, the annual standard deviation
of inflation is 1.6%, which is approximately twice as volatile as the Taylor rule. This
can be attributed to the estimated sequence of non-stationary productivity shocks. Since
nominal GDP under a nominal GDP target does not adjust for changes in trend growth,


                                                  25
   Table 4: Consumption Equivalent Welfare Losses From Different Monetary
                                   Policies


                       Policy       Compared to Flexible Prices            Compared to Taylor Rule

   Gold Shocks
                        GS                       3.6523                               3.5401
                       NGDP                      0.3235                               0.2149
                       Taylor                    0.1084

 No Gold Shocks
                        GS                       0.4231                               0.3143
                       NGDP                      0.3235                               0.2149
                       Taylor                    0.1084
Notes: The table contains the consumption equivalent welfare losses under the gold standard, nominal
GDP target, and Taylor rule in the estimated model.


the price level is more responsive to these shocks.13 Unsurprisingly given the dynamics
shown in Figure 4, we find that inflation under the gold standard is approximately 9
times as volatile as inflation under a nominal GDP target and approximately 16 times
as volatile as inflation under a Taylor rule. Similarly, output growth is roughly 8.4 times
as volatile as a output growth under a nominal GDP target and 5.95 times as volatile as
output growth under the Taylor rule.
   The household's stationary welfare function is derived in Appendix B. We construct
two unconditional welfare measures. In the first measure, we compute the percent of
consumption each period that would make a household indifferent between the flexible
price and wage economy and the sticky price and wage economy under the specific
monetary policy. The second measure computes the percent of consumption each period
that would make a household indifferent between the sticky price and wage economy
with a Taylor rule and the economy under a nominal GDP target or gold standard.
Formally, the measures can be expressed as:

(5.1)                  = 100 exp (1 - ) E V 1 - E V 2                      -1

where E V 1 is the expected value of welfare, either for the corresponding flexible
price world or the sticky wage and price economy with a Taylor rule and E V 2 is


  13. Note that Gar´
                   in et al. (2016), who argue that nominal GDP targeting has desirable features, do not
include permanent trend productivity shocks in their analysis.

                                                  26
the expected value of welfare for all three monetary policies, for the first measure, or
the gold standard or nominal GDP target for the second measure. We can interpret 
as the percent of consumption in that households must be given on a quarterly basis
in perpetuity such that they are indifferent between staying in the economy V2 and
switching to the alternative economy V1 . More desirable monetary policies correspond
with lower values of .
    Table 4 presents the welfare measures, which are derived using a second order ap-
proximation. For the given estimated shock volatilities and model parameters, the most
desirable monetary regime is the Taylor rule. The welfare loss of the Taylor rule com-
pared to the flexible price economy is 0.1084% of consumption. Nominal GDP performs
almost as well as the Taylor rule. The welfare loss of a nominal GDP target is 0.3235%
of consumption compared to the flexible price economy and is 0.2149% of consumption
compared to the Taylor rule. The gold standard performs very poorly relative to the
Taylor rule and nominal GDP target. The welfare loss of the gold standard is 3.6523%
of consumption compared to the flexible price economy and is 3.5401% of consumption
compared to the Taylor rule.
    To emphasize the contribution of the gold shocks to the deterioration of welfare un-
der the gold standard, we also include the consumption equivalent losses of all three
monetary policies without the gold shocks present. Given that shocks to gold demand
and supply do not affect output and inflation under the nominal GDP target or Taylor
rule, there is no change in the welfare loss of either policy without the shocks present.
However, there is a substantial improvement in the gold standard performance. Without
gold shocks, the welfare loss of the gold standard is 0.4231% of consumption, which is
3.2292% better than when gold shocks are present. The gold standard does worse than
the nominal income target even without gold-specific shocks because of intertemporal
preference shocks, which affect the term t in the expressions above. As can be seen in
Figure 7, the nominal GDP target completely stabilizes output and inflation conditional
on these shocks, whereas the gold standard does not. If we were to compute welfare
losses conditional only on permanent productivity shocks, the gold standard would ac-
tually outperform the nominal GDP target, consonant with the intuition laid out earlier.




6   Conclusion
  Moving the debate on the merits of the gold standard to a modern quantitative frame-
work is important. It allows for a formal evaluation of trade-offs that cannot be estab-


                                           27
                               Figure 4: Historical Counterfactuals
                                                    (a) Output

                      1.5



                      1.4



                      1.3



                      1.2



                      1.1



                        1



                      0.9
                        2000   2002   2004   2006   2008   2010   2012   2014   2016   2018   2020




                                                (b) Policy Rate


                        7

                        6

                        5

                        4

                        3

                        2

                        1

                        0

                       -1

                       -2

                       -3
                        2000   2002   2004   2006   2008   2010   2012   2014   2016   2018   2020




Notes: Black solid line represents current monetary policy with an assumed Taylor Rule. The red line is the
historical counterfactual with a nominal GDP target. The blue line is the historical counterfactual under a
gold standard. All three estimates start at the initial state, 2000 Q1.


                                                           28
lished in the confines of a discussion based on pure rhetoric. We determine that there are
positive aspects associated with the implementation of the gold standard. For instance,
in a world with only trend growth shocks to productivity and/or labor supply shocks,
we find that the gold standard can outperform more conventional policies such as nom-
inal GDP targeting. This is because nominal GDP targeting does not adjust for changes
in the growth trend, leading to more volatile inflation. This is in contrast to the gold
standard, which would internalize these trend growth shocks through the associated
changes in the supply of gold.
    However, once we incorporate gold-specific shocks, the performance of the gold stan-
dard severely deteriorates. In contrast to more conventional policies, the gold standard
is forced to react to shocks in the supply and demand for gold. We show that these
shocks tend to be much more volatile than typical macroeconomic variables, such as GDP
growth. This excessive volatility leads to substantially higher output growth volatility
and inflation volatility in our modeling framework.
    We show that the welfare difference between policy under the gold standard and the
Taylor rule would be equivalent to a 3.5401% difference in per period consumption. This
is an economically significant disparity that translates into a permanent difference in
real consumption per capita of approximately $1,500 per year.14 Moreover, our historical
counterfactual suggests that the level of output would be almost 10% lower in the year
2020 had a gold standard been in place since 2000.
    The goal of this study was to help formalize evaluation of the strengths and weak-
nesses of the gold standard. It turns out our findings align with what many in the
economics profession already suspect. We view this study as a starting point and look
forward to the continuing discussion of the merits of the gold standard in a modern
quantitative framework, in which assumptions can be challenged and model choices can
be questioned. It is only under this construct that we can push the conversation forward
and better establish some formal structure to the debate. Without it, the arguments will
continue on indefinitely.




  14. Dollar value calculation based on real consumption per capita in 2012 dollars of $40,566 in 2019Q4.

                                                   29
References
Barro, Robert J (1979) "Money and the price level under the gold standard," The Economic
  Journal, Vol. 89, No. 353, pp. 13­33.

Bernanke, Ben and Harold James (1991) "The gold standard, deflation, and financial
  crisis in the Great Depression: An international comparison," in Financial markets and
  financial crises: University of Chicago Press, pp. 33­68.

Bordo, Michael D and Finn E Kydland (1995) "The gold standard as a rule: An essay in
  exploration," Explorations in Economic History, Vol. 32, No. 4, pp. 423­464.

Bordo, Michael D, Robert D Dittmar, and William T Gavin (2007) "Gold, fiat money, and
  price stability," The BE Journal of Macroeconomics, Vol. 7, No. 1.

Chen, Yao and Felix Ward (2019) "When do fixed exchange rates work? Evidence from
 the Gold Standard," Journal of International Economics, Vol. 116, pp. 158­172.

Diercks, Anthony M. (2019) "The Reader's Guide to Optimal Monetary Policy: Optima-
  lInflation.com."

Eichengreen, Barry J (1995) Golden fetters: the gold standard and the Great Depression, 1919-
  1939: NBER series on long-term factors in economic development.

Fagan, Gabriel, James R Lothian, and Paul D McNelis (2013) "Was the gold standard
  really destabilizing?" Journal of Applied Econometrics, Vol. 28, No. 2, pp. 231­249.

Gar´
   in, Julio, Robert Lester, and Eric Sims (2016) "On the desirability of nominal GDP
 targeting," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, Vol. 69, pp. 21­44.

Wu, Jing Cynthia and Fan Dora Xia (2016) "Measuring the Macroeconomic Impact of
 Monetary Policy at the Zero Lower Bound," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol.
 48, No. 2-3, pp. 253­291.




                                             30
A     Model Dynamics

                          Figure 5: Permanent Productivity Shock


           1.2                           0.2                          0.06

             1                                                        0.05
                                          0
           0.8                                                        0.04

           0.6                          -0.2                          0.03

           0.4                                                        0.02
                                        -0.4
           0.2                                                        0.01

             0                          -0.6                            0
                  0     10         20          0      10         20          0     10         20



           0.2                           0.2                            0

             0                            0
                                                                      -0.2

           -0.2                         -0.2
                                                                      -0.4
           -0.4                         -0.4
                                                                      -0.6
           -0.6                         -0.6

                                                                      -0.8
           -0.8                         -0.8

            -1                            -1                            -1
                  0     10         20          0      10         20          0     10         20




Notes: Black solid line: policy rate follows a Taylor rule; blue dashed lines: central bank follows a gold
standard; red dashed lines: central bank follows a nominal GDP target. Impulse responses are to a 1
standard deviation shock to non-stationary productivity.




                                                   31
                          Figure 6: Labor Supply Preference Shock


             0                           0.2                          0.15

          -0.05                         0.15
           -0.1                                                        0.1
                                         0.1
          -0.15
                                        0.05
           -0.2                                                       0.05

          -0.25                            0

           -0.3                         -0.05                            0
               0        10         20        0          10       20          0      10        20



            0.4                          0.3                             0

                                         0.2                          -0.05
            0.3
                                         0.1                           -0.1

            0.2                            0                          -0.15

                                         -0.1                          -0.2
            0.1
                                         -0.2                         -0.25

             0                           -0.3                          -0.3
                 0      10         20        0          10       20        0        10        20




Notes: Black solid line: policy rate follows a Taylor rule; blue dashed lines: central bank follows a gold
standard; red dashed lines: central bank follows a nominal GDP target. Since the dynamics under the
nominal GDP target and gold standard are identical, the red dashed lines overlay the blue dashed lines.
Impulse responses are to a 1 standard deviation shock to labor supply preference.




                                                   32
                         Figure 7: Intertemporal Preference Shock


           0.8                           0.4                          0.4

           0.6                           0.3
                                                                      0.3

           0.4                           0.2
                                                                      0.2
           0.2                           0.1

                                                                      0.1
            0                             0

          -0.2                          -0.1                            0
              0         10         20       0         10         20         0      10          20



           0.8                                                          0
                                         0.5

                                                                      -0.2
           0.6
                                          0                           -0.4
           0.4
                                                                      -0.6
                                        -0.5
           0.2
                                                                      -0.8

            0                            -1                            -1
                0       10         20         0       10         20         0      10          20




Notes: Black solid line: policy rate follows a Taylor rule; blue dashed lines: central bank follows a gold
standard; red dashed lines: central bank follows a nominal GDP target. Impulse responses are to a 1
standard deviation shock to the household's discount factor




                                                   33
                                 Figure 8: Gold Demand Shock


              0                          0.02                         0.06

                                         0.01                         0.05

          -0.05                            0                          0.04

                                        -0.01                         0.03

                                        -0.02
           -0.1                                                       0.02
                                        -0.03
                                                                      0.01
                                        -0.04
          -0.15                                                          0
               0         10        20           0        10      20          0      10        20



           0.01                          0.15                         0.15

              0

          -0.01                           0.1                           0.1

          -0.02

          -0.03                          0.05                         0.05

          -0.04

          -0.05                            0                             0
               0         10        20           0        10      20          0      10        20




Notes: Black solid line: policy rate follows a Taylor rule; blue dashed lines: central bank follows a gold
standard; red dashed lines: central bank follows a nominal GDP target. Impulse responses are to a 1
standard deviation shock to household preference over gold holdings.




                                                    34
                                  Figure 9: Gold Supply Shock


           0.15                                                          0
                                        0.04
                                                                      -0.01
                                        0.03
            0.1                                                       -0.02
                                        0.02

                                        0.01                          -0.03

           0.05                            0                          -0.04

                                        -0.01                         -0.05

             0                          -0.02                         -0.06
                  0     10         20        0          10       20        0        10        20



           0.05                            0                             0

           0.04

           0.03                         -0.05                         -0.05

           0.02

           0.01                          -0.1                          -0.1

             0

          -0.01                         -0.15                         -0.15
               0        10         20        0          10       20        0        10        20




Notes: Black solid line: policy rate follows a Taylor rule; blue dashed lines: central bank follows a gold
standard; red dashed lines: central bank follows a nominal GDP target. Impulse responses are to a 1
standard deviation shock to supply of gold.




                                                   35
B       Welfare
    Household welfare in recursive form can be written as:


                                             1+ 
                                            Nt
(B.1)                 Vt = t    ln Ct - t      + t ln Gt       + Et Vt+1
                                            1+

    After detrending the value function, we obtain:


                                                      1+ 
(B.2)        Vt = t                       ^t - t Nt
                      (1 + t ) ln At + ln C                ^t
                                                    + t ln G           + + Et Vt+1
                                                 1+

    Breaking up stationarized welfare into components:

(B.3)                                  ^tC + V
                                  Vt = V     ^tN + V
                                                   ^tG + t

    where:

(B.4)                             ^tC = t ln C
                                  V                    ^C
                                             ^ t +  Et V
                                                        t +1



                                                1+ 
(B.5)                           ^tN = -t t Nt
                                V                   ^N
                                              +  Et Vt +1
                                           1+


(B.6)                             ^tG = t t ln G
                                  V                      ^tG
                                               ^ t +  Et V


                                      
(B.7)                       t = Et     j t+ j      1 + t+ j ln At+ j
                                     j =0


    If At is normalized to 1, then t can be written recursively as:


                                
(B.8)                  t =        t+1 (1 + t+1 ) ln Zt+1 + Et t+1
                               1-




                                              36
