                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       DOES LASTING BEHAVIOR CHANGE REQUIRE KNOWLEDGE CHANGE?
        EVIDENCE FROM SAVINGS INTERVENTIONS FOR YOUNG ADULTS

                                       Samantha Horn
                                       Julian Jamison
                                        Dean Karlan
                                      Jonathan Zinman

                                     Working Paper 28011
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28011


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2020




This study was registered in the American Economic Association Registry for randomized
controlled trials (AEARCTR-0000080). Institutional Review Board approval for human subjects
protocols from Innovations for Poverty Action #113.10February-006 and Yale University
#1002006384. We thank the Financial Education Fund from DFID for funding. We thank the IPA
field team, Zach Freitas-Groff, Sarah Kabay, Daniel Katz, Sana Khan, Charity Komujurizi,
Matthew Lowes, Justin Loiseau, Javier Madrazo, Joseph Ndumia, Doug Parkerson, Pia Raffler,
Elana Safran, Noor Sethi, Marla Spivack, Glynis Startz, and Sneha Stephen from Northwestern
University and Innovations for Poverty Action for research assistance and management support.
We thank the Freedom from Hunger and Straight Talk team for collaboration on development of
the financial education curriculum, FINCA for the provision of the bank accounts, and four
dioceses of the Church of Uganda for their cooperation throughout. Earlier results from this
project appeared in NBER Working Paper No. 20135. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Samantha Horn, Julian Jamison, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Lasting Behavior Change Require Knowledge Change?
Evidence From Savings Interventions For Young Adults
Samantha Horn, Julian Jamison, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman
NBER Working Paper No. 28011
October 2020
JEL No. D12,D91,O12

                                          ABSTRACT

Is financial knowledge change necessary for lasting savings behavior change? Or, akin to the
canonical Friedman billiards player, can behavior persist "as if" such knowledge is held? We
randomize 240 Ugandan young-adult clubs to financial education, savings account access, both,
or neither. Each education arm, but not the account-only arm, increases financial knowledge and
trust in banks at one-year. But at five-years the knowledge effects disappear, and the trust effects
diminish. Savings activity, wealth, and income increase at both one-year and five-years for all
treatment arms, suggesting that knowledge change is unnecessary for lasting impacts on behavior
and outcomes.

Samantha Horn                                    Dean Karlan
Carnegie Mellon University                       Kellogg Global Hub
5000 Forbes Avenue                               Northwestern University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213                             2211 Campus Drive
samihorn@cmu.edu                                 Evanston, IL 60208
                                                 and CEPR
Julian Jamison                                   and also NBER
Department of Economics                          dean.karlan@gmail.com
University of Exeter
Business School                                  Jonathan Zinman
Exeter EX4 4PU                                   Department of Economics
United Kingdom                                   Dartmouth College
j.jamison@exeter.ac.uk                           314 Rockefeller Hall
                                                 Hanover, NH 03755
                                                 and NBER
                                                 jzinman@dartmouth.edu
   Financial inclusion remains an important development goal worldwide, with most of the
world's population lacking basic financial literacy and bank account access. Two prevalent
financial inclusion interventions are financial education and basic savings account promotion.
Financial education presumes the importance of building financial knowledge for navigating
previously unfamiliar and increasingly complex formal markets. Basic savings account
interventions presume the importance of facilitating formal market access.

   Yet many questions remain about these interventions and underlying mechanisms. Is financial
knowledge change necessary for lasting savings behavior change and outcome improvement? Or,
instead, is financial knowledge for a successful saver akin to physics knowledge for Friedman's
successful billiards player (Friedman 1953): do agents behave "as if" they have learned some
underlying principles, without demonstrating that knowledge gain on a traditional test? And which
interventions are effective at improving downstream outcomes like income and wealth,
particularly over longer horizons?

   We address such questions using a four-arm randomized evaluation alongside extensive
primary data collection one-year and five-years after intervention onset. We randomly assigned
240 Church of Uganda youth clubs (median age=22) to receive either financial education
("education-only"), facilitated access to a group bank savings account ("account-only"), both
("account+education"), or neither.

   Group-based financial education delivery is common through schools, workplaces, and NGOs.
Group-based savings mechanisms are also common, both traditionally, through informal
institutions, and more recently through various formal institutions. Religious clubs feature
prominently in Uganda and neighboring countries, with 50% or more of young adults belonging
to one. Our interventions and sample are thus broadly interesting for researchers, policymakers,
and practitioners working on financial inclusion and poverty alleviation.

   Our baseline survey of 2,810 club members reveals low levels of financial knowledge and
formal financial bank account usage, and moderate levels of income (with substantial
heterogeneity). The account intervention offered groups easy access to a basic group savings
account with a local affiliate of an international microfinance institution. The financial education
intervention is a 10-week, 15-hour curriculum, designed and refined by three international and




                                                                                                   1
local NGOs, focusing on the formal financial system, savings costs and benefits, budgeting and
planning, and communicating with others about money.

    We administer two follow-up surveys to measure knowledge and other decision inputs,
savings, income and other pre-registered "downstream" behaviors and outcomes. These surveys
take place roughly 1-year (N=2,680) and 5-years (N=1,969) after random assignment, with no
evidence of differential attrition rates.

    We find substantial take-up and utilization of both interventions; e.g., club members attended
about half of the ten financial education sessions, and about half of clubs used the savings account
actively. These relatively high rates 1 are not driven by group-based economic activities, which
have very low prevalence and are not moved by the treatments. Instead, we speculate, the key is
piggybacking service delivery on pre-existing group meetings. Regardless of why utilization is
high, these first-stage results provide statistical power for identifying moderately-sized treatment
effects on decision inputs, behaviors, and downstream outcomes over our two follow-up horizons.

    Our main decision inputs of interest are those covered by the financial education curriculum.
We find no evidence that the account-only arm changes financial knowledge, planning, agency
(control over household resources), or trust in banks. In contrast, after one year there is strong
evidence that each education arm produces large increases in financial knowledge and trust in
banks. At five-years, the evidence suggests that knowledge effects disappear while the trust effects
persist but perhaps lessen.

    Next, we estimate average and quantile treatment effects on several measures of saving
behavior and assets. 2 We find some evidence that each treatment substantially and persistently
increases savings activities. There are hints that the education arms produce larger increases in
savings than the account-only arm; increasing financial knowledge is likely valuable. But we
cannot rule out equal effects from, or economically large savings balance increases in, the account-


1
  Our savings account take-up rate is comparable to that found in other studies in Sub-Saharan Africa, but
with substantially higher utilization (see, e.g., Dupas et al (2018)). For financial education, we are not aware
of any systematic review of take-up or engagement rates but several papers find low participation rates
(Lara Ibarra, McKenzie, and Ruiz-Ortega forthcoming; Burke et al. 2020; Bruhn, Lara Ibarra, and
McKenzie 2014).
2
  We define savings based on a broad set of asset measures, both formal and informal, and liquid and
illiquid. We also estimate treatment effects on borrowing and, finding none, infer increases in wealth.



                                                                                                              2
only arm. This suggests that increasing financial knowledge may not be necessary to generate
lasting and positive changes in financial condition, a tentative inference that is reinforced by our
next set of findings.

   We also estimate average and quantile treatment effects on income, motivated by the mixed
evidence from prior work on the downstream effects of savings interventions. There is evidence
of large, positive and lasting average effects on total income in each of the three treatments. And
we do not find strong evidence that the education arms produce larger increases, suggesting that
increasing financial knowledge or trust is neither necessary nor complementary for generating
lasting improvement in financial status.

   Hoping to shed light on which mechanisms are influential, we estimate treatment effects on
measures of several other inputs and outputs: altruism, patience and self-control, and risk aversion;
business activity and investment; other investments and spending patterns; various measures of
formal labor market effort. We find suggestive evidence consistent with Schaner's (2018)
entrepreneurship channel and Callen et al.'s (2019) labor effort channel, but our estimates are
mostly imprecise. Given the many favorable conditions in our study - relatively high intervention
take-up rates, two follow-up surveys, large treatment effects on downstream outcomes, and a
sample of about 2,000 - our inability to sharply identify mechanisms is sobering. But our results
remain enlightening, at least suggestively, in the sense that they cannot rule out several of these
mechanisms being important. Indeed, we collected data on many decision inputs and outputs
because many savings interventions are posited to work through multiple mechanisms.

   Our study contributes to several literatures.

   Based on Kaiser et al.'s (2020) meta-analysis of randomized financial education interventions,
we infer that we fill five gaps in that impact evaluation literature. First, we address whether
knowledge change is essential for lasting improvements in financial behavior and outcomes, and
find evidence suggesting it is not. Second, we provide in-sample evidence on relative
effectiveness, finding that education-only and account-only deliver similar effects on savings
activity and income. Third, we provide evidence of education's interaction with increased account
access, with little evidence of complementarity and some evidence for substitutability. Fourth, we
extend impact measurement horizons with our five-year endline, finding that the initially strong
positive impact on financial knowledge dissipates. And we provide long-run evidence of effects


                                                                                                    3
on savings activities, finding that initial positive effects persist. Fifth, we provide evidence on the
effects of financial education on income generation, which we infer is novel since Kaiser et al. do
not include income in their set of downstream outcomes.

    We also build on a large literature on savings encouragement interventions. 3 First, we provide
novel evidence on whether market experience alone produces measurable changes to decision
inputs like financial knowledge or trust, and find no evidence that it does. Second and third, we
provide some in-sample evidence on the relative effectiveness of and interaction between savings
access and financial education, as discussed above. Fourth, we extend impact measurement
horizons with our five-year endline, although there are at least two other studies with three- or
four-year measurement horizons for savings and income (Beaman, Karlan, and Thuysbaert 2014;
Schaner 2018). Fifth, we add to the evidence that direct deposit and commitment (Brune et al.
2016), temporary yield incentives (Schaner 2018) or deposit collection (Callen et al. 2019) can
produce lasting increases in income-generation, which is useful to know because most other
savings encouragement studies have not detected effects on earnings (e.g., Aggarwal,
Brailovskaya, and Robinson 2020; Banerjee et al. 2020; Bastian et al. 2018; Beaman, Karlan, and
Thuysbaert 2014; Dupas et al. 2018; Prina 2015; Somville and Vandewalle 2019).

    Three papers have similar 2x2 experimental designs, but are unable to focus on the primary
question we are posing, whether knowledge change from financial education interventions is
necessary for long-term behavior change. We also build on these via increased power as well as
longer-term measurement. Abarcar et al. (forthcoming) implements a similar design in the
Philippines for transnational households with relatively high baseline rates of financial inclusion,
but finds no change in financial literacy as a by-product of the financial education treatment alone,
and also has low take-up rates of its encouraged savings account and limited power to detect its
effects. Abebe et al. (2018) uses savings reminders instead of a savings access treatment with
Ethiopian micro-entrepreneurs who already have substantial financial access at baseline, but it has
limited power to detect downstream impacts, and also does not find improvement in financial
literacy from the financial education-only treatment arm. Cole et al.'s (2011) seminal paper uses
financial incentives to encourage account opening among unbanked Indonesian households, but it


3
  In contrast to financial education, we could not find any meta-analyses of savings encouragement
interventions. We focus our positioning with respect to the 46 papers described in Appendix Table 1.



                                                                                                      4
is underpowered for detecting effects on savings and does not estimate effects on financial
knowledge or downstream outcomes.

      From a broader anti-poverty program design and evaluation perspective, our results
demonstrate two micro-level approaches to increasing wealth and income over a five-year horizon
for low-income households. Our effect sizes and confidence intervals are similar to those found in
Callen et al. (2019) and Schaner (2018). They are also similar to those found in successful multi-
faceted "Graduation" programs that cost about an order of magnitude more than our interventions
(Bandiera et al. 2017; Banerjee et al. 2015). One potentially key difference is that Graduation
programs tend to target very poor households in remote villages, whereas our sample is broader.



I. Research Design and Implementation
Our study design features treatments assigned and administered at the youth club level, and club
member surveys measuring decision inputs and outputs at baseline and one-year and five-year
follow-ups. 4


A. Club Sampling and Baseline Survey
      We created our sample by obtaining permission from The Church of Uganda to work with its
youth clubs. Clubs typically have about 40 members and engage in activities including bible study,
choir, community service, continuing education, and travel to conventions with other clubs.
According to 2012 Afrobarometer data, 50% of Ugandans aged 18-25 belong to a religious
community group.
      Our sample contains 240 clubs, sampled from each of Uganda's four administrative regions,
that each satisfy three criteria: (1) Physical access to a FINCA branch, defined as being located
within a 60-minute walk of public transportation to the district capital (to make the bank account
treatment workable); (2) Active programming, defined as meeting at least twice a month (to make
the financial education treatment workable); (3) Large enough, defined as having at least 12
members over the age of 16 (to facilitate obtaining the target sample size). 5



4
    Appendix Figure 1 provides a design overview.
5
    Appendix Figure 2 provides details on study areas and club sampling.



                                                                                                  5
B. Club Member Sampling, Baseline Survey, and Randomization
    We created a sample frame for surveying active individual club members by using the club
survey to identify the roster of members attending club meetings during both school terms and
holidays. We then randomly selected 12 members and 4 alternates aged 16 and up from each club,
for a baseline survey sample frame of 240*16= 3,840 members. Surveyors approached selected
members at club meetings and administered the survey around the club's regular meeting place
during May and June of 2010.
    We completed 2,810 baseline surveys and then randomly assigned clubs evenly to education-
only, account-only, account+education, and control, stratifying on region and an indicator for
above-median baseline savings.
    The club member baseline reveals a mean age of 24 (SD=7) years, with 63% under 25 and
31% a household head. 43% are female, and 38% are currently attending school, with an average
educational attainment of 9th grade for those no longer in school. Financial knowledge and trust
are low (see Section II-B), as is formal account ownership (37%) and usage (29% of formal
account owners report frequent use). Savings and earnings are very heterogeneous, with about half
the sample classifiable as poor but others showing moderate levels of resources. Turning to
randomization balance checks, we find little evidence of imbalance across our four arms. 6


C. Financial Education Treatment
    Innovations for Poverty Action (IPA) developed the financial education course in cooperation
with the NGOs Freedom from Hunger and Straight Talk Foundation (STF), an organization which
runs a Ugandan network of youth groups. The course is based on an earlier curriculum developed
by the Global Financial Education Program (GFEP) that targets those near the poverty line in
developing countries. STF further refined the curriculum after piloting it with 176 youth in four
STF clubs.
    The 15-hour curriculum focuses on saving (see Table 1 notes). 7 The pedagogical approach uses
active and customized learning, with an emphasis on role playing, mini-cases, and group activities
(Kaiser and Menkhoff 2018).

6
 Appendix Table 2 reports baseline statistics and randomization balance checks.
7
  Saving is the most frequent downstream behavior measured in the 76 RCTs analyzed in Kaiser et al.'s
(2020) meta-analysis of financial education programs. Those programs have mean (median) instruction
hours of 12 (7).



                                                                                                    6
    IPA hired and trained instructors (with recruiting help from FINCA) who led the classes and
tracked attendance. Some clubs scheduled course sessions to piggyback on regular club meeting
times, while others arranged for separate times. We estimate that developing and delivering the
course cost about US$61 per person in 2020 dollars. 8
    Mean attendance is 4.6 sessions out of ten, and standard deviation of 3.9 and median of five.
75% of attended at least one session, and mean attendance conditional on attending at least one
meeting is 6.2 sessions. 9 We do not find any evidence that the control group or account-only arms
got any financial education.
    Our key takeaway from attendance data is that we have a reasonably powerful and symmetric
first stage: substantial levels of engagement with the course, and similar treatment intensity across
the two education arms.


D. Savings Account Treatment
    The savings accounts were offered by FINCA, an international microfinance institution. IPA
and FINCA sought to design an account that would minimize transaction costs (pecuniary and
otherwise), deciding on a group-based account as the most practical way to keep costs down while
still enabling FINCA to deliver basic services. Group delivery was novel in the sense that we could
not find evidence of other formal group accounts in the market, but familiar in the sense that our
sample had substantial baseline exposure to informal group-based savings mechanisms. 10
    Each club had only one FINCA account and was responsible for selecting members to serve
as field agents and a treasurer for handling deposits and withdrawals. FINCA did not impose any
fees except for account closure or pay interest on account balances. Clubs were required to make
a deposit within thirty days of opening the account and had to maintain a minimum balance of
50,000 UGX, 11 below which withdrawals were not permitted. 12




8
  Trainer and manager compensation and expenses account for about 80%.
9
   Appendix Table 3 reports session-level attendance statistics, Appendix Figure 3 illustrates participant
perceptions of course content from focus group data.
10
   ROSCAs and SACCOs are prevalent in our study communities. E.g., 63% of the clubs in our sample had
one or more members with positive savings in one in baseline.
11
   $1 USD = about 2,400 UGX during our sample period; inflation ranged from 5%-10%.
12
   Clubs making an initial deposit subsequently met the minimum balance requirement at 76% of our
monthly snapshots in year 1, with 70% of these clubs meeting the requirement in every month.



                                                                                                        7
     FINCA began marketing in each of the study regions in November 2010, roughly in accordance
with the study design: we encouraged FINCA to begin marketing to the 120 clubs assigned to our
two account arms around the time that the financial education course was concluding. 13 FINCA
marketers first met with clubs to introduce the account, and in most cases returned for additional
meetings to open the account and train the club's field agents and treasurer, making around four
visits to each club on average. 14 We estimate this intervention cost US$28 per person in 2020
dollars. 15
     FINCA data indicate 60% and 72% of clubs open accounts in the account-only and
account+education arm, respectively, and 52% and 53% of clubs, respectively, have non-zero
balances after one year. 16 FINCA neither marketed to nor opened accounts for the control or
education only-arms during our study period.
     Our key takeaways from FINCA data are a reasonably powerful first stage that may have
operated somewhat differently across the two account arms.


E. Endline Surveys and Attrition
     We administered one-year endline surveys between June and August 2011, nine to twelve
months after the last financial education sessions, and seven to ten months after the start of account
marketing. The five-year endline was administered February to July 2015. We attempted to re-
survey all baseline survey respondents and obtained 2,680 completed surveys (95% retention) at
one-year, and 1969 (70%) at five-years.
     We find little evidence of differential attrition rates across study arms: the biggest pairwise
difference in the retention rate, across the four arms and two endlines, is two percentage points.
Regressing a survey completion indicator on the three treatment assignment indicators to formally
test for differential rates yields p-values of 0.59 at one-year and 0.85 at five-years. We also explore
changes in sample composition across study arms by testing whether the means of key baseline
variables, which were balanced at baseline, remain balanced at endlines. Univariate tests indicate


13
   FINCA required Church authorization to open the accounts, and this authorization took three months
longer than expected to obtain in Mbarara Diocese (Western region). But marketing continued during the
delay.
14
   We tracked marketing effort and find no evidence of differential marketing across the two account arms.
15
   This covers marketer and manager compensation and expenses, and is equal to the subsidized portion of
intervention cost under the assumption that FINCA makes weakly positive profits on the margin.
16
   See Appendix Table 3 for additional usage statistics.



                                                                                                        8
weak evidence of compositional changes, and multivariate tests do not reject changes at the five-
year endline. Therefore we control for an outcome's baseline value when estimating treatment
effects. 17


II. Treatment Effects and Mechanisms
A. Estimation Strategy and Table Organization
     We estimate average impacts of financial education and account access by comparing
outcomes across treatment arms, and between each treatment arm and the control group, using
OLS models of the form:


 (1)  = 1t  + 2t  + 3t  + 0 +  + 


where  is an outcome variable (a decision input, behavior, or downstream outcome of interest),
for member  of club  in time period  (either the one-year or five-year endline) or 0 (baseline).
The treatment arm variables have the control group as the omitted category and take the value of
1 if individual i was randomly assigned to that study arm. We use only the random assignment,
and thereby identify intent-to-treat (ITT) estimates , because we lack separate instruments for the
extensive and intensive margins of participation. We cluster standard errors at the unit of
randomization, the club. StratVarsj is a vector of stratification variables described in Section I-B.
Our quantile regressions take the same form, replacing  with one of its deciles.
     Each table covers an "outcome class": decision inputs, saving, income, and other mechanisms.
We adjust for multiple hypothesis testing by reporting a family-wise error rate (FWER) adjusted
p-value for each ITT estimate, defining a family as either the full set of components in each table-
endline or the aggregate measure in each table-endline. 18 One-year endline estimates are always in
Panel A and five-year in Panel B. Each panel-column in Panels A and B presents results from a
single regression. At the bottom of each of these panels we report p-values for tests of equality




17
  Appendix Table 4 has additional details on retention rates and tests for sample composition changes.
18
  We calculate adjusted p-values using Westfall and Young's (1993) single-step resampling with 10,000
bootstraps. This method offers more power than the Bonferroni correction by accounting for the
dependency structure between hypotheses.



                                                                                                     9
across treatment arms and for complementarity. Panel C reports p-values on the difference between
the one- versus five-year effects, for each treatment arm.


B. Treatment Effects on Key Decision Inputs
      Table 1 presents estimates of treatment effects on four decision inputs covered in the financial
education curriculum: knowledge, planning, agency, and trust. These also could be affected by
market experience (induced by, e.g., the account access intervention). Each outcome measure here
is a standardized index of several related measures of one of the four inputs. 19 In Section II-E, we
will consider decision inputs that are not a focus of the curriculum, as part of our exploration of
mechanisms.

      The financial knowledge index in Column 1 is a standardized score of 19 questions regarding
bank regulation and basic financial concepts like budgeting, interest, and collateral. The control
group mean is 9.7 correctly answered (SD= 2.8) at one-year and 10.0 at five-years. At one-year,
the education arms each increase knowledge, by 0.17 and 0.19 SDs (SEs of 0.06, adjusted p-values
0.03 and 0.01), relative to either the control arm or account-only arm (the p-values on the
differences between the account-only arm and each education arm are each <0.01). These one-year
magnitudes are quite similar to the mean estimated effect of 0.20 SD of financial education on
financial knowledge in Kaiser et al.'s (2020) meta-analysis, where the median impact
measurement horizon is about a half-year. Our one-year effects are no longer present at five years
(the point estimates fall to 0.05 and -0.01), with p-values on the within-arm difference between
one- vs. five-year treatment effects of 0.14 and 0.01. We find no evidence that account-only affects
knowledge, and the five-year confidence interval does not contain a substantial positive effect size.

      The financial planning index averages across four component measures of tracking, routine
and emergency planning, and plan implementation. At one-year, 64% of the control group reports
regularly keeping track of money, and 18% report regularly making any preparation for
emergencies. There is little evidence of treatment effects on financial planning, although these
nulls are imprecisely estimated.




19
     Appendix Tables 5-8 report results separately for each index component.



                                                                                                    10
     The financial agency index averages across three component measures of financial decision-
making power in the household. At one-year, 73% of the control group reports that others in their
household would not be angry if the respondent saved alone, and 58% report always making their
own financial decisions. There is little evidence of treatment effects on financial agency, although
we cannot rule out substantial and persistent positive effects from account+education.

     The financial trust index averages across responses to two questions about the security of bank
deposits. At one-year, only 44% of the control group says that bank savings definitely would not
be stolen, and only 43% that savings definitely would be repaid if the bank were robbed. The
education arms each increase trust substantially at the one-year follow-up, by 0.22 and 0.32 SD
(SEs 0.05, adjusted p-values < 0.01) relative to either the control group or the account-only group.
Panel B shows that these effects dissipate by year five to 0.12 and 0.20 (SEs 0.06, adjusted p-
values = 0.66 and 0.05, respectively), but are still statistically significantly different than zero.
Moreover, evidence for dissipation is only suggestive: the p-values on the difference between one-
vs. five-year treatment effects are 0.13 and 0.14. The estimates for the account-only arm suggest
no effect but are imprecisely estimated.

     Altogether, the results suggest that education produces a large increase in knowledge that is
still evident after one year and then dissipates, and large and more lasting increases in trust in
banks. We find no evidence that increasing only account access changes decision inputs.

C. Treatment Effects on Savings
     Table 2 reports impacts on various pre-registered measures of assets and liabilities (Columns
2-7), and an index that averages across them (Column 1). 20 To elicit current asset balances, we first
asked respondents whether they save in each of 13 different savings "locations" (e.g., a hiding
place in the home, a ROSCA, a group account at a formal bank etc.) and then how much they
currently hold in each. 21



20
   We also pre-registered savings goals as an outcome, and consider goal-setting and planning in the
planning index in Table 1.
21
   Appendix Table 9 shows results for each location. As expected, given the evidence from FINCA data
(Appendix Table 3), and the lack of other formal group account offerings in the market (Section I-D), we
see each of our account arms increasing formal group account usage at the one-year endline. Otherwise, the
evidence suggests that each treatment increases the number of locations used relative to control, and that
these effects persist over time and are diffuse across multiple locations.



                                                                                                       11
     Starting with the savings index for brevity's sake, each of the six point estimates across the
two follow-ups are positive, with none smaller than a 0.10 SD increase. Three have p-values <0.01,
and two <0.10. We do not reject equality of treatment effects within-arm across the two follow-up
horizons (Panel C). And although the point estimates on account-only are weakly lower than those
for the education arms, we do not reject equality across treatment arms (the p-values for the
pairwise comparisons between account-only and the other arms range are 0.17, 0.32, 0.34, and
0.72). The one-year account-only effect may be dampened somewhat relative to the education
arms because subjects were exposed to the account for less time than to education. 22
     Total savings balances (Column 4) is the sum of the monetary value across all savings
locations. Baseline savings balances are extremely heterogeneous, with a 1% top-coded mean of
118,000 UGX (SD= 335,000, Appendix Table 2). Because total savings balance is arguably our
most important savings outcome, we consider treatment effects on alternative functional forms in
Appendix Table 10, finding similar results: uniformly positive point estimates, some evidence that
these increases are statistically significant, little evidence that any effects dissipate over time, and
mixed evidence on whether treatment effects differ across arms. We also present quantile
regression results (Figure 1, top panels). Treatment effects are weakly positive throughout the
distribution, for each arm at each follow-up time horizon, and more positive towards the top of the
distribution, with the strongest results from account+education and the weakest from account-only.
(Note that the estimated null effects at lower deciles are not all due to a large mass of non-savers,
as only 14% reports zero savings.)
     Altogether, we infer that the interventions substantially and persistently increase savings
balances. These results are statistically sharper for the savings index than for balances alone. The
index treatment effects are moderate- to large-sized in relative terms; e.g., Kaiser et al.'s (2020)
meta-analytic estimate of the effect of financial education on savings is 0.10 SD.
     More suggestively, our estimates do not rule out one-for-one increases in long-term wealth per
shilling of subsidy, given our estimated intervention costs of roughly 100,000 UGX (account) or
200,000 UGX (education) in 2014 currency. There are also indications, from the ITT point
estimates and the top deciles, that the education arms, and the account+education arm in particular,
produced larger increases in savings than account-only.


22
 This is due to a combination of design, which sought to have accounts offered at the conclusion of the 3-
month curriculum, and an account marketing delay in one of the four regions.



                                                                                                       12
D. Treatment Effects on Income
     Table 3 reports impacts on various pre-registered measures of income (Columns 1-5). To elicit
income, the surveys start by asking "We would like to know about what work you did to earn
money since 90 days ago. Have you done any activities to earn any money? This can include small
activities or even being given something as a thank-you for work you did." and then, if answered
positively, "Please take a moment to think about what work you did to earn money in that time.
Please tell me the activities that you got money from in these months", before then asking for
various details on each activity, including the amount earned in the past 90 days.
     Total income in Column 1 analyzes the sum of the sources in Columns 2-5. 23 Baseline earnings
average about 110% of the individual poverty line, with substantial heterogeneity. Several patterns
are evident in the treatment effect estimates. The point estimates are uniformly positive across all
six arm-endline combinations. They each have p-values between 0.09-0.19 after adjusting for
multiple hypotheses across treatment arms. They each imply increases of about 15-20% over the
control group mean 24 and are similar across arms within-endline. And they are uniformly larger in
levels at five-years than one-year, with p-values between 0.13 to 0.34.
     Because total income is arguably our most important measure of earnings, we estimate
treatment effects on alternative functional forms, finding similar results, in Appendix Table 11.
We also present quantile regression results (Figure 1, bottom panels). As with savings, we see
weakly positive effects throughout the distribution, for each arm at each endline, although here we
do see more evidence of effects from account-only, at least at five-years.
     Altogether, we infer that the interventions substantially and persistently increase income, with
no strong evidence that effects differ across arms. If we take the treatment effect point estimates
literally, they imply annual earnings increases of roughly 1 shilling per 1 shilling of account
subsidy and per 2 shillings of education subsidy.




23
   We also include "other" income in total income. Club-generating income is considered "other" and
constitutes 1% of total income.
24
   The control group endline means in Table 3 suggest a substantial upward trend in control group earnings.
We suspect this is due partly to life-cycle patterns and partly to inflation and other macro trends (e.g., about
25% real GDP growth over our study period).



                                                                                                             13
E. Other Treatment Effects and the Search for Mechanisms
      The results thus far do not paint a clear picture of the mechanisms underlying the treatment
effects, in part because we see increases in income (and, to a suggestive but statistically weaker
extent, savings) in the account-only arm, which did not experience changes in the key decision
inputs (Table 1). If the increased financial knowledge and trust in the education arms are not
essential for lasting behavior change and outcome improvements, what is essential? A related issue
is unpacking the relationship between increases in savings balances and increases in income.
      Table 4 starts by exploring the latter issue. Column 5 reports imprecise null effects on an index
of expenditures and consumption (although our survey was not a full inventory of either). 25 This
lack of cutback in spending, combined with the lack of an increase in borrowing (Table 2 Column
7), suggests the savings balance increase likely came from the increase in income à la Callen et al.
(2019). We do not find evidence that treated members change sources of income (Columns 1 and
2), and the confidence intervals rule out big changes. Increases in work effort - specifically,
working more often - are a more likely candidate, in the sense that five of six point estimates in
Column 3 are positive and part of confidence intervals containing increases that would be
sufficient to account for the treatment effects on income, but none individually is statistically
significant. Another channel runs from saving to income, à la Schaner (2018): initial increases in
saving might fund high-return investments that generate income by the time we conduct our first
endline. Table 4 Column 4 (investment) and Table 3 Column 3 (business income) are consistent
with this hypothesis in the sense that all point estimates are positive, albeit substantially smaller
than those for total income.
      Columns 6-8 consider the possibility that other decision inputs besides knowledge and trust
drive the results, namely changes to preferences and/or beliefs. We were motivated to pre-register
these inputs by the possibility that the financial education curriculum's focus on saving, planning
and agency could indirectly affect time preferences (patience and self-control), risk tolerance, and
altruism. 26 It could also be the case that account access alone changes these preferences, either by




25
     Appendix Table 12 reports results separately for each index component
26
  Subsequently, several financial education evaluations have estimated effects on youths' preferences; e.g.,
Sutter et al (2020).



                                                                                                         14
changing motivation or through a feedback loop with behavior. Yet we find no evidence of such
treatment effects. 27


III. Discussion and Conclusion
     Altogether our results suggest that increasing financial knowledge is valuable but not necessary
for producing lasting changes in saving and earning behavior and improvements in financial
condition. We conclude this from three key sets of results: (1) The account-only treatment arm
does not change measured knowledge or other inputs, but does increase savings and income
similarly to the financial education treatment arms; (2) The financial education treatment arms do
increase measured knowledge after one year, but those effects disappear after five years; (3)
Nevertheless the financial education arms' effects on savings and earnings persist after five years.

     Returning to the Friedman billiards player analogy: we learn from the financial education
treatment arms that persistent knowledge change is unnecessary for persistent behavior change.
(Teaching physics or rudimentary finance may help someone improve at billiards or personal
finance, but they can then forget the knowledge, at least in a "book learning" sense, and still do
well.) And we learn from the account-only arm that financial knowledge change is not necessary
to trigger persistent behavior change, even starting from a low base. (One can improve at billiards
or personal finance without ever learning physics or finance principles.)

     Our results also suggest the interventions studied here are cost-effective. They cost about an
order of magnitude less than Graduation programs yet produce long-run impacts on wealth and
income of similar magnitude.

     However, we caution against inferring confidently that our interventions have lasting impacts,
much less cost-effective ones, given the mixed evidence from prior work on downstream effects
from both financial account access and financial education programs. Further replication and
refinement of intervention design, delivery, and evaluation is needed to sharpen inferences
regarding whether, how, and where such programs can generate the magnitude of effects found
here.


27
  Treatment effect estimates for index components are in Appendix Tables 13-16. Appendix Table 17
reports estimates for other aspects of financial knowledge, and other aspects of expectations, not explicitly
covered in the curriculum and finds little evidence of effects.



                                                                                                          15
   Another key takeaway is that we do not find sharp evidence for any particular mechanism.
Many interventions have multiple plausible paths to impact, and so larger samples, higher-
frequency data, and/or additional identification strategies may be required to identify which, if
any, decision inputs or behaviors must change for downstream outcomes to improve.




                                                                                               16
                                        References
Abarcar, Paolo, Rashmi Barua, and Dean Yang. forthcoming. "Financial Education and Financial
        Access for Transnational Households: Field Experimental Evidence from the
        Philippines." Economic Development and Cultural Change.
Abebe, Girum, Biruk Tekle, and Yukichi Mano. 2018. "Changing Saving and Investment
        Behaviour: The Impact of Financial Literacy Training and Reminders on Micro-
        Businesses." Journal of African Economies 27 (5): 587­611.
Aggarwal, Shilpa, Valentina Brailovskaya, and Jonathan Robinson. 2020. "Saving for Multiple
        Financial Needs: Evidence from Lockboxes and Mobile Money in Malawi." w27035.
        Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bandiera, Oriana, Robin Burgess, Narayan Das, Selim Gulesci, Imran Rasul, and Munshi
        Sulaiman. 2017. "Labor Markets and Poverty in Village Economies." The Quarterly
        Journal of Economics 132 (2): 811­70.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Nathanael Goldberg, Dean Karlan, Robert Osei, William
        Parienté, Jeremy Shapiro, Bram Thuysbaert, and Christopher Udry. 2015. "A
        Multifaceted Program Causes Lasting Progress for the Very Poor: Evidence from Six
        Countries." Science 348 (6236): 1260799.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Dean Karlan, Robert Darko Osei, Hannah Trachtman, and Christopher Udry.
        2020. "Unpacking a Multi-Faceted Program to Build Sustainable Income for the Very
        Poor." w24271. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bastian, Gautam, Iacopo Bianchi, Markus Goldstein, and Joao Montalvao. 2018. "Short-Term
        Impacts of Improved Access to Mobile Savings, with and without Business Training:
        Experimental Evidence from Tanzania." w478. Washington, D.C.: Center for Global
        Development.
Beaman, Lori, Dean Karlan, and Bram Thuysbaert. 2014. "Saving for a (Not so) Rainy Day: A
        Randomized Evaluation of Savings Groups in Mali," October.
Bruhn, Miriam, Gabriel Lara Ibarra, and David McKenzie. 2014. "The Minimal Impact of a
        Large-Scale Financial Education Program in Mexico City." Journal of Development
        Economics 108 (May): 184­89.
Brune, Lasse, Xavier Giné, Jessica Goldberg, and Dean Yang. 2016. "Facilitating Savings for
        Agriculture: Field Experimental Evidence from Malawi." Economic Development and
        Cultural Change 64 (2): 187­220.
Burke, Jeremy, Julian Jamison, Dean Karlan, Kata Mihaly, and Jonathan Zinman. 2020. "Credit
        Building or Credit Crumbling? A Credit Builder Loan's Effects on Consumer Behavior,
        Credit Scores and Their Predictive Power."
Callen, Michael, Suresh de Mel, Craig McIntosh, and Christopher Woodruff. 2019. "What Are
        the Headwaters of Formal Savings? Experimental Evidence from Sri Lanka." The Review
        of Economic Studies 86 (6): 2491­2529.
Cole, Shawn, Thomas Sampson, and Bilal Zia. 2011. "Prices or Knowledge? What Drives
        Demand for Financial Services in Emerging Markets?" Journal of Finance 66 (6): 1933­
        67.
Dupas, Pascaline, Dean Karlan, Jonathan Robinson, and Diego Ubfal. 2018. "Banking the
        Unbanked? Evidence from Three Countries." American Economic Journal: Applied
        Economics 10 (2): 257­97.
Friedman, Milton. 1953. Essays in Positive Economics. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press.




                                                                                          17
Kaiser, Tim, Annamaria Lusardi, Lukas Menkhoff, and Carly Urban. 2020. "Financial Education
        Affects Financial Knowledge and Downstream Behaviors."
Kaiser, Tim, and Lukas Menkhoff. 2018. "Active Learning Fosters Financial Behavior:
        Experimental Evidence."
Lara Ibarra, Gabriel, David McKenzie, and Claudia Ruiz-Ortega. forthcoming. "Estimating
        Treatment Effects with Big Data When Take-up Is Low: An Application to Financial
        Education." The World Bank Economic Review.
Prina, Silvia. 2015. "Banking the Poor via Savings Accounts: Evidence from a Field
        Experiment." Journal of Development Economics 115: 16­31.
Schaner, Simone. 2018. "The Persistent Power of Behavioral Change: Long-Run Impacts of
        Temporary Savings Subsidies for the Poor." American Economic Journal: Applied
        Economics 10 (3): 67­100.
Somville, Vincent, and Lore Vandewalle. 2019. "Access to Banking, Savings and Consumption
        Smoothing in Rural India." Working Paper HEIDWP09-2019. International Economics
        Department Working Paper Series. Graduate Institute of International and Development
        Studies.
Sutter, Matthias, Michael Weyland, Anna Untertrifaller, and Manuel Froitzheim. 2020.
        "Financial Literacy, Risk and Time Preferences: Results from a Randomized Educational
        Intervention."




                                                                                           18
Table 1. Treatment Effects on Knowledge and Other Inputs Covered by the Financial Education Curriculum
                                                                                         (1)                 (2)                (3)                 (4)
                                                                                    Financial            Financial       Financial Agency    Financial Trust
                                                                                 Knowledge Index      Planning Index          Index              Index
                                                 Number of questions in index            19                  4                  3                   2
                                               Results for index components in          AT5                 AT6                AT7                 AT8
Panel A. One-Year Endline
Account Access Only                                                                     0.01                 0.03              -0.05               -0.01
                                                                                       (0.06)              (0.06)             (0.06)              (0.06)
                                                                                       [0.99]              [0.98]             [0.93]              [0.99]
Education Only                                                                          0.17                 0.09               0.01                0.22
                                                                                       (0.06)              (0.06)             (0.06)              (0.05)
                                                                                       [0.03]              [0.70]             [0.99]             [<0.01]
Account + Education                                                                     0.19                -0.06               0.10                0.32
                                                                                       (0.06)              (0.06)             (0.06)              (0.05)
                                                                                       [0.01]              [0.93]             [0.51]             [<0.01]
Control Group Mean                                                                      0.00                 0.00               0.00                0.00
Control Group SD                                                                        1.00                 1.00               1.00                1.00
N                                                                                       2680                2680               2680                2680
p-values: Account Access Only = Education Only                                         <0.01                 0.40               0.25              <0.01
p-values: Account Access Only = Account + Education                                    <0.01                 0.17             <0.01               <0.01
p-values: Education Only = Account + Education                                          0.77                 0.03               0.12                0.07
p-values: Account Access Only + Education Only = Account + Education                    0.96                 0.04               0.10                0.16
Proportion of Obs Equal Zero                                                            0.00                 0.00               0.00                0.00
Controls for Baseline Values                                                            Yes                  Yes                Yes                 Yes

Panel B. Five-Year Endline
Account Access Only                                                                     -0.09               0.08               -0.03               0.06
                                                                                       (0.07)              (0.06)             (0.07)              (0.07)
                                                                                       [0.88]              [0.88]             [0.96]              [0.93]
Education Only                                                                           0.05               0.07               -0.11               0.12
                                                                                       (0.07)              (0.08)             (0.07)              (0.06)
                                                                                       [0.93]              [0.88]             [0.74]              [0.66]
Account + Education                                                                     -0.01               0.02                0.08               0.20
                                                                                       (0.08)              (0.07)             (0.06)              (0.06)
                                                                                       [0.97]              [0.97]             [0.88]              [0.05]
Control Group Mean                                                                       0.00               0.00                0.00               0.00
Control Group SD                                                                         1.00               1.00                1.00               1.00
N                                                                                       1969                1969               1969                1969
p-values: Account Access Only = Education Only                                           0.05               0.92                0.26               0.39
p-values: Account Access Only = Account + Education                                      0.37               0.32                0.10               0.05
p-values: Education Only = Account + Education                                           0.39               0.45              <0.01                0.19
p-values: Account Access Only + Education Only = Account + Education                     0.87               0.16                0.02               0.77
Proportion of Obs Equal Zero                                                             0.00               0.00                0.00               0.00
Controls for Baseline Values                                                             Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes

Panel C: Comparisons across One-Year and Five-Year Endlines
p-values: Account Access Only One-year = Account Access Only Five-year                  0.24                0.52               0.82                0.37
p-values: Education Only One-year = Education Only Five-year                            0.14                0.88               0.11                0.13
p-values: Account + Education One-year = Account + Education Five-year                  0.01                0.35               0.82                0.14
Notes: Unit of observation is a club member-endline. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the unit of randomization (the youth club), and FWER
adjusted p-values in square brackets with a family of hypotheses defined as all treatment effects for an endline survey (i.e. 12 hypotheses per endline
survey). Each column-panel in Panels A and B reports results for a single OLS regression of the dependent variable listed in the column heading on the
treatment variables listed in the row headings (control group is the omitted category), the baseline value of the dependent variable if available (with a dummy
for missing baseline value where needed), and the stratification variables for randomization: an indicator for the club's members having above median total
savings at baseline and region indicators. Item non-response rates are low and our indices average across non-missing components. The financial education
curriculum covers one topic per meeting: (1) myths about the formal financial sector, (2) bank regulation by the Bank of Uganda, (3) how banks function as
businesses, (4) the relative costs and benefits of saving versus borrowing, (5) targeted/goal-oriented saving, (6) budgeting and record keeping, (7)
prioritizing spending decisions, (8) addressing challenges to saving, (9) making informed decisions about where and how to save, and (10) how to
communicate about money. Handouts and homework assignments are used to reinforce each lesson. Members were informed ex-ante that attending seven or
more sessions would earn a certificate of completion.



                                                                                                                                                          19
Table 2. Treatment Effects on Savings
                                                                                      (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                 (5)                (6)                (7)

                                                                                                                     Total Number of    Savings Balance
                                                                               Savings Index of     Any Savings                                             Any Resellable     Formal Account
                                                                                                                         Savings        ('000 UGX): 1%                                             No Debt (1/0)
                                                                                 Columns 2-7           (1/0)                                                 Asset (1/0)           (1/0)
                                                                                                                        Locations           top-coded

Panel A. One-Year Endline
Account Access Only                                                                  0.12               0.01                0.09              45.00               0.01               0.05               0.04
                                                                                    (0.07)             (0.02)              (0.05)            (37.33)             (0.02)             (0.02)             (0.03)
                                                                                                       [0.99]              [0.54]             [0.82]             [0.99]             [0.13]             [0.74]
Education Only                                                                       0.18               0.02                0.15             104.37               0.00               0.05               0.04
                                                                                    (0.07)             (0.02)              (0.06)            (41.83)             (0.02)             (0.02)             (0.03)
                                                                                                       [0.82]              [0.08]             [0.08]             [0.99]             [0.26]             [0.77]
Account + Education                                                                  0.18               0.04                0.14              44.30               0.00               0.09               0.03
                                                                                    (0.06)             (0.02)              (0.06)            (33.59)             (0.02)             (0.02)             (0.03)
                                                                                                       [0.37]              [0.11]             [0.82]             [0.99]            [<0.01]             [0.82]
Control Group Mean                                                                   0.00               0.84                1.28             221.94               0.12               0.16               0.48
Control Group SD                                                                     1.00               0.37                0.88             606.00               0.32               0.37               0.50
N                                                                                    2680               2680                2680               2678               2680               2680               2680
p-values: Account Access Only = Education Only                                       0.34               0.51                0.29               0.14               0.83               0.75               0.92
p-values: Account Access Only = Account + Education                                  0.32               0.12                0.36               0.98               0.84               0.14               0.72
p-values: Education Only = Account + Education                                       0.99               0.29                0.86               0.10               0.99               0.07               0.78
p-values: Account Access Only + Education Only = Account + Education                 0.18               0.71                0.20               0.05               0.79               0.75               0.20
Proportion of Obs Equal Zero                                                         0.00               0.14                0.14               0.14               0.88               0.79               0.49
Controls for Baseline Values                                                          Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes

Panel B. Five-Year Endline
Account Access Only                                                                  0.10               0.02                0.15               99.26              -0.00              -0.00              0.04
                                                                                    (0.07)             (0.02)              (0.09)            (78.88)             (0.02)             (0.03)             (0.03)
                                                                                                       [0.96]              [0.57]             [0.92]             [0.98]             [0.98]             [0.92]
Education Only                                                                       0.12               0.01                0.12              123.41               0.02               0.03              0.01
                                                                                    (0.07)             (0.02)              (0.09)            (91.02)             (0.02)             (0.03)             (0.03)
                                                                                                       [0.97]              [0.81]             [0.86]             [0.97]             [0.92]             [0.98]
Account + Education                                                                  0.19               0.02                0.18              188.15               0.03               0.04              0.04
                                                                                    (0.07)             (0.02)              (0.08)            (84.08)             (0.02)             (0.03)             (0.03)
                                                                                                       [0.92]              [0.29]             [0.43]             [0.83]             [0.78]             [0.92]
Control Group Mean                                                                   0.00               0.86                1.60              552.14               0.13               0.23              0.51
Control Group SD                                                                     1.00               0.35                1.14             1202.70               0.33               0.42              0.50
N                                                                                    1969               1969                1956               1960               1969               1956               1969
p-values: Account Access Only = Education Only                                       0.72               0.83                0.77                0.79               0.38               0.19              0.32
p-values: Account Access Only = Account + Education                                  0.17               0.81                0.70                0.31               0.11               0.10              0.83
p-values: Education Only = Account + Education                                       0.30               0.62                0.49                0.50               0.47               0.72              0.42
p-values: Account Access Only + Education Only = Account + Education                 0.81               0.82                0.50                0.78               0.50               0.74              0.69
Proportion of Obs Equal Zero                                                         0.00               0.13                0.13                0.13               0.87               0.75              0.47
Controls for Baseline Values                                                          Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes

Panel C: Comparisons across One-Year and Five-Year Endlines
p-values: Account Access Only One-year = Account Access Only Five-year                  0.75                 0.74                0.54              0.49           0.70              0.05               0.99
p-values: Education Only One-year = Education Only Five-year                            0.44                 0.76                0.75              0.83           0.63              0.67               0.46
p-values: Account + Education One-year = Account + Education Five-year                  0.88                 0.55                0.62              0.07           0.25              0.13               0.93
Notes: Unit of observation is a club member-endline. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the unit of randomization (the youth club), and FWER adjusted p-values in square brackets with a family of
hypotheses defined as all treatment effects for an endline survey (i.e. 18 hypotheses per endline survey, excluding the savings index). We do not adjust p-values for the savings index because the index itself
reduces the number of hypotheses tested. Each column-panel in Panels A and B reports results for a single OLS regression of the dependent variable listed in the column heading on the treatment variables listed in
the row headings (control group is the omitted category), the baseline value of the dependent variable if available (with a dummy for missing baseline value where needed), and the stratification variables for
randomization: an indicator for the club's members having above median total savings at baseline and region indicators. Our survey asks about 13 different savings locations (please see Appendix Table 9 for
details). Total savings here is top-coded at the 99th percentile; please see Appendix Table 10 for results on other functional forms of savings balances.




                                                                                                                                                                                                          20
Table 3. Treatment Effects on Income
                                                                                     (1)                (2)              (3)                (4)                   (5)
                                                                                              Income ('000 UGX) last 90 days, top-coded at 99th percentile
                                                                                    Total         Formal Wage         Business             Farm                Informal
Panel A. One-Year Endline
Account Access Only                                                                 31.06               -1.39             10.29              10.13                9.13
                                                                                   (16.22)             (9.07)             (7.51)             (7.56)             (5.81)
                                                                                    [0.11]             [0.96]             [0.74]             [0.72]             [0.69]
Education Only                                                                      32.45              15.12               2.76               5.62                9.11
                                                                                   (16.44)             (8.80)             (7.56)             (6.50)             (6.40)
                                                                                    [0.11]             [0.74]             [0.96]             [0.93]             [0.69]
Account + Education                                                                 36.34              16.55               7.25               4.07                2.96
                                                                                   (17.01)             (9.48)             (7.59)             (6.42)             (5.76)
                                                                                    [0.09]             [0.70]             [0.91]             [0.96]             [0.96]
Control Group Mean                                                                 200.79              70.07              38.51              42.93               29.90
Control Group SD                                                                   337.78              217.66             120.53             103.85             100.42
N                                                                                    2661               2661               2661               2661               2661
p-values: Account Access Only = Education Only                                       0.93                0.09              0.30               0.58                1.00
p-values: Account Access Only = Account + Education                                  0.76                0.08              0.68               0.45                0.21
p-values: Education Only = Account + Education                                       0.83                0.89              0.55               0.83                0.27
p-values: Account Access Only + Education Only = Account + Education                 0.26                0.84              0.59               0.26                0.06
Proportion of Obs Equal Zero                                                         0.11                0.67              0.77               0.54                0.74
Controls for Baseline Values                                                          Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes

Panel B. Five-Year Endline
Account Access Only                                                                 75.47              -22.25               6.46              37.21              34.31
                                                                                   (43.46)            (22.76)             (16.89)            (20.15)            (14.69)
                                                                                    [0.19]             [0.89]              [0.99]             [0.47]             [0.27]
Education Only                                                                      71.70               12.06              24.32               -1.25             23.19
                                                                                   (44.41)            (25.09)             (20.32)            (16.58)            (13.95)
                                                                                    [0.19]             [0.99]              [0.78]             [1.00]             [0.68]
Account + Education                                                                 95.13                8.95              33.35               -0.34             44.42
                                                                                   (43.15)            (24.74)             (18.43)            (16.89)            (14.87)
                                                                                    [0.10]             [0.99]              [0.50]             [1.00]             [0.05]
Control Group Mean                                                                 482.02             148.29              105.38             112.03              97.27
Control Group SD                                                                   673.52             400.81              282.07             273.56             217.91
N                                                                                    1963               1963                1963               1963               1963
p-values: Account Access Only = Education Only                                       0.94                0.11               0.38                0.07              0.47
p-values: Account Access Only = Account + Education                                  0.69                0.14               0.15                0.09              0.53
p-values: Education Only = Account + Education                                       0.64                0.89               0.68                0.96              0.17
p-values: Account Access Only + Education Only = Account + Education                 0.43                0.56               0.93                0.19              0.54
Proportion of Obs Equal Zero                                                         0.09                0.78               0.67                0.59              0.62
Controls for Baseline Values                                                          Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes

Panel C: Comparisons across One-Year and Five-Year Endlines
p-values: Account Access Only One-year = Account Access Only Five-year               0.28                0.33               0.82               0.15               0.10
p-values: Education Only One-year = Education Only Five-year                         0.34                0.90               0.30               0.67               0.30
p-values: Account + Education One-year = Account + Education Five-year               0.13                0.74               0.14               0.78              <0.01
Notes: Unit of observation is a club member-endline. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the unit of randomization (the youth club), and FWER adjusted p-values in
square brackets with two family of hypotheses per endline: (i) all treatment effects on total earnings for an endline survey (i.e. 3 hypotheses per endline survey), (ii) all
treatment effects on earnings components for an endline survey (i.e. 12 hypotheses per endline survey). Each column-panel in Panels A and B report results for a single OLS
regression of the dependent variable listed in the column heading on the treatment variables listed in the row headings (control group is the omitted category), the baseline
value of the dependent variable if available (with a dummy for missing baseline value where needed), and the stratification variables for randomization: an indicator for the
club's members having above median total savings at baseline and region indicators. Please see Appendix Table 11 for results on other functional forms of earnings.




                                                                                                                                                                     21
Table 4. Treatment Effects on Mechanisms
                                                                                      (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)                 (6)                (7)                (8)

                                                                               Primary Income        Number of         Total Days           Business       Expenditures and
                                                                                                                                                                            Patience and Self-     Risk Tolerance
                                                                               Source Changed     Income Streams      Worked (in last     Investment in     Consumption                                               Altruism Index
                                                                                                                                                                              Control Index            Index
                                                                                from Baseline     in Last 90 Days         90)            Last 12 Months         Index

                                               Number of questions in index                                                                                       3                4, 6                 3                   2
                                             Results for index components in                                                                                     AT12           AT13, AT14             AT15                AT16
Panel A. One-Year Endline
Account Access Only                                                                  -0.03              0.03                3.66              19.54               0.02                0.04               0.02               -0.08
                                                                                    (0.03)             (0.05)              (2.79)            (33.04)             (0.06)             (0.06)             (0.06)              (0.06)
                                                                                    [1.00]             [1.00]              [0.97]             [1.00]             [1.00]             [1.00]             [1.00]              [0.99]
Education Only                                                                        0.02              0.04                3.19              35.33               0.00               -0.00              -0.07               -0.05
                                                                                    (0.03)             (0.05)              (2.75)            (30.82)             (0.04)             (0.06)             (0.06)              (0.06)
                                                                                    [1.00]             [1.00]              [0.99]             [0.99]             [1.00]             [1.00]             [0.99]              [1.00]
Account + Education                                                                   0.00              0.02                1.85              37.21               0.01                0.04              -0.07               -0.10
                                                                                    (0.03)             (0.05)              (2.62)            (34.84)             (0.04)             (0.05)             (0.06)              (0.06)
                                                                                    [1.00]             [1.00]              [1.00]             [0.99]             [1.00]             [1.00]             [0.99]              [0.91]
Control Group Mean                                                                    0.52              1.41               46.70             178.59               0.00                0.00               0.00                0.00
Control Group SD                                                                      0.50              0.87               45.22             531.71               1.00                1.00               1.00                1.00
N                                                                                    2013               2680                2660               2674               2680               2680               2677                2680
p-values: Account Access Only = Education Only                                        0.22              0.91                0.88               0.61               0.79                0.50               0.18                0.70
p-values: Account Access Only = Account + Education                                   0.40              0.86                0.54               0.61               0.96                0.88               0.16                0.73
p-values: Education Only = Account + Education                                        0.67              0.77                0.64               0.95               0.71                0.40               0.98                0.46
p-values: Account Access Only + Education Only = Account + Education                  0.77              0.50                0.21               0.71               0.96                0.89               0.82                0.73
Proportion of Obs Equal Zero                                                          0.49              0.11                0.11               0.52               0.00                0.00               0.00                0.00
Controls for Baseline Values                                                          No                 Yes                 Yes                No                Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes

Panel B. Five-Year Endline
Account Access Only                                                                  -0.06              0.10                 4.64             29.95               0.11               -0.04              0.11                 0.05
                                                                                    (0.04)             (0.06)              (3.48)            (73.14)             (0.07)             (0.07)             (0.06)              (0.07)
                                                                                    [0.95]             [0.89]              [0.97]             [1.00]             [0.97]             [1.00]             [0.93]              [1.00]
Education Only                                                                       -0.08              0.03                -1.25             162.57              0.15               -0.01              0.04                -0.01
                                                                                    (0.04)             (0.06)              (3.41)            (71.35)             (0.08)             (0.07)             (0.07)              (0.08)
                                                                                    [0.77]             [1.00]              [1.00]             [0.68]             [0.81]             [1.00]             [1.00]              [1.00]
Account + Education                                                                  -0.06              0.11                 7.21             83.69               0.07               -0.04              0.08                 0.04
                                                                                    (0.03)             (0.06)              (3.78)            (83.78)             (0.07)             (0.07)             (0.07)              (0.08)
                                                                                    [0.95]             [0.85]              [0.72]             [0.99]             [1.00]             [1.00]             [0.98]              [1.00]
Control Group Mean                                                                    0.60              1.52               69.41              398.39              0.00                0.00              0.00                 0.00
Control Group SD                                                                      0.49              0.91               57.96             1071.70              1.00                1.00              1.00                 1.00
N                                                                                    1504               1968                1968               1924               1962               1969               1969                2810
p-values: Account Access Only = Education Only                                        0.66              0.25                 0.08              0.11               0.63                0.70              0.30                 0.42
p-values: Account Access Only = Account + Education                                   0.97              0.92                 0.49              0.57               0.67                0.95              0.72                 0.90
p-values: Education Only = Account + Education                                        0.61              0.17                 0.02              0.38               0.39                0.73              0.52                 0.51
p-values: Account Access Only + Education Only = Account + Education                  0.15              0.81                 0.44              0.35               0.11                0.90              0.52                 0.96
Proportion of Obs Equal Zero                                                          0.45              0.08                 0.08              0.38               0.00                0.00              0.00                 0.00
Controls for Baseline Values                                                          No                 Yes                 Yes                No                Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes

Panel C: Comparisons across One-Year and Five-Year Endlines
p-values: Account Access Only One-year = Account Access Only Five-year                 0.50              0.33                0.81               0.89               0.29               0.40                0.30              0.20
p-values: Education Only One-year = Education Only Five-year                           0.03              0.84                0.29               0.08               0.06               0.93                0.23              0.70
p-values: Account + Education One-year = Account + Education Five-year                 0.19              0.21                0.18               0.57               0.41               0.35                0.07              0.17
Notes: Unit of observation is a club member-endline. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the unit of randomization (the youth club), and FWER adjusted p-values in square brackets with a family of hypotheses defined as all
treatment effects for an endline survey (i.e. 24 hypotheses per endline survey). Each column-panel in Panels A and B reports results for a single OLS regression of the dependent variable listed in the column heading on the treatment
variables listed in the row headings (control group is the omitted category), the baseline value of the dependent variable if available (with a dummy for missing baseline value where needed), and the stratification variables for
randomization: an indicator for the club's members having above median total savings at baseline and region indicators. Item non-response rates are low and our indices average across non-missing components.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           22
Figure 1. Quantile Treatment Effects for Savings and Income


     Savings

                                            Panel A: Account Access Only                                                               Panel B: Education Only                                                                    Panel C: Account + Education

                             0.60                                          300%                                    0.60                                                    300%                                    0.60                                          300%
       Standard Deviations




                                                                                             Standard Deviations




                                                                                                                                                                                             Standard Deviations
                             0.40                                          200%                                    0.40                                                    200%                                    0.40                                          200%
            One-Year




                                                                                                  One-Year




                                                                                                                                                                                                  One-Year
                             0.20                                          100%                                    0.20                                                    100%                                    0.20                                          100%




                                                                                   Percent




                                                                                                                                                                                   Percent




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Percent
                             0.00                                          0%                                      0.00                                                    0%                                      0.00                                          0%
                             -0.20                                         -100%                                   -0.20                                                   -100%                                   -0.20                                         -100%
                             -0.40                                         -200%                                   -0.40                                                   -200%                                   -0.40                                         -200%
                             -0.60                                         -300%                                   -0.60                                                   -300%                                   -0.60                                         -300%


                             0.60                                          300%                                    0.60                                                    300%                                    0.60                                          300%
       Standard Deviations




                                                                                             Standard Deviations




                                                                                                                                                                                             Standard Deviations
                             0.40                                          200%                                    0.40                                                    200%                                    0.40                                          200%
            Five-Year




                                                                                                  Five-Year




                                                                                                                                                                                                  Five-Year
                             0.20                                          100%                                    0.20                                                    100%                                    0.20                                          100%




                                                                                   Percent




                                                                                                                                                                                   Percent




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Percent
                             0.00                                          0%                                      0.00                                                    0%                                      0.00                                          0%
                             -0.20                                         -100%                                   -0.20                                                   -100%                                   -0.20                                         -100%
                             -0.40                                         -200%                                   -0.40                                                   -200%                                   -0.40                                         -200%
                             -0.60                                         -300%                                   -0.60                                                   -300%                                   -0.60                                         -300%

                                     0   10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90                                                        0    10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90                                                                 0   10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90



     Income

                                            Panel D: Account Access Only                                                               Panel E: Education Only                                                                    Panel F: Account + Education

                             0.60                                          300%                                    0.60                                                    300%                                    0.60                                          300%
       Standard Deviations




                                                                                             Standard Deviations




                                                                                                                                                                                             Standard Deviations
                             0.40                                          200%                                    0.40                                                    200%                                    0.40                                          200%
            One-Year




                                                                                                  One-Year




                                                                                                                                                                                                  One-Year
                             0.20                                          100%                                    0.20                                                    100%                                    0.20                                          100%
                                                                                   Percent




                                                                                                                                                                                   Percent




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Percent
                             0.00                                          0%                                      0.00                                                    0%                                      0.00                                          0%
                             -0.20                                         -100%                                   -0.20                                                   -100%                                   -0.20                                         -100%
                             -0.40                                         -200%                                   -0.40                                                   -200%                                   -0.40                                         -200%
                             -0.60                                         -300%                                   -0.60                                                   -300%                                   -0.60                                         -300%


                             0.60                                          300%                                    0.60                                                    300%                                    0.60                                          300%
       Standard Deviations




                                                                                             Standard Deviations




                                                                                                                                                                                             Standard Deviations
                             0.40                                          200%                                    0.40                                                    200%                                    0.40                                          200%
            Five-Year




                                                                                                  Five-Year




                                                                                                                                                                                                  Five-Year
                             0.20                                          100%                                    0.20                                                    100%                                    0.20                                          100%
                                                                                   Percent




                                                                                                                                                                                   Percent




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Percent
                             0.00                                          0%                                      0.00                                                    0%                                      0.00                                          0%
                             -0.20                                         -100%                                   -0.20                                                   -100%                                   -0.20                                         -100%
                             -0.40                                         -200%                                   -0.40                                                   -200%                                   -0.40                                         -200%
                             -0.60                                         -300%                                   -0.60                                                   -300%                                   -0.60                                         -300%

                                     0   10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90                                                        0    10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90                                                                 0   10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90




                                                                                                                               Standard Deviations               Percent




Notes: Treatment effects on the left axis in standard deviation units of the outcome variable, standardized with respect to the full control group. On the right axis we present
treatment effects for the unadjusted outcome (i.e. valued in UGX) as a percentage of the relevant control group percentile. Each quantile regression controls for the baseline
outcome (with a dummy for missing baseline value where needed) and stratification variable with standard errors clustered at the unit of randomization (the youth club).




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         23
For Online Publication: Appendices




                                     24
Appendix Figure 1. Study Design and Timeline




                                               25
Appendix Figure 2. District Map of Uganda with Study Areas Highlighted




Notes: Sampling: We chose study areas in consultation with our various implementing partner organizations,
then identified 300 clubs in the vicinity of the district capitals in each study area, and then surveyed club
officers in April and May 2010 to assess whether each club met the three eligibility criteria described in
Section I-A. 267 clubs met the criteria and we randomly selected 240 of these for the study.




                                                                                                       26
Appendix Figure 3a. Word cloud of responses to question: "What do you remember most from the financial education curriculum?"




Appendix Figure 3b. Word cloud of responses to question: "What was your favorite part of the financial education?"




Notes: Questions were asked during a series of focus groups in December 2011 (around five months after the one-year endline survey) with
five groups of randomly selected members from the two education arms.




                                                                                                                                27
Appendix Table 1. Literature review of savings encouragement RCTs in developing countries
                                                                                 Endline Measurement Horizon(s)
                                         Financial Knowledge/                                                                    Spending/ Consumption
Study                                                                    Savings Impacts               Income Impacts
                                            Literacy Impacts                                                                               Impacts
Abarcar et al. (2019) [1]                          12                             12                          12                              12
Abebe et al. (2018) [2]                            5-7                           5-7                          5-7                            5-7
Abraham et al. (2016) [3]                                                     [0,2], 4
Aggarwal et al. (2020) [4]                                                   [0,9], 26                       [0,9]                          [0,9]
Aker et al. (2020) [5]                                                          3-14                          14                             3-14
Ashraf et al. (2015) [6]                                                       [0,48]
Ashraf et al. (2006a) [7]                                                       6, 12
Ashraf et al. (2006b) [8]                                                       6-15
Atkinson et al. (2013) [9]                                                     [0,36]
Attanasio et al. (2019) [10]                      3-29                     [0,6], 10, 29                                                      10
Avdeenko et al. (2019) [11]                                                       2
Banerjee et al. (2020) [12]                                                    [0,24]                       24, 36                          24, 36
Bastian et al. (2018) [13]                         12                          [0,12]                         12
Batista and Vicente (2020) [14]                                                [0,23]                                                          6
Beaman et al. (2014) [15]                                                         36                          36                              36
Berry et al. (2018) [16]                            8                             8                            8                               8
Blumenstock et al. (2018) [17]                                                 [0,25]
Brune et al. (2016) [18]                                                          14                          14                              14
Brune et al. (2017) [19]                                                    1-2 weeks                                                     1-2 weeks
Brune et al. (2019) [20]                                                        [0,3]                        [0,3]                           1-5
Callen et al. (2019) [21]                                                 [0,15], 21, 27                [0,15], 21, 27                  [0,15], 21, 27
Carter et al. (2016) [22]                                                       3-26                                                         3-26
Cole et al. (2011) [23]                                                         2, 24
De Mel et al. (2018) [24]                                                       7-26
Dizon et al. (2019) [25]                                                          7
Dupas and Robinson (2013a) [26]                                                 6, 12                                                       6, 12
Dupas and Robinson (2013b) [27]                                                 [4,7]                                                       [4,7]
Dupas et al. (2012) [28]                                                       [0,12]
Dupas et al. (2018)
    Site 1: Uganda [29]                                                        [0,24]                        6-18                            6-18
    Site 2: Malawi [30]                                                        [0,22]                        6-18                            6-18
    Site 3: Chile [31]                                                         [0,17]
Flory (2018) [32]                                                                 24                          24                              24
Gertler et al. (2017) [33]                                                     [0,18]
Habyarimana and Jack (2018) [34]                                                 6, 7
Jamison et al. (2014) [35]                        7-10                       [0,8], 10                       7-10                            7-10
John (2020) [36]                                                                 3-6                                                           6
Karlan and Linden (2014) [37]                                                  [0,24]
Karlan and Zinman (2018) [38]                                                  [0,12]
Karlan et al. (2016)
    Site 1: The Philippines [39]                                                3-24
    Site 2: Peru [40]                                                           6-12
    Site 3: Bolivia [41]                                                       10-12
Kast and Pomeranz (2014) [42]                                                  13-15                                                        13-15
Kast et al. (2012)
    Study 1: Peer Groups [43]                                                  [0,12]
    Study 2: Feedback Messages [44]                                             [0,3]
Laajaj (2017) [45]                                                              3-27                         3-27
Lipscomb and Schechter (2018) [46]                                             [0,13]
Prina (2015) [47]                                                              [0,12]                                                         12
Salas (2015) [48]                                                                 9
Schaner (2017) [49]                                                            [0,36]
Schaner (2018) [50]                                                            [0,36]                       36, 48
Somville and Vandewalle (2019) [51]                                             [1,7]                        [1,7]                          [1,7]
Supanantaroek et al. (2017) [52]                                                  3
General Notes:
Time horizons in months unless indicated otherwise.
Numbers inside brackets indicate a time horizon, in months, for which high frequency data was collected, typically a bank's administrative data on savings.


                                                                                                                                                      28
Study-specific notes:
[1] Endline conducted 12 months since researchers started giving financial incentives to take-up treatment, since take-up had been very low.
[2] Endline conducted between 5 to 7 months after intervention.
[3] Savings data from administrative bank data spanning two months and a 3-4 month endline with questions on outside savings and gambling.
[4] Data from high-frequency phone surveys taken twice a week for 9 months. Only half of the participants were surveyed in these phone surveys.
Additionally, 5 and 7 month follow-up surveys conducted for all participants on savings, income, and consumption outcomes, as well as a 26 month survey
on savings outcomes.
[5] Savings and consumption outcomes from 3, 6 and 10 month phone surveys, and from a 14 month endline. Income outcomes from the 14 month
endline.
[6] On top of 48 months of bank administrative data there was also a 12 month survey to measure total savings. Study is with US-based migrants, but the
accounts are in El Salvador.
[7] Savings outcomes from 6 and 12 month follow-up surveys.
[8] Savings outcomes from 6, 10 and 15 month follow-up surveys.
[9] Savings outcomes from bi-monthly administrative portfolio data spanning 3 years, and data on all movements in the accounts.
[10] For savings outcomes there are 6 months of bank administrative data, as well as data from 3 follow-up surveys (3, 10, and 29 month). Financial literacy
outcomes are from the 3, 10 and 29 month follow-ups. Consumption outcomes only from 10 month follow-up.
[11] Savings outcomes from 2 month follow-up.
[12] Savings outcomes from 2 years of administrative data. Income and consumption outcomes are from 24 and 36 month follow-up surveys.
[13] Savings outcomes are from 12 months of bank administrative data on transaction and from 12 month follow-up survey. Financial literacy and income
outcomes are from the 12 month follow-up. Financial literacy outcomes are financial and business practices scores. An additional 20 month follow-up was
scheduled to take place at the time of writing the working paper.
[14] Savings outcomes are from 23 months of administrative data and from a 6 month follow-up survey. Consumption outcomes are from the 6 month
follow-up.
[15] And endline survey was conducted at 36 months. A smaller subset of the participants got surveyed either every 2-3 weeks or every 3-4 months over 20
months, in order to examine consumption smoothing outcomes.
[16]   The intervention had not ended when the 8 month endline was conducted, so these are short-term impacts.
[17]   Savings outcomes from 25 months of administrative data and from a 7 month endline survey.
[18]   Savings, income and consumption outcomes from a 14 month follow-up survey.
[19]   Savings and consumption outcomes from 1 week and 2 week surveys.
[20] Savings outcomes from 3 months of administrative data and 1 and 3 month follow-ups. Income outcomes from 3 months of administrative data.
Consumption outcomes from 1, 3 and 5 month follow-ups. There are two additional 8 and 26 month follow-up surveys on assets.
[21] For 15 months some participants were surveyed monthly and some quarterly. Additionally, both groups got long-term follow-ups at months 21 and 27.
[22] Savings and consumption outcomes from 3, 15 and 26 month follow-up surveys (months after the savings intervention, which happened after the
fertilizer subsidy intervention.)
[23] Main outcome is "Opened bank account 2 months after intervention." Then there was an endline 2 years after intervention with other savings outcomes.
[24] Savings outcomes are from 4 follow-up surveys, which were conducted at different times relative to intervention depending on when the accounts were
activated. First follow-up: 7-11 month survey, full sample surveyed. Second follow-up: 9-13 month survey, only a sub-sample surveyed. Third follow-up:
13-17 month survey, only a sub-sample surveyed. Fourth follow-up: 19-26 month survey, full sample surveyed.
[25] Savings outcomes from 7 month follow-up survey.
[26] Savings and consumption outcomes from 6 and 12 month follow-up surveys. The reported consumption outcome is "amount spent on preventative
health products."
[27] Data collected in self-reported logbooks, recorded daily from 4 to 7 months after intervention.
[28] Savings outcomes from 12 months of bank administrative data.
[29] Savings outcomes from 24 months of administrative data and from 6, 12 and 18 month follow-up surveys. Income and consumption outcomes from 6,
12 and 18 month follow-ups.
[30] Savings outcomes from 22 months of administrative data and from 6, 12 and 18 month follow-up surveys. Income and consumption outcomes from 6,
12 and 18 month follow-ups.
[31] There are 17 months of administrative data on savings. Take-up of accounts was low so there were no follow-ups to measure impact. There are
qualitative surveys on why participants did not open an account.
[32] Savings, income and consumption outcomes are from 24 month follow-up survey. Savings outcome is "Has formal savings" dummy. Consumption
outcome is a food-access score.
[33] Savings outcomes from 18 months of administrative data.
[34] Savings outcomes from 6 and 7 month follow-up surveys.
[35] Financial literacy, savings, income, and consumptions outcomes from a follow-up survey conducted between 7 and 10 months after intervention.
Additionally, there are 8 months of administrative data on savings.
[36]   Consumption outcomes from a 6 month follow-up. Savings outcomes from administrative data spanning from baseline to 3-6 months after baseline.
[37]   Savings outcomes from administrative data spanning 24 months.
[38]   Savings outcomes from 12 months of administrative data.
[39]   The client chooses a commitment period ranging between 3 and 24 months. There is bank administrative data on deposits made in that period.
[40]   The client chooses a commitment period ranging between 6 and 12 months. There is bank administrative data on deposits made in that period.
[41] The commitment period has a fixed end-date. Depending on when the client signs up the period could range between 9 and 11 months. There is bank
administrative data on deposits made in that period.


                                                                                                                                                     29
[42] Outcomes come from follow-up survey conducted between 13 and 15 months after intervention, as well as bank administrative data.
[43] Savings outcomes from administrative data spanning 12 months.
[44] Savings outcomes from administrative data spanning 3 months. The second study came right after the first one, with the same study participants (re-
randomizing and stratifying on Study 1 assignment).
[45]   Savings and income outcomes from 3, 15 and 27 month follow-up surveys.
[46]   Savings outcomes from administrative data on mobile account use spanning 13 months and a 12 month follow-up survey.
[47]   Savings outcomes from bank administrative data spanning 12 months. Consumption outcomes from a 12 month follow-up survey.
[48]   Data from both a 9 month endline and administrative data from month 9.
[49]   Savings outcomes from bank administrative data spanning 36 months and from a 36 month endline survey.
[50] Savings outcomes from administrative data spanning 36 months and from a 36 month follow-up survey. Income outcomes from 36 month and 48
month follow-ups.
[51] Savings, income and consumption outcomes from weekly interviews conducted between months 1 and 4 and then again between months 6 and 7.
[52] Savings outcomes from 3 month follow-up survey.




                                                                                                                                                     30
Appendix Table 2. Baseline Summary Statistics and Balance
                                                       (1)                  (2)                 (3)                   (4)                    (5)                 (6)
                                                                                             Mean (SD)
                                                                                                                                                             row var on
                                                                                                                                          Account +
                                                  Full Sample            Control           Account Only        Education Only                            indicators for each
                                                                                                                                          Education
                                                                                                                                                              treatment
Female                                                 0.43                0.44                   0.41                 0.42                   0.43               0.66
                                                     (0.49)              (0.50)                 (0.49)               (0.49)                 (0.50)
Age                                                   23.82               23.31                 24.12                 23.83                  24.02               0.13
                                                     (7.19)              (6.60)                 (8.09)               (6.68)                 (7.32)
Education: Highest Level Completed                    10.28               10.32                 10.11                 10.45                  10.23               0.35
                                                     (3.56)              (3.49)                 (3.51)               (3.70)                 (3.54)
Has Any Formal Account                                 0.37                0.37                   0.36                 0.37                   0.37               0.95
                                                     (0.48)              (0.48)                 (0.48)               (0.48)                 (0.48)
Household Head (1/0)                                   0.31                0.29                   0.32                 0.32                   0.31               0.68
                                                     (0.46)              (0.46)                 (0.47)               (0.47)                 (0.46)
Financial Knowledge Index                             -0.02                0.00                  -0.09                -0.01                   0.00               0.26
                                                     (0.98)              (1.00)                 (0.98)               (0.96)                 (0.98)
Financial Planning Index                              -0.03                0.00                  -0.01                -0.05                  -0.06               0.58
                                                     (1.01)              (1.00)                 (0.98)               (1.02)                 (1.02)
Financial Agency Index                                -0.02               -0.00                  -0.05                -0.01                  -0.03               0.77
                                                     (0.97)              (1.00)                 (0.99)               (0.97)                 (0.95)
Financial Trust Index                                 -0.01                0.00                  -0.01                -0.07                   0.02               0.33
                                                     (1.01)              (1.00)                 (1.04)               (0.98)                 (1.01)
Total Savings ('000 UGX): 1% top-coded               118.21              117.71                117.90                135.49                 101.92               0.30
                                                    (334.81)            (337.75)              (352.38)             (367.29)                (274.74)
Total Income ('000 UGX): 1% top-coded                140.05              129.47                141.87                150.20                 139.15               0.42
                                                    (230.77)            (226.77)              (243.17)             (233.16)                (219.96)
N                                                     2810                 717                    692                  693                    708
Notes: Unit of observation is the club member. We have many additional baseline variables but, for concision, limit the set here          to key demographics and outcome
variables. Each cell in Column 6 provides the p-value from an F-test on the joint signifiance of the three treatment variables, from an   OLS regression of the row variable
on the treatment assignment dummies and stratification variables.




                                                                                                                                                                       31
Appendix Table 3. Account usage and financial education attendance
                                                                                                    (1)                (2)                 (3)                 (4)
                                                                                                             Mean or Proportion (SE)                        p -value
                                                                                                                                       Account +
                                                                                              Account Only       Education Only
                                                                                                                                        Education      (1)=(3) or (2)=(3)
Club Opened Savings Account                                                                    0.60 (0.06)              -              0.72 (0.06)            0.13

Conditional on Opening Account:
 FINCA Savings Account Balance at Time of One-year Endline Survey ('000 UGX)                 107.47 (33.14)             -          180.97 (65.56)             0.25
 Non-Zero FINCA Savings Account Balance at Time of One-year Endline Survey                     0.86 (0.06)              -            0.73 (0.07)              0.12
 Number of FINCA Transactions from Opening through One-year Endline Survey                     3.87 (0.60)              -            4.20 (0.72)              0.59

Total financial education sessions attended                                                           -             4.58 (0.28)       4.76 (0.22)             0.56
Attended all financial education sessions                                                             -             0.13 (0.02)       0.13 (0.02)             0.79
Attended session: Myths about the formal financial sector                                             -             0.50 (0.03)       0.56 (0.03)             0.16
Attended session: Bank regulation by the Bank of Uganda                                               -             0.45 (0.03)       0.46 (0.03)             0.80
Attended session: How banks function as businesses                                                    -             0.46 (0.03)       0.49 (0.03)             0.34
Attended session: Costs and benefits of saving versus borrowing                                       -             0.48 (0.03)       0.47 (0.03)             0.90
Attended session: Targeted/goal-oriented saving                                                       -             0.47 (0.03)       0.49 (0.03)             0.44
Attended session: Budgeting and record keeping                                                        -             0.44 (0.03)       0.46 (0.03)             0.68
Attended session: Prioritizing spending decisions                                                     -             0.45 (0.03)       0.46 (0.03)             0.87
Attended session: Addressing challenges to saving                                                     -             0.45 (0.03)       0.47 (0.03)             0.61
Attended session: Decisions about where and how to save                                               -             0.44 (0.04)       0.45 (0.02)             0.96
Attended session: How to communicate about money                                                      -             0.45 (0.03)       0.45 (0.03)             0.98
Notes: Unit of observation is a club member, sample is those completing endline 1. Account data from FINCA and attendance data from instuctor logs. Standard errors
in parentheses, clustered at the unit of randomization (the youth club). Each p-value in Column 4 is from a single regression using our usual specification but estimated
using only subjects from two arms being compared in the row. For example, in the first four rows - for the savings variables - we only include individuals from clubs
assigned to account access only or to account+education.




                                                                                                                                                                32
Appendix Table 4. Attrition: Retention Rates and Sample Composition Across Arms and Endlines
                                                                                    (1)                    (2)                    (3)                   (4)                    (5)                     (6)
                                                                                                                         Balance: Mean (SD)                                                         Composition
                                                                                                                                                                                                  p-value of F-test of
                                                                                                                                                                                                interaction terms after
                                                                                                                                                                     p-value of F-test of             regression of
                                                                                                                                                                    treatment assignment       1=completed survey on
                                                                                                                                                                        dummies after            treatment assignment
                                                                                  Control            Account Only          Education Only       Account + Education
                                                                                                                                                                      regression of row              dummies, row
                                                                                                                                                                    variable on treatment          variables, and row
                                                                                                                                                                    assignment dummies         variables interacted with
                                                                                                                                                                                                 treatment assignment
                                                                                                                                                                                                        dummies
Panel A. One-Year Endline
Completed survey                                                                   0.95                   0.96                   0.96                   0.95                   0.59
                                                                                  (0.23)                 (0.21)                 (0.19)                 (0.21)
Baseline statistics for those completing survey:
Female                                                                              0.44                   0.40                   0.42                   0.43                  0.54
                                                                                  (0.50)                 (0.49)                 (0.49)                 (0.49)
Age                                                                                23.39                  24.16                  23.85                  24.12                  0.16
                                                                                  (6.56)                 (8.03)                 (6.69)                 (7.40)
Education: Highest Level Completed                                                 10.35                  10.09                  10.47                  10.22                  0.24
                                                                                  (3.50)                 (3.52)                 (3.68)                 (3.56)
Has Any Formal Account                                                              0.37                   0.36                   0.37                   0.36                  0.91
                                                                                  (0.48)                 (0.48)                 (0.48)                 (0.48)
Household Head (1/0)                                                                0.30                   0.32                   0.32                   0.31                  0.73
                                                                                  (0.46)                 (0.47)                 (0.47)                 (0.46)
Financial Knowledge Index                                                           0.02                  -0.09                  -0.01                   0.01                  0.17
                                                                                  (1.00)                 (0.98)                 (0.96)                 (0.98)
Financial Planning Index                                                           -0.00                  -0.01                  -0.04                  -0.06                  0.68
                                                                                  (1.00)                 (0.99)                 (1.02)                 (1.03)
Financial Agency Index                                                              0.00                  -0.06                   0.00                  -0.02                  0.68
                                                                                  (0.99)                 (0.99)                 (0.96)                 (0.95)
Financial Trust Index                                                              -0.00                  -0.02                  -0.07                   0.04                  0.20
                                                                                  (1.00)                 (1.05)                 (0.97)                 (1.01)
Total Savings ('000 UGX): 1% top-coded                                            121.61                 120.69                 132.12                  93.46                  0.08
                                                                                 (346.16)               (359.62)               (357.19)               (235.95)
Total Income ('000 UGX): 1% Winsor                                                131.10                 141.98                 151.41                 138.17                  0.46
                                                                                 (229.95)               (242.81)               (234.08)               (217.35)
p-value: treatments X all variables above                                                                                                                                                               0.24
p-value: treatments X outcome variables only (indices, savings, income)                                                                                                                                 0.12
N                                                                                  678                    661                    666                    675                   2680                      2810

Panel B. Five-Year Endline
Completed survey                                                                   0.70                   0.71                   0.69                   0.71                   0.85
                                                                                  (0.46)                 (0.45)                 (0.46)                 (0.46)
Baseline statistics for those completing survey:
Female                                                                             0.42                    0.40                   0.43                   0.40                  0.62
                                                                                  (0.49)                 (0.49)                 (0.50)                 (0.49)
Age                                                                                24.07                  24.74                  24.19                  24.56                  0.47
                                                                                  (6.88)                 (8.29)                 (6.98)                 (7.50)
Education: Highest Level Completed                                                 10.33                   9.99                  10.58                  10.17                  0.06
                                                                                  (3.65)                 (3.55)                 (3.58)                 (3.67)
Has Any Formal Account                                                             0.39                    0.34                   0.36                   0.38                  0.42
                                                                                  (0.49)                 (0.47)                 (0.48)                 (0.49)
Household Head (1/0)                                                               0.32                    0.34                   0.35                   0.33                  0.88
                                                                                  (0.47)                 (0.47)                 (0.48)                 (0.47)
Financial Knowledge Index                                                          0.06                   -0.11                  -0.04                   0.03                  0.02
                                                                                  (0.99)                 (0.97)                 (0.95)                 (0.99)
Financial Planning Index                                                           0.07                    0.03                  -0.06                  -0.05                  0.13
                                                                                  (0.98)                 (0.98)                 (1.03)                 (1.04)
Financial Agency Index                                                             0.06                   -0.01                  -0.00                  -0.03                  0.51
                                                                                  (0.96)                 (0.96)                 (0.94)                 (0.95)
Financial Trust Index                                                              0.03                   -0.04                  -0.05                   0.07                  0.17
                                                                                  (1.02)                 (1.06)                 (0.99)                 (0.98)
Total Savings ('000 UGX): 1% top-coded                                            134.74                 128.82                 145.70                 105.22                  0.19
                                                                                 (360.59)               (368.62)               (395.53)               (239.25)
Total Income ('000 UGX): 1% Winsor                                                140.29                 147.22                 156.57                 150.15                  0.76
                                                                                 (231.24)               (248.72)               (239.74)               (231.82)
p-value: treatments X all variables above                                                                                                                                                                0.02
p-value: treatments X outcome variables only (indices, savings, income)                                                                                                                                  0.03
N                                                                                 500                      491                      478                   500                  1969                      2810
Notes: Unit of observation is the club member. We have many additional baseline variables but, for concision, limit the set here to key demographics and outcome variables. Regressions in Columns 5 and 6 also include
stratification variables.




                                                                                                                                                                                                               33
Appendix Table 5. Treatment Effects on Financial Knowledge Summary Measures and Index Components
                                                                         (1)              (2)                                       (3)                  (4)                 (5)                  (6)                  (7)               (8)                    (9)              (10)             (11)                 (12)                 (13)
                                                                           Summary measures                                                                                                                                     Index Components
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Answered
                                                                                    Financial        Knowledge                                                                                                                                                                Answered       Answered                                   Answered
                                                                                                                                                    Answered          Answered                                    Answered             Answered             Answered                                               Question on
                                                                                Knowledge Index -     Questions              Bank Regulation                                                 Answered                                                                         Correctly: Correctly: Savings                           Correctly: Loan
                                                                                                                                                 Correctly: Formal Correctly: Interest                         Correctly: Interest Correctly: Rotating      Correctly:                                               Interest
                                                                                 Same as Table 1      Answered                   Index                                                     Correctly: Wants                                                                   Informal     Interest Rate                               Interest Rate
                                                                                                                                                      Budget        with Borrowing                                of Savings            Savings             Collateral                                            Compounding
                                                                                     Col 1        Correctly out of 19                                                                                                                                                          Budget       Calculation                                 Calculation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Correctly
Panel A. One-Year Endline
Account Access Only                                                                    0.01                 0.10                   0.04                 0.01                 0.01                0.01                 -0.00                -0.12                0.03             0.02             -0.06                -0.01                0.06
                                                                                      (0.06)               (0.17)                 (0.06)               (0.06)               (0.06)              (0.05)               (0.06)               (0.06)               (0.05)           (0.06)           (0.05)               (0.06)               (0.06)
Education Only                                                                         0.17                 0.46                   0.11                 0.12                 0.03                0.15                  0.15                 0.10                0.01             0.10             -0.03                -0.06                0.01
                                                                                      (0.06)               (0.17)                 (0.06)               (0.06)               (0.06)              (0.06)               (0.06)               (0.06)               (0.05)           (0.06)           (0.05)               (0.05)               (0.06)
Account + Education                                                                    0.19                 0.55                   0.16                 0.10                 0.05                0.13                  0.14                 0.08                0.03             0.07             -0.05                 0.02                0.04
                                                                                      (0.06)               (0.16)                 (0.06)               (0.06)               (0.07)              (0.06)               (0.06)               (0.06)               (0.05)           (0.06)           (0.05)               (0.05)               (0.06)
Control Group Mean                                                                     0.00                 9.72                   0.00                 0.00                 0.00                0.00                  0.00                 0.00                0.00             0.00              0.00                 0.00                0.00
Control Group SD                                                                       1.00                 2.77                   1.00                 1.00                 1.00                1.00                  1.00                 1.00                1.00             1.00              1.00                 1.00                1.00
N                                                                                      2680                 2680                   2680                 2680                 2680                2680                 2680                 2680                 2680             2680             2677                 2680                 2676
p-values: Account Access Only = Education Only                                         0.01                 0.03                   0.26                 0.05                 0.62                0.03                  0.01                 0.00                0.77             0.17              0.70                 0.37                0.31
p-values: Account Access Only = Account + Education                                    0.00                 0.01                   0.05                 0.15                 0.42                0.07                  0.01                 0.00                0.99             0.42              0.91                 0.64                0.64
p-values: Education Only = Account + Education                                         0.77                 0.57                   0.38                 0.72                 0.72                0.77                  0.88                 0.72                0.77             0.58              0.78                 0.15                0.61
p-values: Account Access Only + Education Only = Account + Education                   0.96                 0.97                   0.94                 0.73                 0.86                0.72                  0.96                 0.20                0.83             0.53              0.58                 0.26                0.69
Proportion of Obs Equal Zero                                                           0.00                 0.00                   0.00                 0.00                 0.00                0.00                  0.00                 0.00                0.00             0.00              0.00                 0.00                0.00
Controls for Baseline Values                                                           Yes                   Yes                    No                   No                   Yes                 Yes                  Yes                   No                  Yes              No                No                  Yes                  No

Panel B: Five-Year Endline
Account Access Only                                                                      -0.09              -0.19                     -0.05               -0.05                  0.01              0.02                 -0.03                -0.04                 -0.05        -0.13            -0.08                -0.06                 0.03
                                                                                        (0.07)             (0.18)                    (0.07)              (0.07)                (0.07)             (0.07)               (0.07)               (0.08)                (0.07)       (0.07)           (0.06)               (0.07)                (0.07)
Education Only                                                                            0.05               0.24                      0.11                0.05                  0.09              0.03                  0.00                -0.01                 -0.05        -0.05            -0.08                -0.04                 0.12
                                                                                        (0.07)             (0.19)                    (0.07)              (0.07)                (0.07)             (0.06)               (0.07)               (0.08)                (0.06)       (0.07)           (0.05)               (0.07)                (0.07)
Account + Education                                                                      -0.01              -0.03                     -0.00               -0.10                 -0.02              0.04                 -0.02                 0.03                  0.01        -0.07            -0.10                 0.07                 0.09
                                                                                        (0.08)             (0.21)                    (0.07)              (0.08)                (0.07)             (0.07)               (0.07)               (0.08)                (0.06)       (0.07)           (0.05)               (0.07)                (0.07)
Control Group Mean                                                                        0.00               9.97                      0.00                0.00                  0.00              0.00                  0.00                 0.00                  0.00         0.00             0.00                 0.00                 0.00
Control Group SD                                                                          1.00               2.57                      1.00                1.00                  1.00              1.00                  1.00                 1.00                  1.00         1.00             1.00                 1.00                 1.00
N                                                                                        1969               1969                      1969                1969                  1969               1969                 1968                 1967                  1969         1969             1969                 1968                  1968
p-values: Account Access Only = Education Only                                            0.05               0.02                      0.04                0.13                  0.26              0.85                  0.69                 0.74                  0.99         0.21             0.98                 0.83                 0.19
p-values: Account Access Only = Account + Education                                       0.37               0.45                      0.57                0.51                  0.66              0.84                  0.87                 0.35                  0.38         0.34             0.75                 0.11                 0.43
p-values: Education Only = Account + Education                                            0.39               0.21                      0.15                0.04                  0.13              0.98                  0.81                 0.53                  0.36         0.80             0.75                 0.13                 0.67
p-values: Account Access Only + Education Only = Account + Education                      0.87               0.76                      0.54                0.32                  0.23              0.83                  0.92                 0.45                  0.23         0.24             0.38                 0.10                 0.55
Proportion of Obs Equal Zero                                                              0.00               0.00                      0.00                0.00                  0.00              0.00                  0.00                 0.00                  0.00         0.00             0.00                 0.00                 0.00
Controls for Baseline Values                                                              Yes                Yes                        No                 No                    Yes                Yes                  Yes                   No                   Yes           No               No                  Yes                   No
Notes: To calculate the index in Column 1 we take the mean of its non-missing components in Columns 3-13 (each of which has control group mean zero and SD 1) and then restandardize to SD=1 so that treatment effect estimates are in standard deviation units. Unit of observation is a club member-endline. Standard errors in parentheses,
clustered at the unit of randomization (the youth club). Unit of observation is a club member-endline. Each column-panel in Panels A and B reports results for a single OLS regression of the dependent variable listed in the column heading on the treatment variables listed in the row headings (control group is the omitted category), the baseline
value of the dependent variable if available (with a dummy for missing baseline value where needed), and the stratification variables for randomization: an indicator for the club's members having above median total savings at baseline and region indicators.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          34
Appendix Table 6. Treatment Effects on Financial Planning Index Components
                                                                                          (1)                  (2)                  (3)              (4)                      (5)
                                                                                                                                      Index Components

                                                                                  Financial Planning    Regularly Keeps      Regularly Plans Ratio of Financial
                                                                                                                                                                         Prepares for
                                                                                   Index - Same as      Track of Money      for How to Spend Plans Succeeded to
                                                                                                                                                                         Emergencies
                                                                                    Table 1 Col 2            Spent           Expected Money     Plans Made

Panel A. One-Year Endline
Account Access Only                                                                       0.03                -0.01                -0.02                 0.03                0.08
                                                                                        (0.06)               (0.06)               (0.05)               (0.05)               (0.06)
Education Only                                                                            0.09                 0.05                -0.02                 0.04                0.12
                                                                                        (0.06)               (0.06)               (0.06)               (0.05)               (0.07)
Account + Education                                                                      -0.06                -0.03                -0.12                -0.05                0.06
                                                                                        (0.06)               (0.06)               (0.06)               (0.05)               (0.07)
Control Group Mean                                                                        0.00                 0.00                 0.00                 0.00                0.00
Control Group SD                                                                          1.00                 1.00                 1.00                 1.00                1.00
N                                                                                        2680                 2680                 2680                 2680                 2680
p-values: Account Access Only = Education Only                                            0.40                 0.25                 0.89                 0.82                0.60
p-values: Account Access Only = Account + Education                                       0.17                 0.85                 0.12                 0.15                0.71
p-values: Education Only = Account + Education                                            0.03                 0.15                 0.12                 0.08                0.40
p-values: Account Access Only + Education Only = Account + Education                      0.04                 0.43                 0.33                 0.10                0.12
Proportion of Obs Equal Zero                                                              0.00                 0.00                 0.00                 0.00                0.00
Controls for Baseline Values                                                              Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  No

Panel B: Five-Year Endline
Account Access Only                                                                         0.08                  0.09                0.01                 0.10                0.01
                                                                                           (0.06)               (0.06)              (0.06)                (0.06)             (0.07)
Education Only                                                                              0.07                  0.01               -0.03                 0.05                0.13
                                                                                           (0.08)               (0.06)              (0.08)                (0.08)             (0.07)
Account + Education                                                                         0.02                 -0.00                0.04                 0.04               -0.06
                                                                                           (0.07)               (0.07)              (0.07)                (0.07)             (0.07)
Control Group Mean                                                                          0.00                  0.00                0.00                 0.00                0.00
Control Group SD                                                                            1.00                  1.00                1.00                 1.00                1.00
N                                                                                           1969                 1969                1969                  1950               1969
p-values: Account Access Only = Education Only                                              0.92                  0.23                0.62                 0.50                0.06
p-values: Account Access Only = Account + Education                                         0.32                  0.18                0.66                 0.35                0.34
p-values: Education Only = Account + Education                                              0.45                  0.82                0.39                 0.93                0.01
p-values: Account Access Only + Education Only = Account + Education                        0.16                  0.26                0.57                 0.30                0.04
Proportion of Obs Equal Zero                                                                0.00                  0.00                0.00                 0.00                0.00
Controls for Baseline Values                                                                Yes                   Yes                 Yes                  Yes                  No
Notes: To calculate the index in Column 1 we take the mean of its non-missing components in Columns 2-5 (each of which has control group mean zero and SD 1) and then
restandardize to SD=1 so that treatment effect estimates are in standard deviation units. Unit of observation is a club member-endline. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the
unit of randomization (the youth club). Each column-panel in Panels A and B reports results for a single OLS regression of the dependent variable listed in the column heading on the
treatment variables listed in the row headings (control group is the omitted category), the baseline value of the dependent variable if available (with a dummy for missing baseline value
where needed), and the stratification variables for randomization: an indicator for the club's members having above median total savings at baseline and region indicators.




                                                                                                                                                                                    35
Appendix Table 7. Treatment Effects on Financial Agency Index Components
                                                                                         (1)                  (2)            (3)                        (4)
                                                                                                                    Index Components
                                                                                  Financial Agency HH/Family would       Involved in               Always make
                                                                                   Index - Same as  not be angry if      household's              decisions about
                                                                                    Table 1 Col 3    saved alone     financial decisions            own money
Panel A. One-Year Endline
Account Access Only                                                                      -0.05               -0.02                -0.08                -0.01
                                                                                        (0.06)              (0.06)               (0.06)               (0.06)
Education Only                                                                            0.01               -0.00                -0.01                 0.03
                                                                                        (0.06)              (0.06)               (0.06)               (0.06)
Account + Education                                                                       0.10                0.08                 0.04                 0.06
                                                                                        (0.06)              (0.06)               (0.06)               (0.06)
Control Group Mean                                                                        0.00                0.00                 0.00                 0.00
Control Group SD                                                                          1.00                1.00                 1.00                 1.00
N                                                                                        2680                2680                 2680                 2680
p-values: Account Access Only = Education Only                                            0.25                0.81                 0.27                 0.45
p-values: Account Access Only = Account + Education                                       0.01                0.07                 0.06                 0.23
p-values: Education Only = Account + Education                                            0.12                0.15                 0.41                 0.67
p-values: Account Access Only + Education Only = Account + Education                      0.10                0.23                 0.13                 0.69
Proportion of Obs Equal Zero                                                              0.00                0.00                 0.00                 0.00
Controls for Baseline Values                                                              Yes                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes

Panel B: Five-Year Endline
Account Access Only                                                                      -0.03                 -0.01                -0.08               0.03
                                                                                        (0.07)                (0.06)               (0.07)              (0.06)
Education Only                                                                           -0.11                 -0.21                -0.03               0.04
                                                                                        (0.07)                (0.07)               (0.06)              (0.07)
Account + Education                                                                       0.08                 -0.10                 0.08               0.16
                                                                                        (0.06)                (0.07)               (0.05)              (0.07)
Control Group Mean                                                                        0.00                  0.00                 0.00               0.00
Control Group SD                                                                          1.00                  1.00                 1.00               1.00
N                                                                                        1969                  1968                 1969                1968
p-values: Account Access Only = Education Only                                            0.26                  0.01                 0.52               0.96
p-values: Account Access Only = Account + Education                                       0.10                  0.18                 0.02               0.06
p-values: Education Only = Account + Education                                            0.01                  0.14                 0.05               0.11
p-values: Account Access Only + Education Only = Account + Education                      0.02                  0.22                 0.04               0.38
Proportion of Obs Equal Zero                                                              0.00                  0.00                 0.00               0.00
Controls for Baseline Values                                                              Yes                   Yes                  Yes                Yes
Notes: To calculate the index in Column 1 we take the mean of its non-missing components in Columns 2-4 (each of which has control group mean zero and SD
1) and then restandardize to SD=1 so that treatment effect estimates are in standard deviation units. Unit of observation is a club member-endline. Standard errors
in parentheses, clustered at the unit of randomization (the youth club). Each column-panel in Panels A and B reports results for a single OLS regression of the
dependent variable listed in the column heading on the treatment variables listed in the row headings (control group is the omitted category), the baseline value of
the dependent variable if available (with a dummy for missing baseline value where needed), and the stratification variables for randomization: an indicator for the
club's members having above median total savings at baseline and region indicators.




                                                                                                                                                              36
Appendix Table 8. Treatment Effects on Bank Trust Index Components
                                                                                         (1)                  (2)              (3)
                                                                                                                Index Components
                                                                                                      Trust that savings
                                                                                   Financial Trust                       Trust that savings
                                                                                                       in formal bank
                                                                                  Index - Same as                        would be repaid if
                                                                                                        would not be
                                                                                   Table 1 Col 4                           bank robbed
                                                                                                            stolen
Panel A. One-Year Endline
Account Access Only                                                                     -0.01                -0.01                -0.01
                                                                                       (0.06)               (0.06)               (0.05)
Education Only                                                                           0.22                 0.09                 0.22
                                                                                       (0.05)               (0.05)               (0.05)
Account + Education                                                                      0.32                 0.21                 0.25
                                                                                       (0.05)               (0.05)               (0.06)
Control Group Mean                                                                       0.00                 0.00                 0.00
Control Group SD                                                                         1.00                 1.00                 1.00
N                                                                                       2680                 2680                 2680
p-values: Account Access Only = Education Only                                           0.00                 0.05                 0.00
p-values: Account Access Only = Account + Education                                      0.00                 0.00                 0.00
p-values: Education Only = Account + Education                                           0.07                 0.03                 0.57
p-values: Account Access Only + Education Only = Account + Education                     0.16                 0.09                 0.56
Proportion of Obs Equal Zero                                                             0.00                 0.00                 0.00
Controls for Baseline Values                                                             Yes                  Yes                  Yes

Panel B: Five-Year Endline
Account Access Only                                                                      0.06                 0.05                0.03
                                                                                        (0.07)              (0.07)               (0.07)
Education Only                                                                           0.12                -0.00                0.16
                                                                                        (0.06)              (0.06)               (0.06)
Account + Education                                                                      0.20                 0.19                0.10
                                                                                        (0.06)              (0.07)               (0.07)
Control Group Mean                                                                       0.00                 0.00                0.00
Control Group SD                                                                         1.00                 1.00                1.00
N                                                                                        1969                1966                 1968
p-values: Account Access Only = Education Only                                           0.39                 0.44                0.04
p-values: Account Access Only = Account + Education                                      0.05                 0.05                0.33
p-values: Education Only = Account + Education                                           0.19                 0.00                0.35
p-values: Account Access Only + Education Only = Account + Education                     0.77                 0.12                0.36
Proportion of Obs Equal Zero                                                             0.00                 0.00                0.00
Controls for Baseline Values                                                             Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Notes: To calculate the index in Column 1 we take the mean of its non-missing components in Columns 3-13 (each of which has control
group mean zero and SD 1) and then restandardize to SD=1 so that treatment effect estimates are in standard deviation units. Unit of
observation is a club member-endline. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the unit of randomization (the youth club). Each column-
panel in Panels A and B reports results for a single OLS regression of the dependent variable listed in the column heading on the treatment
variables listed in the row headings (control group is the omitted category), the baseline value of the dependent variable if available (with a
dummy for missing baseline value where needed), and the stratification variables for randomization: an indicator for the club's members
having above median total savings at baseline and region indicators.




                                                                                                                                       37
Appendix Table 9. Treatment Effects on Savings Locations
                                                                                      (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)              (6)              (7)              (8)              (9)             (10)             (11)            (12)
                                                                                                                                                                     Savings and
                                                                                Total Number                                                                          Credit Co-                                          Formal                                            Business
                                                                                                                  Box or Tin at    Hidden Place                                        Telecom     Formal Group                           Another         Resellable
                                                                                 of Savings       Pocket (1/0)                                   ROSCA (1/0)           operative                                        Individual                                         Investment
                                                                                                                  Home (1/0)       at Home (1/0)                                     Account (1/0) Account (1/0)                        Person (1/0)     Assets (1/0)
                                                                                  Locations                                                                           (SACCO)                                          Account (1/0)                                          (1/0)
                                                                                                                                                                         (1/0)
Panel A: One-Year Endline
Account Access Only                                                                  0.09             0.01             -0.02            -0.01            0.04            0.01             -0.01            0.05             0.01             -0.01           0.01             0.00
                                                                                    (0.05)           (0.01)           (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.02)          (0.02)           (0.01)           (0.01)           (0.02)           (0.02)          (0.02)           (0.01)
Education Only                                                                       0.15             0.00             -0.00            -0.01            0.03            0.02              0.01            0.01             0.04              0.05           0.00             0.00
                                                                                    (0.06)           (0.01)           (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.02)          (0.02)           (0.01)           (0.01)           (0.02)           (0.02)          (0.02)           (0.01)
Account + Education                                                                  0.14             0.00             -0.02             0.02            0.05            0.00              0.00            0.06             0.04              0.01           0.00             0.00
                                                                                    (0.06)           (0.01)           (0.02)           (0.02)           (0.02)          (0.02)           (0.01)           (0.01)           (0.02)           (0.02)          (0.02)           (0.01)
Control Group Mean                                                                   1.28             0.04              0.19             0.21            0.10            0.14              0.03            0.01             0.16              0.16           0.12             0.04
Control Group SD                                                                     0.88             0.21              0.40             0.41            0.30            0.35              0.17            0.09             0.36              0.37           0.32             0.20
N                                                                                    2680             2680             2680             2680             2680            2680             2680             2680             2680             2680            2680             2680
p-values: Account Access Only = Education Only                                       0.29             0.46              0.40             0.95            0.62            0.92              0.05            0.00             0.27              0.02           0.83             0.92
p-values: Account Access Only = Account + Education                                  0.36             0.37              0.92             0.33            0.53            0.70              0.33            0.47             0.34              0.46           0.84             0.97
p-values: Education Only = Account + Education                                       0.86             0.88              0.49             0.33            0.23            0.62              0.31            0.00             0.93              0.08           0.99             0.89
p-values: Account Access Only + Education Only = Account + Education                 0.20             0.35              0.86             0.33            0.68            0.45              0.76            0.82             0.59              0.35           0.79             0.77
Proportion of Obs Equal Zero                                                         0.14             0.95              0.81             0.79            0.88            0.85              0.97            0.96             0.82              0.83           0.88             0.96
Controls for Baseline Values                                                         Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes               Yes             Yes              Yes               Yes            Yes              Yes

Panel B: Five-Year Endline
Account Access Only                                                                    0.15               0.02            -0.00          -0.02             0.04           0.05             0.03           -0.01            -0.00               0.03          -0.00            0.02
                                                                                      (0.09)            (0.02)           (0.03)         (0.02)            (0.03)         (0.03)           (0.03)         (0.01)           (0.03)             (0.02)         (0.02)           (0.02)
Education Only                                                                         0.12               0.01            -0.03          -0.01             0.01           0.02             0.01            0.02             0.02              -0.02           0.02            0.03
                                                                                      (0.09)            (0.02)           (0.03)         (0.02)            (0.03)         (0.03)           (0.03)         (0.02)           (0.03)             (0.02)         (0.02)           (0.02)
Account + Education                                                                    0.18              -0.00             0.01          -0.01             0.01           0.03             0.00            0.00             0.04               0.04           0.03            0.03
                                                                                      (0.08)            (0.02)           (0.03)         (0.02)            (0.03)         (0.02)           (0.03)         (0.01)           (0.03)             (0.02)         (0.02)           (0.02)
Control Group Mean                                                                     1.60               0.07             0.18           0.14             0.20           0.20             0.15            0.04             0.21               0.08           0.13            0.09
Control Group SD                                                                       1.14               0.25             0.39           0.35             0.40           0.40             0.36            0.20             0.41               0.28           0.33            0.29
N                                                                                      1956              1956             1956           1956              1956           1956             1956           1956             1956               1956           1956             1956
p-values: Account Access Only = Education Only                                         0.77               0.58             0.44           0.58             0.19           0.45             0.43            0.06             0.44               0.05           0.36            0.57
p-values: Account Access Only = Account + Education                                    0.70               0.29             0.75           0.81             0.21           0.52             0.30            0.48             0.13               0.59           0.10            0.61
p-values: Education Only = Account + Education                                         0.49               0.58             0.25           0.76             0.95           0.84             0.80            0.21             0.41               0.00           0.48            0.97
p-values: Account Access Only + Education Only = Account + Education                   0.50               0.31             0.36           0.70             0.27           0.30             0.31            0.51             0.51               0.26           0.52            0.47
Proportion of Obs Equal Zero                                                           0.13               0.93             0.82           0.87             0.78           0.77             0.84            0.96             0.78               0.90           0.87            0.89
Controls for Baseline Values                                                           Yes                Yes              Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes                Yes            Yes              Yes
Notes: Unit of observation is a club member-endline. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the unit of randomization (the youth club). Each column-panel in Panels A and B reports results for a single OLS regression of the dependent variable listed in the column heading
on the treatment variables listed in the row headings (control group is the omitted category), the baseline value of the dependent variable if available (with a dummy for missing baseline value where needed), and the stratification variables for randomization: an indicator for the
club's members having above median total savings at baseline and region indicators. We do not include the two savings locations with very low frequencies: "other" (1.9% for the one-year endline and 1.6% at the five-year endline) and "hole in ground" (0% at both endlines).




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               38
Appendix Table 10. Treatment Effects on Savings (Other Functional Forms)
                                                                                            (1)                 (2)                 (3)                    (4)
                                                                                                              Savings Balance ('000 UGX)

                                                                                      Top 1% Top-                               Top 5% Top-       Inverse Hyperbolic
                                                                                                          No Top-Coding
                                                                                         Coded                                     Coded                 Sine

Panel A. One-Year Endline
Account Access Only                                                                        45.00                45.62                23.96                0.17
                                                                                          (37.33)              (55.67)              (16.74)              (0.16)
Education Only                                                                            104.37               138.58                49.21                0.34
                                                                                          (41.83)              (66.63)              (17.91)              (0.15)
Account + Education                                                                        44.30                 8.51                38.80                0.37
                                                                                          (33.59)              (43.68)              (17.15)              (0.13)
Control Group Mean                                                                        221.94               247.09               162.94                3.97
Control Group SD                                                                          606.00               867.99               296.60                2.44
N                                                                                          2678                 2678                 2678                 2678
p-values: Account Access Only = Education Only                                              0.14                 0.18                 0.14                0.27
p-values: Account Access Only = Account + Education                                         0.98                 0.42                 0.36                0.15
p-values: Education Only = Account + Education                                              0.10                 0.03                 0.55                0.82
p-values: Account Access Only + Education Only = Account + Education                        0.05                 0.03                 0.16                0.48
Proportion of Obs Equal Zero                                                                0.14                 0.14                 0.14                0.14
Controls for Baseline Values                                                                Yes                  Yes                  Yes                 Yes

Panel B: Five-Year Endline
Account Access Only                                                                         99.26              -33.54                 47.55                 0.21
                                                                                          (78.88)             (122.10)              (51.95)                (0.18)
Education Only                                                                             123.41              168.82                 71.54                 0.19
                                                                                          (91.02)             (163.11)              (56.88)                (0.18)
Account + Education                                                                        188.15              302.58                107.03                 0.39
                                                                                          (84.08)             (211.54)              (53.78)                (0.17)
Control Group Mean                                                                         552.14              662.66                480.80                 5.09
Control Group SD                                                                          1202.70             2202.81                853.50                 2.57
N                                                                                           1960                1960                  1960                  1960
p-values: Account Access Only = Education Only                                               0.79               0.16                   0.69                 0.95
p-values: Account Access Only = Account + Education                                          0.31               0.09                   0.29                 0.30
p-values: Education Only = Account + Education                                               0.50               0.55                   0.56                 0.25
p-values: Account Access Only + Education Only = Account + Education                         0.78               0.51                   0.88                 0.98
Proportion of Obs Equal Zero                                                                 0.13               0.13                   0.13                 0.13
Controls for Baseline Values                                                                 Yes                Yes                    Yes                  Yes
Notes: Unit of observation is a club member-endline. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the unit of randomization (the youth club). Each column-panel in
Panels A and B reports results for a single OLS regression of the dependent variable listed in the column heading on the treatment variables listed in the row headings
(control group is the omitted category), the baseline value of the dependent variable if available (with a dummy for missing baseline value where needed), and the
stratification variables for randomization: an indicator for the club's members having above median total savings at baseline and region indicators.




                                                                                                                                                                 39
Appendix Table 11. Treatment Effects on Income (Other Functional Forms)
                                                                                         (1)                 (2)                (3)
                                                                                                            Total Income ('000 UGX)

                                                                                   Top 1% Top-                               Top 5% Top-       Inverse Hyperbolic
                                                                                                       No Top-Coding
                                                                                      Coded                                     Coded                 Sine

Panel A. One-Year Endline
Account Access Only                                                                     31.06               28.45                23.13                 0.09
                                                                                       (16.22)             (34.60)              (13.07)               (0.11)
Education Only                                                                          32.45               29.92                26.63                 0.26
                                                                                       (16.44)             (31.16)              (13.16)               (0.11)
Account + Education                                                                     36.34               28.48                25.96                 0.18
                                                                                       (17.01)             (36.37)              (13.03)               (0.10)
Control Group Mean                                                                     200.79              233.86               180.99                 4.50
Control Group SD                                                                       337.78              714.61               259.51                 2.24
N                                                                                       2661                2661                 2661                  2661
p-values: Account Access Only = Education Only                                           0.93                0.96                 0.78                 0.15
p-values: Account Access Only = Account + Education                                      0.76                1.00                 0.82                 0.38
p-values: Education Only = Account + Education                                           0.83                0.96                 0.96                 0.47
p-values: Account Access Only + Education Only = Account + Education                     0.26                0.52                 0.19                 0.28
Proportion of Obs Equal Zero                                                             0.11                0.11                 0.11                 0.11
Controls for Baseline Values                                                             Yes                 Yes                  Yes                   Yes

Panel B: Five-Year Endline
Account Access Only                                                                       75.47                113.15               61.22                0.24
                                                                                         (43.46)               (62.83)             (34.22)              (0.14)
Education Only                                                                            71.70                122.65               48.01                0.23
                                                                                         (44.41)               (59.64)             (33.37)              (0.14)
Account + Education                                                                       95.13                177.40               86.54                0.36
                                                                                         (43.15)               (96.51)             (32.86)              (0.14)
Control Group Mean                                                                       482.02                491.36              443.27                5.61
Control Group SD                                                                         673.52                739.64              533.12                2.30
N                                                                                         1963                  1963                1963                 1963
p-values: Account Access Only = Education Only                                             0.94                  0.89                0.72                0.96
p-values: Account Access Only = Account + Education                                        0.69                  0.53                0.50                0.38
p-values: Education Only = Account + Education                                             0.64                  0.60                0.29                0.35
p-values: Account Access Only + Education Only = Account + Education                       0.43                  0.63                0.65                0.59
Proportion of Obs Equal Zero                                                               0.09                  0.09                0.09                0.09
Controls for Baseline Values                                                               Yes                   Yes                 Yes                  Yes
Notes: Unit of observation is a club member-endline. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the unit of randomization (the youth club). Each column-panel in
Panels A and B reports results for a single OLS regression of the dependent variable listed in the column heading on the treatment variables listed in the row
headings (control group is the omitted category), the baseline value of the dependent variable if available (with a dummy for missing baseline value where needed),
and the stratification variables for randomization: an indicator for the club's members having above median total savings at baseline and region indicators.




                                                                                                                                                          40
Appendix Table 12. Treatment Effects on Expenditure and Consumption Index Components
                                                                                            (1)                   (2)                (3)                    (4)
                                                                                                                              Index Components
                                                                                     Expenditures and      Human Capital
                                                                                                                            Total Spending
                                                                                      Consumption         Spending Last 12                          Total Meals with
                                                                                                                           Last 7 Days ('000
                                                                                     Index - Same as       months (UGX                              Meat Last 7 Days
                                                                                                                                 UGX)
                                                                                      Table 4 Col 5            '000)
Panel A. One-Year Endline
Account Access Only                                                                         0.02                  0.03                -0.01                0.08
                                                                                           (0.06)               (0.08)               (0.04)               (0.06)
Education Only                                                                              0.00                 -0.01                 0.01                0.09
                                                                                           (0.04)               (0.05)               (0.05)               (0.05)
Account + Education                                                                         0.01                  0.01                 0.00                0.10
                                                                                           (0.04)               (0.05)               (0.04)               (0.06)
Control Group Mean                                                                          0.00                  0.00                 0.00                0.00
Control Group SD                                                                            1.00                  1.00                 1.00                1.00
N                                                                                           2680                 2674                 2680                 2679
p-values: Account Access Only = Education Only                                              0.79                  0.53                 0.60                0.78
p-values: Account Access Only = Account + Education                                         0.96                  0.72                 0.63                0.66
p-values: Education Only = Account + Education                                              0.71                  0.56                 0.88                0.84
p-values: Account Access Only + Education Only = Account + Education                        0.96                  0.88                 0.91                0.41
Proportion of Obs Equal Zero                                                                0.00                  0.00                 0.00                0.00
Controls for Baseline Values                                                                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes

Panel B: Five-Year Endline
Account Access Only                                                                         0.11                 0.15                 0.04                   0.10
                                                                                           (0.07)               (0.07)               (0.07)                (0.08)
Education Only                                                                              0.15                 0.14                 0.11                  -0.01
                                                                                           (0.08)               (0.07)               (0.10)                (0.08)
Account + Education                                                                         0.07                 0.06                 0.06                   0.12
                                                                                           (0.07)               (0.08)               (0.07)                (0.08)
Control Group Mean                                                                          0.00                 0.00                 0.00                   0.00
Control Group SD                                                                            1.00                 1.00                 1.00                   1.00
N                                                                                           1962                 1915                 1956                  1969
p-values: Account Access Only = Education Only                                              0.63                 0.91                 0.50                   0.19
p-values: Account Access Only = Account + Education                                         0.67                 0.35                 0.83                   0.78
p-values: Education Only = Account + Education                                              0.39                 0.40                 0.60                   0.11
p-values: Account Access Only + Education Only = Account + Education                        0.11                 0.05                 0.42                   0.79
Proportion of Obs Equal Zero                                                                0.00                 0.00                 0.00                   0.00
Controls for Baseline Values                                                                 Yes                  Yes                 Yes                    Yes
Notes: To calculate the index in Column 1 we take the mean of its non-missing components in Columns 2-4 (each of which has control group mean zero and SD 1)
and then restandardize to SD=1 so that treatment effect estimates are in standard deviation units. Unit of observation is a club member-endline. Standard errors in
parentheses, clustered at the unit of randomization (the youth club). Each column-panel in Panels A and B reports results for a single OLS regression of the
dependent variable listed in the column heading on the treatment variables listed in the row headings (control group is the omitted category), the baseline value of the
dependent variable if available (with a dummy for missing baseline value where needed), and the stratification variables for randomization: an indicator for the club's
members having above median total savings at baseline and region indicators.




                                                                                                                                                                  41
Appendix Table 13. Treatment Effects on Patience Index Components
                                                                                            (1)                  (2)                  (3)              (4)                       (5)
                                                                                                                                        Index Components
                                                                                                         Chose 6K USH in Chose 8K USH in Chose 4K USH in Chose 6K USH in
                                                                                      Patience Index     2 weeks over 2K 2 weeks over 2K 2 weeks over 2K 4 weeks 2K USH
                                                                                                            USH now         USH now         USH now         in 2 weeks
Panel A. One-Year Endline
Account Access Only                                                                         0.04                 0.04                  0.03                 0.02                -0.01
                                                                                          (0.05)               (0.05)                (0.07)               (0.09)               (0.06)
Education Only                                                                             -0.02                 0.02                 -0.05                -0.10                 0.00
                                                                                          (0.06)               (0.06)                (0.07)               (0.09)               (0.05)
Account + Education                                                                        -0.04                -0.05                  0.01                 0.10                -0.09
                                                                                          (0.06)               (0.06)                (0.07)               (0.09)               (0.06)
Control Group Mean                                                                          0.00                 0.00                  0.00                 0.00                 0.00
Control Group SD                                                                            1.00                 1.00                  1.00                 1.00                 1.00
N                                                                                          2677                 2677                  1676                 1007                 2677
p-values: Account Access Only = Education Only                                              0.32                 0.68                  0.27                 0.19                 0.78
p-values: Account Access Only = Account + Education                                         0.17                 0.11                  0.83                 0.40                 0.16
p-values: Education Only = Account + Education                                              0.67                 0.28                  0.36                 0.04                 0.07
p-values: Account Access Only + Education Only = Account + Education                        0.44                 0.18                  0.73                 0.16                 0.29
Proportion of Obs Equal Zero                                                                0.00                 0.00                  0.00                 0.00                 0.00
Controls for Baseline Values                                                                Yes                  Yes                   Yes                  Yes                  Yes

Panel B: Five-Year Endline
Account Access Only                                                                          0.07                  0.09               0.09                  0.07                -0.02
                                                                                           (0.07)                (0.07)             (0.08)                (0.11)               (0.07)
Education Only                                                                              -0.09                 -0.06              -0.08                  0.02                -0.07
                                                                                           (0.07)                (0.06)             (0.09)                (0.12)               (0.07)
Account + Education                                                                         -0.00                  0.07              -0.01                 -0.11                -0.05
                                                                                           (0.07)                (0.07)             (0.08)                (0.11)               (0.07)
Control Group Mean                                                                           0.00                  0.00               0.00                  0.00                 0.00
Control Group SD                                                                             1.00                  1.00               1.00                  1.00                 1.00
N                                                                                           1969                  1969               1319                   649                 1968
p-values: Account Access Only = Education Only                                               0.02                  0.03               0.04                  0.61                 0.41
p-values: Account Access Only = Account + Education                                          0.24                  0.80               0.21                  0.07                 0.57
p-values: Education Only = Account + Education                                               0.24                  0.04               0.39                  0.28                 0.78
p-values: Account Access Only + Education Only = Account + Education                         0.92                  0.63               0.87                  0.21                 0.70
Proportion of Obs Equal Zero                                                                 0.00                  0.00               0.00                  0.00                 0.00
Controls for Baseline Values                                                                 Yes                   Yes                Yes                   Yes                  Yes
Notes: To calculate the index in Column 1 we take the mean of its non-missing components in Columns 2-5 (each of which has control group mean zero and SD 1) and then
restandardize to SD=1 so that treatment effect estimates are in standard deviation units. Unit of observation is a club member-endline. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the unit
of randomization (the youth club). Each column-panel in Panels A and B reports results for a single OLS regression of the dependent variable listed in the column heading on the
treatment variables listed in the row headings (control group is the omitted category), the baseline value of the dependent variable if available (with a dummy for missing baseline value
where needed), and the stratification variables for randomization: an indicator for the club's members having above median total savings at baseline and region indicators.




                                                                                                                                                                                  42
Appendix Table 14. Treatment Effects on Self-Control Index Components
                                                                                           (1)                  (2)                  (3)                  (4)              (5)                       (6)                  (7)
                                                                                                                                                            Index Components
                                                                                                                               Present-biased
                                                                                                                                                                          Acts without        Spends money          Puts most of
                                                                                                      Future based time              time         Plans to do things
                                                                                                                                                                         thinking about         received too        money in safe
                                                                                  Self-Control Index inconsistency: Pos.       inconsistency):      and postpones
                                                                                                                                                                        results (Pos. less   quickly (Pos. less     place to avoid
                                                                                                      is more consistent         Pos. is more      (Pos. less often)
                                                                                                                                                                              often)               often)            spending it
                                                                                                                                  consistent
Panel A. One-Year Endline
Account Access Only                                                                       0.03                 -0.06                 0.02                 0.02                 0.11                 -0.03
                                                                                         (0.05)               (0.05)               (0.05)                (0.06)               (0.06)               (0.06)
Education Only                                                                            0.01                 -0.05                -0.02                 0.01                 0.09                  0.00
                                                                                         (0.05)               (0.05)               (0.05)                (0.06)               (0.06)               (0.05)
Account + Education                                                                       0.07                 -0.02                 0.03                 0.09                 0.02                  0.05
                                                                                         (0.05)               (0.06)               (0.05)                (0.06)               (0.05)               (0.06)
Control Group Mean                                                                        0.00                  0.00                 0.00                 0.00                 0.00                  0.00
Control Group SD                                                                          1.00                  1.00                 1.00                 1.00                 1.00                  1.00
N                                                                                         2680                 2677                 2677                  2680                 2680                 2680
p-values: Account Access Only = Education Only                                            0.81                  0.93                 0.51                 0.78                 0.80                  0.48
p-values: Account Access Only = Account + Education                                       0.40                  0.55                 0.80                 0.26                 0.13                  0.14
p-values: Education Only = Account + Education                                            0.26                  0.62                 0.39                 0.18                 0.18                  0.32
p-values: Account Access Only + Education Only = Account + Education                      0.65                  0.28                 0.65                 0.50                 0.02                  0.28
Proportion of Obs Equal Zero                                                              0.00                  0.00                 0.00                 0.00                 0.00                  0.00
Controls for Baseline Values                                                               Yes                  Yes                  Yes                   Yes                  Yes                  Yes

Panel B: Five-Year Endline
Account Access Only                                                                       -0.07                -0.09                  0.07                 -0.12                -0.05                 -0.00                0.02
                                                                                         (0.08)               (0.07)                 (0.06)               (0.07)               (0.07)                (0.07)              (0.09)
Education Only                                                                             0.01                 0.07                  0.04                 -0.04                -0.03                  0.03               -0.07
                                                                                         (0.08)               (0.05)                 (0.07)               (0.07)               (0.07)                (0.07)              (0.09)
Account + Education                                                                       -0.03                -0.07                  0.09                 -0.14                -0.03                  0.06                0.02
                                                                                         (0.08)               (0.06)                 (0.06)               (0.08)               (0.08)                (0.07)              (0.09)
Control Group Mean                                                                         0.00                 0.00                  0.00                  0.00                 0.00                  0.00                0.00
Control Group SD                                                                           1.00                 1.00                  1.00                  1.00                 1.00                  1.00                1.00
N                                                                                         1969                 1968                   1968                 1967                 1966                  1969                1423
p-values: Account Access Only = Education Only                                             0.27                 0.02                  0.64                  0.30                 0.76                  0.63                0.33
p-values: Account Access Only = Account + Education                                        0.62                 0.78                  0.77                  0.73                 0.73                  0.39                0.95
p-values: Education Only = Account + Education                                             0.54                 0.03                  0.46                  0.17                 0.96                  0.73                0.31
p-values: Account Access Only + Education Only = Account + Education                       0.81                 0.60                  0.82                  0.90                 0.58                  0.79                0.55
Proportion of Obs Equal Zero                                                               0.00                 0.00                  0.00                  0.00                 0.00                  0.00                0.00
Controls for Baseline Values                                                               Yes                  Yes                    Yes                  Yes                  Yes                   Yes                  No
Notes: To calculate the index in Column 1 we take the mean of its non-missing components in Columns 2-7 (each of which has control group mean zero and SD 1) and then restandardize to SD=1 so that treatment effect
estimates are in standard deviation units. Unit of observation is a club member-endline. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the unit of randomization (the youth club). Each column-panel in Panels A and B reports
results for a single OLS regression of the dependent variable listed in the column heading on the treatment variables listed in the row headings (control group is the omitted category), the baseline value of the dependent variable
if available (with a dummy for missing baseline value where needed), and the stratification variables for randomization: an indicator for the club's members having above median total savings at baseline and region indicators.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            43
Appendix Table 15. Treatment Effects on Risk Tolerance Index Components
                                                                                         (1)                  (2)                 (3)                   (4)
                                                                                                                           Index Components

                                                                                   Risk Tolerance
                                                                                                      Less Risk Averse - Less Risk Averse - Less Risk Averse -
                                                                                  Index - Same as
                                                                                                        100% vs Coin        Coin Choice         Ambiguity
                                                                                   Table 4 Col 7

Panel A. One-Year Endline
Account Access Only                                                                       0.02                0.02                 0.04                -0.02
                                                                                        (0.06)              (0.06)               (0.06)               (0.05)
Education Only                                                                           -0.07               -0.12                -0.00                -0.00
                                                                                        (0.06)              (0.05)               (0.06)               (0.06)
Account + Education                                                                      -0.07               -0.04                -0.01                -0.07
                                                                                        (0.06)              (0.06)               (0.06)               (0.05)
Control Group Mean                                                                        0.00                0.00                 0.00                 0.00
Control Group SD                                                                          1.00                1.00                 1.00                 1.00
N                                                                                        2677                2677                 2674                 2677
p-values: Account Access Only = Education Only                                            0.18                0.01                 0.44                 0.76
p-values: Account Access Only = Account + Education                                       0.16                0.30                 0.40                 0.32
p-values: Education Only = Account + Education                                            0.98                0.16                 0.92                 0.21
p-values: Account Access Only + Education Only = Account + Education                      0.82                0.43                 0.57                 0.52
Proportion of Obs Equal Zero                                                              0.00                0.00                 0.00                 0.00
Controls for Baseline Values                                                              Yes                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes

Panel B: Five-Year Endline
Account Access Only                                                                      0.11                   0.02                0.05                0.15
                                                                                        (0.06)                (0.06)               (0.07)              (0.06)
Education Only                                                                           0.04                  -0.01                0.06                0.03
                                                                                        (0.07)                (0.06)               (0.07)              (0.06)
Account + Education                                                                      0.08                   0.07                0.06                0.05
                                                                                        (0.07)                (0.06)               (0.06)              (0.07)
Control Group Mean                                                                       0.00                   0.00                0.00                0.00
Control Group SD                                                                         1.00                   1.00                1.00                1.00
N                                                                                        1969                  1965                 1944                1968
p-values: Account Access Only = Education Only                                           0.30                   0.66                0.86                0.07
p-values: Account Access Only = Account + Education                                      0.72                   0.42                0.93                0.15
p-values: Education Only = Account + Education                                           0.52                   0.19                0.92                0.76
p-values: Account Access Only + Education Only = Account + Education                     0.52                   0.45                0.54                0.17
Proportion of Obs Equal Zero                                                             0.00                   0.00                0.00                0.00
Controls for Baseline Values                                                              Yes                   Yes                  Yes                 Yes
Notes: To calculate the index in Column 1 we take the mean of its non-missing components in Columns 2-4 (each of which has control group mean zero and SD
1) and then restandardize to SD=1 so that treatment effect estimates are in standard deviation units. Unit of observation is a club member-endline. Standard errors
in parentheses, clustered at the unit of randomization (the youth club). Each column-panel in Panels A and B reports results for a single OLS regression of the
dependent variable listed in the column heading on the treatment variables listed in the row headings (control group is the omitted category), the baseline value of
the dependent variable if available (with a dummy for missing baseline value where needed), and the stratification variables for randomization: an indicator for the
club's members having above median total savings at baseline and region indicators.




                                                                                                                                                              44
Appendix Table 16. Treatment Effects on Altruism Index Components
                                                                                         (1)                  (2)                (3)
                                                                                                                 Index Components
                                                                                                                          Willing to Make
                                                                                  Altruism Index -       Chose More
                                                                                                                            Sacrifices for
                                                                                  Same as Table 4      Altruistic Money
                                                                                                                           People Around
                                                                                        Col 8               Option
                                                                                                                               Them
Panel A: One-Year Endline
Account Access Only                                                                      -0.08                -0.06               -0.05
                                                                                        (0.06)               (0.06)              (0.06)
Education Only                                                                           -0.05                -0.01               -0.07
                                                                                        (0.06)               (0.06)              (0.05)
Account + Education                                                                      -0.10                -0.04               -0.11
                                                                                        (0.06)               (0.06)              (0.06)
Control Group Mean                                                                        0.00                 0.00                0.00
Control Group SD                                                                          1.00                 1.00                1.00
N                                                                                        2680                 2677                2680
p-values: Account Access Only = Education Only                                            0.70                 0.37                0.63
p-values: Account Access Only = Account + Education                                       0.73                 0.70                0.35
p-values: Education Only = Account + Education                                            0.46                 0.61                0.56
p-values: Account Access Only + Education Only = Account + Education                      0.73                 0.71                0.85
Proportion of Obs Equal Zero                                                              0.00                 0.00                0.00
Controls for Baseline Values                                                              Yes                  Yes                 Yes

Panel B: Five-Year Endline
Account Access Only                                                                        0.05               0.08                 0.00
                                                                                         (0.07)             (0.07)               (0.08)
Education Only                                                                            -0.01              -0.01                -0.02
                                                                                         (0.08)             (0.07)               (0.08)
Account + Education                                                                        0.04               0.08                -0.01
                                                                                         (0.08)             (0.07)               (0.08)
Control Group Mean                                                                         0.00               0.00                 0.00
Control Group SD                                                                           1.00               1.00                 1.00
N                                                                                         2810               2810                 2810
p-values: Account Access Only = Education Only                                             0.42               0.22                 0.76
p-values: Account Access Only = Account + Education                                        0.90               0.99                 0.84
p-values: Education Only = Account + Education                                             0.51               0.25                 0.90
p-values: Account Access Only + Education Only = Account + Education                       0.96               0.93                 0.96
Proportion of Obs Equal Zero                                                               0.00               0.00                 0.00
Controls for Baseline Values                                                               Yes                Yes                  Yes
Notes: To calculate the index in Column 1 we take the mean of its non-missing components in Columns 2 and 3 (each of which has control
group mean zero and SD 1) and then restandardize to SD=1 so that treatment effect estimates are in standard deviation units. Unit of
observation is a club member-endline. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the unit of randomization (the youth club). Each column-
panel in Panels A and B reports results for a single OLS regression of the dependent variable listed in the column heading on the treatment
variables listed in the row headings (control group is the omitted category), the baseline value of the dependent variable if available (with a
dummy for missing baseline value where needed), and the stratification variables for randomization: an indicator for the club's members
having above median total savings at baseline and region indicators.




                                                                                                                                          45
Appendix Table 17. Treatment Effects on Other Mechanisms
                                                                                       (1)                  (2)                 (3)                  (4)                  (5)

                                                                                                                          Expected Future      Expects           Expects
                                                                                Price Awareness      Basic Numeracy
                                                                                                                            Standing in   Emergency in Next Emergency in Next
                                                                                      Index               Index
                                                                                                                            Community         6 Months          3 Months

                                               Number of questions in index             8                    3
Panel A: One-Year Endline
Account Access Only                                                                   -0.08                -0.03                 0.09                0.01                0.05
                                                                                     (0.07)               (0.06)               (0.13)               (0.03)              (0.03)
Education Only                                                                         0.08                 0.02                -0.00                0.01                0.04
                                                                                     (0.06)               (0.06)               (0.14)               (0.03)              (0.03)
Account + Education                                                                    0.10                 0.07                 0.34                0.03                0.05
                                                                                     (0.07)               (0.05)               (0.13)               (0.03)              (0.03)
Control Group Mean                                                                     0.00                 0.00                 7.31                0.75                0.64
Control Group SD                                                                       1.00                 1.00                 2.11                0.43                0.48
N                                                                                     2680                 2680                 2680                 2680                2680
p-values: Account Access Only = Education Only                                         0.02                 0.39                 0.53                0.89                0.58
p-values: Account Access Only = Account + Education                                    0.02                 0.07                 0.06                0.52                0.93
p-values: Education Only = Account + Education                                         0.82                 0.37                 0.01                0.57                0.65
p-values: Account Access Only + Education Only = Account + Education                   0.34                 0.31                 0.18                0.94                0.33
Proportion of Obs Equal Zero                                                           0.00                 0.00                 0.00                0.24                0.33
Controls for Baseline Values                                                            No                  Yes                  Yes                  No                  No

Panel B: Five-Year Endline
Account Access Only                                                                    0.01                  -0.01               -0.05               0.03                  -0.01
                                                                                      (0.08)                (0.08)              (0.14)             (0.03)                 (0.03)
Education Only                                                                         0.04                   0.01               -0.07               0.01                   0.01
                                                                                      (0.08)                (0.07)              (0.14)             (0.03)                 (0.03)
Account + Education                                                                    0.03                   0.04                0.21              -0.02                   0.02
                                                                                      (0.09)                (0.07)              (0.13)             (0.04)                 (0.03)
Control Group Mean                                                                     0.00                   0.00                7.14               0.68                   0.63
Control Group SD                                                                       1.00                   1.00                1.93               0.47                   0.48
N                                                                                      1969                  1969                1968               1965                   1966
p-values: Account Access Only = Education Only                                         0.71                   0.83                0.93               0.47                   0.52
p-values: Account Access Only = Account + Education                                    0.78                   0.52                0.07               0.14                   0.22
p-values: Education Only = Account + Education                                         0.97                   0.64                0.05               0.40                   0.58
p-values: Account Access Only + Education Only = Account + Education                   0.90                   0.69                0.10               0.19                   0.47
Proportion of Obs Equal Zero                                                           0.00                   0.00                0.00               0.31                   0.36
Controls for Baseline Values                                                            No                    Yes                 Yes                 No                    No
Notes: To calculate the indices in Columns 1 and 2 we take the mean of the index's non-missing standardized components (the components are not shown separately in this table) and
then restandardize to SD=1 so that treatment effect estimates are in standard deviation units. Unit of observation is a club member-endline. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered
at the unit of randomization (the youth club). Each column-panel in Panels A and B reports results for a single OLS regression of the dependent variable listed in the column heading
on the treatment variables listed in the row headings (control group is the omitted category), the baseline value of the dependent variable if available (with a dummy for missing
baseline value where needed), and the stratification variables for randomization: an indicator for the club's members having above median total savings at baseline and region
indicators.




                                                                                                                                                                            46
