                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         ADVERSE SELECTION DYNAMICS IN
                     PRIVATELY-PRODUCED SAFE DEBT MARKETS

                                       Nathan Foley-Fisher
                                         Gary B. Gorton
                                        Stéphane Verani

                                       Working Paper 28016
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28016


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2020




For providing valuable comments and assistance with data, we would like to thank, without
implication, Sriya Anbil, Celso Brunetti, Richard Cantor, Francesca Carapella, Larry Cordell,
Burcu Duygan-Bump, Sebastian Infante, Tom King, Brittany Lewis, David Little, Ralf
Meisenzahl, Borghan Narajabad, Michael Palumbo, Lubo Petrasek, Coco Ramirez, Algis
Remeza, Peter Sallerson, Alex von Hafften, and Guillaume Vuillemey. We are grateful to Sam
Dreith and Nathan Heinrich for exceptional research assistance. The views in this paper are solely
the authors' and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System or of any other person associated with the Federal Reserve System. The
authors have nothing to disclose. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Nathan Foley-Fisher, Gary B. Gorton, and Stéphane Verani. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Adverse Selection Dynamics in Privately-Produced Safe Debt Markets
Nathan Foley-Fisher, Gary B. Gorton, and Stéphane Verani
NBER Working Paper No. 28016
October 2020
JEL No. E44,G14,G23

                                         ABSTRACT

Privately-produced safe debt is designed so that there is no adverse selection in trade. This is
because no agent finds it profitable to produce private information about the debt's backing and
all agents know this (i.e., it is information-insensitive). But in some macro states, it becomes
profitable for some agents to produce private information, and then the debt faces adverse
selection when traded (i.e., it becomes information-sensitive). We empirically study these adverse
selection dynamics in a very important asset class, collateralized loan obligations, a large
symbiotic appendage of the regulated banking system, which finances loans to below investment-
grade firms.

Nathan Foley-Fisher                             Stéphane Verani
Federal Reserve Board                           Federal Reserve Board
20th Street and Constitution Avenue             20th Street and Constitution Avenue
NW Washington, DC 20551                         NW Washington, DC 20551
nathan.c.foley-fisher@frb.gov                   stephane.h.verani@frb.gov

Gary B. Gorton
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
Gary.Gorton@yale.edu
1     Introduction

There is a primitive demand for safe debt, debt that can store value through

time safely and can be traded without fear of adverse selection. The

government cannot completely meet this demand (see, e.g., Krishnamurthy

and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012), Caballero, Farhi and Gourinchas (2017),

Gorton, Llewellen and Metrick (2012), and Gorton (2017)). The private

sector cannot produce riskless debt, but it can produce a close substitute,

debt such that no agent finds it profitable to produce private information

about its fundamentals, and all agents know this. This debt is senior,

complicated, and opaque, making the cost of understanding it high. It is

information-insensitive. It provides protection against adverse selection; it

is rated AAA/Aaa (S&P/Moody's) and it trades at par (minus a small

bid-ask spread). But bad public news about the fundamental value of

the debt's backing can prompt sophisticated investors to acquire private

information creating adverse selection; see Dang, Gorton and Holmström

(2019). We study the dynamics of this switch from information-insensitive

to information-sensitive in the collateralized loan market and document the

resulting adverse selection.

    The risk of a switch from information-insensitive to sensitive, and the

resulting adverse selection, is a unique risk. Because the security is designed

to be information-insensitive, no investor has an incentive to produce



                                      2
private information about the security's fundamentals. Ex ante investors

do not investigate the fundamentals of the bond and accept the debt at

par. Investors are uninformed by design. In particular, the risk of a switch

to adverse selection is neither investigated nor priced ex ante. Ex post in

the case of bad times, they cannot price the security because they have not

invested in the technology to do so. See Hanson and Sunderam (2013), and

Monnet and Quintin (2017). So, privately-produced safe debt is a double-

edged sword: It serves its purpose of avoiding adverse selection until it

doesn't.

   A collateralized loan obligation (CLO) is a legal entity that buys loans

from banks and finances them by issuing debt in the capital market.The

CLO manager can subsequently buy and sell assets. The CLO liabilities,

called "tranches", have ratings that range from AAA/Aaa to B. CLOs

play a very significant role in financing below investment-grade firms,

whose loans are called "leveraged loans". According to Fed Chair Jerome

Powell Powell (2019): "Collateralized loan obligations are now the largest

[nonbank] lenders, with about 62 percent of outstanding leveraged loans."

The leveraged loan market is about $1.1 trillion, and is used by about

70 percent of U.S. companies, including companies like Burger King, United

Airlines, Avis Rent a Car, and Equinox Fitness.

   Why do banks sell their loans? The answer is that it is profitable to do

so. And it reduces the cost of credit to the borrowing firms. Nadauld and


                                     3
Weisbach (2012) found that bank loans that are eligible to be securitized,

i.e., sold to a CLO, cost borrowers 17 basis points less than otherwise

(100 basis points equals one percent). The bank can make up this difference

because the AAA/Aaa-rated debt sold by the CLO has a convenience yield,

that is investors value it for safety in addition to the interest rate it pays,

so its pecuniary coupon rate is lower than it otherwise would be. "Safety"

means that it is highly likely to pay off at par at maturity and, if it is sold

early, it will sell for (almost) par. It is information-insensitive.

   In our sample about 65 percent of a typical CLO is rated AAA. This

means that to recover the 17 basis points, the convenience yield must

be at least 26 basis points. By comparison, Krishnamurthy and Vissing-

Jorgensen (2012) find that the yield on U.S. Treasuries over 1926-2008 was,

on average, 73 basis points lower than it otherwise would have been, due

to the "moneyness" and safety of U.S. Treasury securities. Using higher

frequency data, van Binsbergen, Diamond and Grotteria (2019) estimate

the convenience yield on Treasuries to be about 40 basis points.

   Consistent with the AAA tranches having a convenience yield, these

tranches are held by insurance companies, pension funds, U.S. and foreign

banks, and U.S. investment banks. The mezzanine tranches in the middle

of the CLO capital structure are held by hedge funds and asset managers,

among others. The equity part of the capital structure is held by private

equity firms, the CLO managers, and CLO sponsors. See Liu and Schmidt-


                                       4
Eisenlohr (2019) and DeMarco, Liu and Schmidt-Eisenlohr (2020).

       To value a CLO tranche the companies whose leveraged loans are in

the underlying portfolio have to be studied and the correlations between all

the loans in the CLO portfolio have to be determined. This requires credit

analysts and a model to simulate outcomes. Also, as we explain below,

CLOs have complicated and opaque internal structures. All these attributes

make it very expensive for agents to produce private information about the

value of the AAA tranche, allowing buyers of this debt to avoid adverse

selection because it is very expensive to produce private information. But,

in bad times this is exactly the problem!

       When the COVID-19 pandemic took hold in March 2020, risks to the

pools of loans underpinning CLOs rose as the pandemic posed an immediate

and prolonged threat to corporate profitability. Facing the prospect of

widespread downgrades and possible defaults, we show below that the

AAA tranches became information-sensitive. Prior to the pandemic, AAA

tranches traded at (almost) par. But in the pandemic the AAA prices fan

out below par, despite unprecedented actions by the Federal Reserve to

improve financial intermediation.1

       The increase in AAA price dispersion, reflecting the differential pricing
   1
     In general, all of the Federal Reserve's actions potentially had an indirect effect
on CLO markets by improving the conditions for financial intermediation. Indeed, we
will show that the Federal Reserve improved market liquidity for CLOs. Nevertheless,
secondary market pricing did not return to pre-pandemic levels, suggesting that trading
was based on private information about the underlying pool of collateral.




                                          5
based on information, is shown by the boxplots in Figure 1.


Figure 1: Trading conditions for AAA-rated CLO debt securities.
The boxplots in the figure show the distribution of prices for AAA-rated CLO tranches.
The central boxes show the interquartile range (IQR) of prices bisected by the median
as a horizontal line. The whiskers show the distribution of prices outside the IQR, up to
±1.5×IQR. For each CLO tranche, we calculate a daily weighted-average price, where
the weights are transaction volumes. We then average the daily prices to obtain a weekly
average weighted by CLO tranche par amount. The dashed line is the imputed round
trip cost for agency trades in AAA-rated CLO tranches. Source: Authors' calculations
from data provided by TRACE, Bloomberg LP., Moody's Analytics, S&P, and Fitch.




    The central boxes show the interquartile range of prices bisected by the

median as a horizontal line. The whiskers show the distribution of prices

beyond the interquartile range, excluding outliers. The figure summarizes

our argument. Prior to the pandemic there was no price dispersion. AAA

tranches traded at par of $100, consistent with information-insensitivity.

When the pandemic hits, the price distribution widens out below par as

shown by the box plots. Importantly, if it were an economy-wide shock that

introduced a risk premium for AAA-rated CLOs, then their prices would


                                           6
drop uniformly and there would not be price dispersion across CLOs. The

lower dotted line is similar to a bid-ask spread, a measure of averse selection

(discussed in detail later). This measure increases considerably when the

pandemic hits, due to adverse selection. In the analysis presented below,

we will provide formal tests of the information shown in Figure 1.

   To show that when the pandemic struck, some investors started

producing information, we show that there is a structural break in the

standard deviation of AAA-rated CLO prices with the onset of the

pandemic, confirming what is shown in Figure 1 and suggesting that the

prices contain tranche-specific information. We also provide the results

of a difference-in-differences quantile regression of secondary market prices

of AAA-rated CLO tranches on an index of the stock price volatility of

industries (e.g., Oil & Gas, Leisure, Retail) that were identified by Sallerson

(2020) as being especially vulnerable to the pandemic. The regression

shows that the uncertainty about the vulnerable industries is driving the

dispersion in AAA-rated CLO tranche prices.

   Where do investors get information on the CLOs' portfolios?             We

look at AAA-rated CLO tranche price changes just after the release of

monthly trustee reports on the CLOs (which occur at different dates during

the month) that contain relevant information for investors. Prior to the

pandemic, price changes were consistently near zero around trustee report

dates, but not so once the pandemic hits.


                                      7
   Leveraged loans do not trade frequently. And they do not trade in a

central location. They trade over-the-counter. Consequently, CLOs buy

third-party prices to mark their loans to "market". For example, CLOs are

required to mark-to-market riskier loans rated CCC and below that they

hold in excess of some predetermined contractual limit. We examine the

loan prices supplied by two third-party pricing agencies. A measure of the

increase in ignorance of the uninformed is the difference in these prices,

for the same loan on the same date, from the two pricing agencies. The

difference in the distributions of these two loan prices is significant. In

other words, disagreement goes up with the onset of the pandemic.

   We then turn to measuring the resulting adverse selection; see Glosten

and Milgrom (1985) and Dang et al. (2019). We show that a measure of the

bid-ask spread, the imputed roundtrip cost (IRC) of transactions, explained

later, increased dramatically, indicating a deterioration in market liquidity.

In Figure 1, the dashed line is the IRC in basis points for the AAA-rated

CLO tranches from January 1, 2020. The deterioration in secondary market

trading conditions began on Monday, March 9. From about 10bps at the

beginning of the year, the IRC peaked at over 100bps on March 19. This

sudden loss of market liquidity coincided with falling prices. By March 18,

the average mid price for transacting the most-senior CLO tranches had

already fallen below 95 cents.

   The literature closest to our work includes Brancati and Macchiavelli


                                     8
(2019), Gallagher, Schmidt, Timmermann and Wermers (2020), Perignon,

Thesmar and Vuillemey (2018), and Benmelech and Bergman (2018).

Brancati and Macchiavelli (2019) examine the Panic of 2007-2008 and

"...   provide direct evidence that while in good times bank debt is

largely informationally insensitive, it becomes significantly sensitive to

information in bad times" (p. 99). Gallagher et al. (2020) study investor

information production, money market funds (MMFs) redemptions, and

MMF managers' rebalancing decisions during the Eurozone crisis. They

find that there was significant selective information acquisition about

fund holdings and, although there were redemptions at all funds, the

reductions were largest for funds with the most sophisticated investors,

who did produce information. "Under these circumstances, MMF shares

become information-sensitive because MMFs' risk exposures are suddenly

differentiated following the acquisition of information" (p. 1). Perignon

et al. (2018) study the wholesale CD market in Europe during 2008-2014.

Lenders to banks moved their money from bad banks (those whose future

performance decreases) to good banks, apparently on the basis of private

information that they produced. The uninformed faced adverse selection in

that they did not move their money. Benmelech and Bergman (2018) study

U.S. corporate bonds. They show that when there is a drop in a bond's

price, the bond becomes more illiquid, suggesting adverse selection. Other,

more distantly, related literature is surveyed in Dang et al. (2019). We


                                    9
differ from this previous research by focusing on privately-produced safe

debt. We explicitly show that when AAA-rated debt becomes information-

sensitive, it coincides with the arrival of adverse selection, consistent with

Dang, Gorton and Holmström (2018).

    The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2 we briefly describe the

data, provide some background on CLOs, and some background on the

loans in CLO portfolios. Section 3 analyzes the switch from information-

insensitive to information-sensitive. When the pandemic hit some agents

became informed while others did not. Section 4 studies these two groups:

the informed and the uninformed. That this switch coincided with the

arrival of adverse selection is studied in Section 5. Section 7 concludes.




2    Background and Data

In this section we first discuss the dataset that we constructed to assess

the information sensitivity of CLOs during the pandemic. We combined

several large datasets, including transactions on individual CLO debt

tranches, tranche-level credit ratings, loan-level information about the

underlying pools of collateral, and loan transactions by CLO managers.

The combination of these data create a window to study how information

about CLO tranches can affect the trading decisions of CLO investors.

    Then we provide some detail about how CLOs work, and examine the



                                     10
underlying loans in CLO portfolios. Finally, we summarize the loans held

by CLOs.



2.1       Data

We identify CLO tranches using Bloomberg's Backoffice data on asset-

backed securities and match these data by CUSIP identifiers to dealer

transaction data reported in the regulatory version of the Trade Reporting

and Compliance Engine (TRACE), created by the Financial Regulatory

Authority (FINRA).2 Bloomberg provides information on individual CLO

tranche characteristics, including offering amount, offering yield, and

amount outstanding. After merging these two large data sets, we add

Moody's, Fitch, and Standard & Poor's credit ratings and credit watch list

information for each CLO tranche at a daily frequency.

       Our data on secondary market over-the-counter trading of CLO debt

is from TRACE. Under regulations introduced in 2002 by FINRA, dealers

are required to file detailed reports of their transactions, including trade

time, quantity, price, and counterparty. FINRA made asset-backed security

secondary market trading data, including CLO debt, available from 2011

as part of an effort to increase transparency in this over-the-counter market

after the 2007-09 financial crisis. The limitation on data availability means

that, unfortunately, we cannot compare trading during the pandemic to the
   2
    CUSIP stands for Committee on Uniform Securities Identification Procedures and is
a unique identifier for most financial instruments, including privately-placed securities.


                                           11
financial crisis 2007-09. We follow standard procedures for cleaning these

data.3 We use confidential regulatory data with dealer bank identifiers,

which allows us to match trades by buyer, seller, amount, and trade time

while removing duplicates. The regulatory version of TRACE allows us to

identify dealers and observe the trading behavior of every dealer.

      We construct daily aggregates for each CLO tranche using the

transaction-level data. The daily trading price is defined as the weighted

average price on transactions, where the weights are the transaction

volumes. This measure is designed to approximate the mid price for each

CLO tranche as the vast majority of trades are matched in advance. We

also calculate the total volume transacted.

      The data we use to study the loans held by CLOs are from Moody's

Analytics, which are based on trustee reports issued by each CLO each

month and vastly augmented by Moody's proprietary leveraged loan

analytics. These data contain details of the entire portfolio of assets held,

including type of asset, credit rating, maturity, par value, market value,

creditor information, as well as multiple individual loan prices provided by

Markit, Reuters, and the CLO trustees. Moody's also provides information

about the performance of the CLO, such as details of the internal triggers

for cash flows, discussed below.

      Table 1 presents summary statistics from the baseline dataset where
  3
      See, for example, Dick-Nielsen (2009) and Bao, O'Hara and Zhou (2018).



                                         12
the unit of observation is CLO tranche i on day t, conditional on at least

one transaction occurring. Our sample data cover the period from January

1, 2020 onwards. We separate the period into two subsamples: The dates

prior to March 1, 2020 are in the "pre-pandemic period" and the dates

thereafter are in the "pandemic period." The tests of equality of the means

and standard deviations between the two subsamples are reported in the

columns labeled " p-value ". During the pandemic there was a drop in the

average transaction prices, together with an increase in the dispersion

of transaction prices, while there was no change in aggregate trading

volumes. These statistics suggest that investors' trading behaviour changed

significantly as investors sought information about the underlying risks

across CLO tranches. We investigate the role of information production

below.

   Dang et al. (2018) have no prediction about the trading volume once

there is a switch to information-sensitive. While the market might collapse,

as in Akerlof (1970), uninformed agents may choose to trade anyway,

accepting the adverse selection. And, in reality, fearing that the AAA-

rated tranches may be downgraded may motivate some institutions to sell.



2.2      CLO Background

CLOs are securitization vehicles created typically by large asset managers

to finance pools of leveraged loans extended to below investment grade

                                    13
Table 1: Summary statistics This table reports summary statistics for the
CLO tranche secondary market trading data used in the analysis. Trade_priceit is
the weighted average transaction price, where the weights are the transaction volumes.
Trade_volumeit is the sum of transaction volumes. Our sample begins on January 1,
2020 and is divided on March 1, 2020 into the pre-pandemic period and the pandemic
period. Source: TRACE, Bloomberg LP., Moody's Analytics, S&P, and Fitch.

 Variable           Statistic    AAA-rated tranches           Class E tranches
 (units)                         Pre  Post p-value           Pre   Post p-value

 Trade_priceit      Mean        99.91 96.48        0        95.69   72.08       0
 ($ per 100 face)   SD           0.38 3.17         0         4.9    14.87       0
                    N           1,125 4,000                  581    1,222

 Trade_volumeit     Mean         9.77 11.36      0.95        5.3    5.33      0.56
 ($'000s)           SD          30.11 24.33        1         5.03   4.83      0.88
                    N           1,125 4,000                  581    1,222



firms. These loans are predominantly originated by banks as part of a

syndication (Bruche, Malherbe and Meisenzahl, 2020). A CLO manager

first buys a pool of leveraged loans on the secondary market. The initial

pool of loans may remain unchanged in a "static" CLO. More often, the

loans are actively traded by the CLO manager in accordance with the

terms of the prospectus, which specifies inter alia the currency, maturity,

industry, and rating of the loans that may enter the pool. The cash flows

from the pool of loans are used to pay the interest and principal on a set

of securities (tranches) issued by the CLO vehicle, which are structured

as a hierarchy of claims on the underlying collateral. Each security has a

priority claim on the capital structure.

   CLOs allocate the effects of default risk in the underlying pool of



                                         14
loans in several ways. First, there is subordination. For example the

AAA-rated tranche is protected by the mezzanine (middle) tranche and

the junior tranche. Second, there are over-collateralization tests. Over-

collateralization tests are calculated by dividing the principal balance of

the portfolio by the total cumulative balance of the tranche (and, if it

is not the senior tranche then all tranches senior to it). The numerator

is adjusted when some of the loans face stress: they become more risky,

default, or are worth significantly less than their face value. There are

specific haircuts for loans in these categories.

   When an over-collateralization test is violated, there is a reallocation of

excess spread. Excess spread is the interest earned on the portfolio of loans

in excess of the interest due on the CLO tranches. If there are no defaults

and the CLO can make its obligated payments to the note holders, then

the excess spread flows to the equity holders (on a monthly basis). But, if

the portfolio experiences stress in the form of defaults, ratings downgrades,

etc., such that over-collateralization tests fail, then excess spread is directed

away from equity, and sometimes away from junior tranches, and used to

pay down principal on the AAA debt.

   CLO managers are large sophisticated entities that usually manage

multiple CLOs. According to the fourth-quarter 2019 manager rankings

from CreditFlux, the average CLO manager had 10 CLOs with a total par

value of $5.3 billion. CLO managers are often affiliated with private equity


                                      15
Figure 2: Leveraged loans outstanding and held by CLOs. The
time series in the figure below show the amount of outstanding U.S. leveraged loans.
The bars in the figure show the aggregate amount of U.S. leveraged loans held by U.S.
CLOs (grey) and European CLOs (black). Source: S&P and Moody's Analytics.




funds, hedge funds, asset managers, banks, or insurance companies. These

firms have large teams of credit analysts and loan traders, which contribute

to the CLO managing and trading its portfolios.

       CLOs are an important way for banks to offload large amounts of

risky loans that would otherwise reside on their balance sheets. Figure 2

compares the amounts of leveraged loans and CLOs outstanding. As of

2019, according to the Loan Syndications and Trading Association (LSTA),

there were more than $1.1 trillion of U.S. leveraged loans outstanding. U.S.

CLOs, which are the largest nonbank investors in U.S. leveraged loans,

amounted to over $500 billion.4
   4
    These CLOs may hold other types of investments, e.g., junk bonds, but are
predominantly backed by U.S. leveraged loans.



                                        16
2.3      CLO Loan Portfolios

We use Moody's data largely drawn from CLO trustee reports to examine

the typical CLO loan portfolio characteristics. We then use the same data

to describe how prices of leveraged loans evolved during the pandemic. We

show that variation in the distributions of loan prices depend on whether

the firms belonged to industries that were more vulnerable to the pandemic

shock.

   Table 2 presents summary statistics across CLOs from the information

provided in the trustee reports. The unit of observation is a CLO. The

first three columns show statistics for 1,627 CLOs during the pre-pandemic

period and are calculated using the last trustee report for each CLO

published before February 15, 2020.      The second three columns cover

1,599 CLOs during the pandemic period, calculated using the first trustee

report published after April 1, 2020. Data constructed by Moody's indicate

that the average attachment point for the AAA-rated tranches in these

CLOs before the pandemic is about 37 percent. In other words, on average

63 percent of a CLO is rated AAA. The data confirm that loans dominate

the asset portfolios of CLOs, with the typical portfolio containing about

370 loans and a total market value of roughly $420 million. Bonds account

for less than 3 percent of the principal value of the typical portfolio. The

average loan in the portfolio is worth $1-1.5 million and has a residual



                                    17
maturity of 4.5-5 years.


Table 2: Summary statistics of CLO loan portfolios. For the pre-
pandemic sample of 1,627 CLOs, the statistics are calculated using the last trustee report
published before February 15, 2020 for each CLO. The pandemic sample of 1,599 CLOs
use the first trustee report published after April 1, 2020. Source: Authors' calculations
from data provided by Moody's Analytics.

                                       Pre-pandemic, 1,627 CLOs          Pandemic, 1,599 CLOs
 Characteristic                        Mean Median         SD            Mean Median SD

 AAA tranche attachment point (%)      36.9     35.7     5.5              36.7    35.6   5.9
 Loans per CLO                         369.6     344     233             390.3    349    285
 Bonds per CLO                          7.7       0      25       9.8       0      35
 CLO market value (loans, $mn)         421.4    408.9   175.7            367.7   353.7   157.7
 CLO principal value (nonloans, $mn)   10.7      1.4    24.2      12.1    1.1     28.2
 Mean loan value ($mn)                  1.5      1.3     0.9              1.3      1.2   0.8
 Median loan value ($mn)                1.2       1      0.9                1      0.9    0.7
 Mean loan maturity (yrs)               4.5      4.8     0.9              4.5      4.8   0.9
 Median loan maturity (yrs)             4.7       5      0.9               4.7     4.9   0.9
 Principal value in bonds (%)           2.7       0      8.6               3.4      0    11.4
 Vulnerable loans (market value, %)    18.4     18.1     9.6              16.4    16.2     9




    The last line of Table 2 shows that the typical CLO loan portfolio

has about 18 percent of its market value in industries that Moody's

identified as vulnerable to the pandemic shock. Sallerson (2020) identified

seven industries vulnerable to the pandemic shock: Automotive, Consumer

goods: Durable, Energy: Oil & Gas, Hotel, Gaming & Leisure, Retail,

Transportation: Cargo, and Transportation: Consumer.                             Appendix 8

describes how we map these industries to other data. We use these sectors

throughout our analysis to tease out a differential impact of the pandemic.

    Table 3 presents summary statistics from the leveraged loan trans-

actions reported in the trustee reports.                We separate the transactions

since January 1, 2020 into two time periods: The pre-pandemic period


                                               18
up to March 1 and thereafter the pandemic period. The table reports

both the number and average transaction value of sales and purchases

per CLO. The table is divided into three parts. The first three columns

provide summary statistics for all leveraged loan transactions. The middle

three columns provide statistics for transactions on loans to the sectors

identified by Moody's as vulnerable to the pandemic shock. The final

three columns provide statistics for transactions on the non-vulnerable

loans. The statistics generally indicate that loan portfolio turnover (sales

and purchases) increased, including for loans to firms in vulnerable sectors.

There was no change in the average value of the loan transactions per CLO.

As a robustness check on the summary statistics reported in the table, we

excluded loan transactions that took place during a CLO's ramp-up period

and report the results in Table 8 in appendix 9.

       The trustee reports also reveal greater deterioration in the market

value of leveraged loans in the seven vulnerable sectors. CLO managers

provide monthly updates through the trustee reports on the market value

of the leveraged loans in their portfolios.5 We use these data to construct

distributions of loan market values over time. For each month, we plot

the distributions separately for loans to firms in the vulnerable and not

vulnerable industries. Figure 3 shows that the values of loans to firms
   5
    We compared the loan market values in the trustee reports to the bid prices provided
by Reuters and Markit. These pricing services obtain their data using a combination
of polling traders and modelling. We found that the vast majority of CLO managers
report market values identical to Markit bid prices.


                                          19
Table 3: Loan transactions summary statistics.                       The table shows
summary statistics for leveraged loan transactions per CLO in the pre-pandemic period
(January 1, 2020--March 1, 2020) and the pandemic period (March 2, 2020--June 30,
2020). Source: Authors' calculations from data provided by Moody's Analytics.

Variable              Statistic     All transactions      Vulnerable sector    Non-vulnerable sector
(units)                           Pre    Post p-value    Pre   Post p-value    Pre    Post p-value

Number of sales       Mean        47.16 82.79      0     6.83 10.99      0     45.09 78.77      0
(per CLO)             SD          59.33 136.29     0     16.41 23.03     0     53.49 127.75     0
                      N           1,581 1,625             493   603            1,579 1,624

Mean sales value      Mean         0.8    0.72     1     0.57    0.53   0.82   0.81    0.73      1
($mn per CLO)         SD          0.76     0.78   0.1    0.64    0.62   0.25   0.76    0.79    0.08
                      N           1,581   1,625          493     603           1,579   1,624

Number of purchases Mean          62.66 102.43     0       6   12.73     0     58.79 94.8       0
(per CLO)           SD            63.55 146.42     0     13.52 29.2      0     55.96 130.94     0
                    N             1,549 1,592            1,001 961             1,549 1,591

Mean purchase value   Mean        1.16     0.84    1      1.1    0.77    1     1.17    0.85     1
($mn per CLO)         SD          0.91     0.86   0.01   1.01      1    0.37   0.92    0.86     0
                      N           1,549   1,592          1,001   961           1,549   1,591




in the vulnerable industries (shaded boxplots) fell further and were more

variable than the values of loans to firms in other industries.




3      The Switch to Information-Sensitive Debt

In this section we study the switch from information-insensitive debt

to information-sensitive debt.                    First, we show that the onset of the

pandemic coincided with a regime switch in the standard deviation of

AAA tranche prices. Then we adopt a quantile regression approach to

show that uncertainty about the vulnerable industries is responsible for

differentiation in transaction prices across AAA-rated CLO tranches. The

lowest transaction prices for AAA CLOs became correlated with an index

of the volatility of the vulnerable industries' stock prices, while the highest

                                                    20
Figure 3: Loan collateral price distribution The boxplots in this figure
show the distributions of loan prices reported in CLO trustee reports of U.S. leveraged
loans. The shaded boxplots include loans to firms in the industries identified by Moody's
as vulnerable to the pandemic shock. The unshaded boxplots contain loans to firms in
all other industries. Source: Moody's Analytics.




transaction prices remained relatively uncorrelated with the same index.



3.1     AAA CLO Price Dispersion During the Pandemic

Figure 1 above displayed the fanning out of post-pandemic prices,

suggesting that investors were differentially pricing the AAA tranches using

information from trustee reports most likely. "Fanning out" corresponds to

an increase in measures of prices dispersion.

    Panel (a) of figure 4 shows the time series of two measures of the

dispersion in the prices of AAA-rated CLO tranches.                    Also shown is

the Bank of America-Merrill Lynch High Yield Index Option-Adjusted

Spread. This index is appropriate for comparison because CLOs hold

                                          21
loans to below investment-grade firms. Compared to this index are the

two measures of dispersion across CLO tranches: the standard deviation

and the interquartile range.6 The two measures of dispersion are highly

correlated and mirror the movements in the High Yield Index.


Figure 4: Dispersion of prices, the high yield spread, and
vulnerable sector stock price volatility. This figure compares the time series
of dispersion in the prices of AAA-rated CLO tranches to the Bank of America-Merrill
Lynch High Yield Index Option-Adjusted Spread (left-hand panel) and the volatility
of the stock prices of firms in the sectors identified by Moody's as vulnerable to the
pandemic shock (right-hand panel). We calculate two measures of dispersion across
CLO prices: the standard deviation and the interquartile range. Source: Authors'
calculations from data provided by TRACE, FRED, Bloomberg LP, Moody's Analytics,
S&P, and Fitch.


             (a) High yield spread            (b) Vulnerable stock price volatility




       As a complement to panel (a), we replaced the high-yield spread with

the stock price volatility in the industries that Moody's identified as being

most vulnerable to the pandemic shock. The solid line in panel (b) of

figure 4 is the weighted average daily difference between the high and

low log prices on the seven vulnerable industries identified by Moody's,

where the weights are the transaction volumes. Bank loans and bonds are
   6
    To calculate the dispersion measures we first calculate a daily weighted-average
price, where the weights are transaction volumes.



                                         22
alternative sources of funding for firms. Based on the time-series of data

since January 1, 2020, the correlation between the high-yield spread and

the volatility index is 0.61.

      We can further formalize this increase in dispersion by estimating

structural breaks in the standard deviation of AAA-rated CLO prices. We

do this by applying the method of Bai and Perron (2003) for identifying

multiple structural breaks in a single time series. For each tranche, we

calculate a daily weighted-average price, where the weights are transaction

volumes. We then calculate the standard deviation across tranches. The

optimal number of breaks to explain the time series is determined by the

Bayesian Information Criterion.

      Figure 5 shows the results.   The shaded regions show 95 percent

confidence intervals for the location of the structural breaks. AAA-rated

tranche prices show little dispersion prior to the pandemic, consistent with

the AAA-rated tranches being information-insensitive. From mid-March

until early May the dispersion is high and variable, before settling down

somewhat, but still above the pre-pandemic levels.

      The first structural break is estimated to have occurred between

March 4 and March 11, 2020, when the World Health Organization declared

the novel coronavirus outbreak a pandemic.7 The timing of this structural

break coincides with disruptions to a wide range of financial markets,
  7
      https://www.who.int/news-room/detail/27-04-2020-who-timeline---Covid-19



                                    23
Figure 5: Structural breaks in the standard deviation of AAA-
rated CLO prices. This figure shows the estimated structural breaks from applying
the method of Bai and Perron (2003) for identifying multiple structural breaks in a single
time series. Source: Authors' calculations from data provided by TRACE, Bloomberg
LP, Moody's Analytics, S&P, and Fitch.




including Treasuries (Logan, 2020) and corporate debt (Kargar, Lester,

Lindsay, Liu, Weill and Zuniga, 2020; Haddad, Moreira and Muir, 2020).

    The second structural break is estimated to have occurred between

May 6 and May 18, with a point estimate of May 7. The window of

the break is wider than the first, and is likely a response to the combined

impact of several announcements by the Federal Reserve. In particular,

on May 4, the Board of Governors announced that the Primary Market

Corporate Credit Facility (PMCCF) and Secondary Market Corporate

Credit Facility (SMCCF) would begin purchasing corporate bonds in "early

May". The SMCCF is the only emergency facility with the authority

to purchase corporate debt below investment grade. Following through,

                                           24
the New York Fed announced on May 11 that the SMCCF would begin

purchasing exchange traded funds on May 12. Also on May 12, the Board of

Governors announced that the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility

(TALF) would accept a narrowly-defined set of highly-rated CLO tranches.8

All of these announcements had the potential to directly improve conditions

in the CLO market. In addition, several further announcements in the time

window indirectly affected conditions by modifying the liquidity coverage

ratio (May 5) and the supplementary leverage ratio (May 15). These

modifications were intended to ease banks' ability to provide credit and

financial intermediation services. As such, they had a potentially indirect

effect on conditions in the CLO market.



3.2    Quantile Regression

We delved deeper into the relationship between the dispersion of AAA

CLO tranche prices and uncertainty about vulnerable industries using

quantile regression with CUSIP fixed effects.      The dependent variable

Trading priceit is the weighted-average price of CLO tranche i on day t,

where the weights are the transaction volumes. The variable Covidt takes

the value 0 before March 1, 2020 and 1 thereafter. Volatilityt is the volume-

weighted average daily difference between the high and low log prices on

seven vulnerable industries (Sallerson, 2020). We estimate the conditional
  8
   See     https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/files/
monetary20200512a1.pdf

                                    25
quantile functions QTrading price ( |Covidt , Volatilityt ) of the response of
                                 it


the t-th observation on the i-th CLO tranche's Trading priceit given by



  QTrading price ( |Covidt , Volatilityt ) = i + 1 ( )Covidt
                it



                                          + 2 ( )Volatilityt

                                          + 3 ( )Covidt × Volatilityt ,   (1)



with quantile   {0.25, 0.5, 0.75} and where i is the CUSIP fixed effect.

The CUSIP fixed effects absorb all time-invariant cross-sectional differences

in the CLOs that were traded during the period. The quantile fixed effect

regressions are implemented using the penalized fixed-effects estimation

method proposed by Koenker (2004).

   Table 4 shows the results. The columns in the table refer to the different

CLO tranches by seniority. The industry calls the most senior debt tranche

the A Class and the most junior debt tranche the E Class. Class A tranches

are designed to attract a AAA rating by a credit rating agency at issuance.

Therefore, the majority of AAA-rated tranches are Class A debt securities.

In our sample of CLO trades, about 92 percent of the CLO tranches rated

AAA by at least one of the main credit rating agencies (S&P, Moody's,

and Fitch) are Class A tranches. The remaining AAA CLO tranches in

our sample are below Class A. In the table, the first column is all AAA

tranches. Columns 2 through 6 follow the CLO capital structure from the


                                     26
most senior debt tranches (Class A) to the most subordinate debt tranches

(Class E).

   The regression reveals how sensitive the CLO prices within a tranche

group are to the vulnerable industries volatility index. The table includes

a row reporting a 2 test of the null hypothesis that the 25th and 75th

percentile coefficients are the same. The statistical significance of the

difference between the two coefficients increases monotonically with the

seniority of the tranches and loses significance lower in the capital structure

(E class).

   Percentiles of the distribution of transaction prices are responding

heterogeneously to uncertainty about the vulnerable industries.           The

variation is strongest for the tranches that were information insensitive

in the pre-pandemic period.      Before the pandemic, the distribution of

transaction prices of AAA tranches was uniformly uncorrelated with the

vulnerable industries volatility index. During the pandemic, the lowest

transaction prices for AAA-rated CLOs became correlated with an index

of the volatility of the vulnerable industries' stock prices, while the highest

transaction prices remained relatively uncorrelated with the same index.

   Looking at the AAA tranches, the difference in the coefficients

between the 25th and the 75th percentile is economically meaningful.

The counterfactual price of a AAA CLO tranche that moved from the

75th percentile to the 25th percentile would have been 180 bps lower, given


                                     27
Table 4: Information sensitivity of CLO debt tranches ­ quantile
fixed effect regression. This table shows that highly-rated CLO debt tranches
became information-sensitive during the pandemic. The dependent variable is the
weighted average price of CLO tranche i on day t, where the weights are the transaction
volumes. Covidt takes the value 0 before March 1, 2020 and 1 thereafter. Volatilityt
is the weighted average daily difference between the high and low log prices on
the seven vulnerable industries identified by Moody's, where the weights are the
transaction volumes. Column 1 includes only the CLO tranches rated AAA by at
least one of the three main credit rating agencies. The quantile fixed effect regressions
are implemented using the penalized fixed-effects estimation method proposed by
Koenker (2004). Percentiles are indicated in the square parentheses. Clustered
bootstrapped standard errors (1,000 replications) are implemented using the generalized
bootstrap of Chatterjee and Bose (2005) with unit exponential weights sampled for each
individual CUSIP, and reported in parentheses. Source: Authors' calculations from data
provided by TRACE, BarChart, Bloomberg LP., Moody's Analytics, S&P, and Fitch.

    p<0.01,  p<0.05,  p<0.1

 Dep. var.:                                                        Debt class
 Trading price                AAA          A               B          C             D           E
                               (1)        (2)             (3)        (4)           (5)         (6)

 [0.25]Covidt                 -0.59      -0.59           -1.23       -3.72       -12.54      -22.09
                               (0.21)     (0.22)          (0.58)      (0.89)       (1.33)      (1.89)
 [0.25]Volatilityt              -2.41     -4.97         -24.88      -53.56            0       -69.14
                               (1.94)     (2.25)          (7.64)     (13.32)      (12.01)     (31.54)
 [0.25]Covidt ×Volatilityt   -79.04     -83.59         -150.69     -181.15      -232.75     -197.09
                               (8.03)     (8.48)         (23.16)     (31.24)      (37.71)      (61.1)

 [0.5]Covidt                  -1.23      -1.23           -2.1       -3.83        -10.97     -18.75
                               (0.18)     (0.17)         (0.34)       (0.6)        (1.14)     (1.88)
 [0.5]Volatilityt               -1.35      -1.58       -15.87       -23.11          1.53     -49.01
                               (1.03)     (1.45)         (6.07)      (11.44)       (7.14)    (25.69)
 [0.5]Covidt ×Volatilityt    -36.24     -40.42          -78.8      -106.52      -149.41     -100.54
                               (6.29)     (6.26)        (13.54)      (22.88)      (32.74)    (58.66)

 [0.75]Covidt                -1.55       -1.54          -2.15       -3.7         -8.91      -13.58
                              (0.16)      (0.15)         (0.33)       (0.5)       (0.85)      (1.82)
 [0.75]Volatilityt              1.3        0.22         -11.13        -7.74        0.41       -26.57
                              (2.19)      (1.58)         (5.96)      (9.71)       (7.82)      (25.3)
 [0.75]Covidt ×Volatilityt   -12.46     -16.05         -44.23      -54.05       -81.18        -51.83
                              (5.47)      (5.04)        (12.02)     (18.41)      (20.82)     (48.65)

 CUSIP FE                       Y          Y               Y           Y            Y           Y
 Observations                 16,417     18,208          5,899       6,734        8,386       6,017

                                  H0 : [0.25]Covidt ×Volatilityt = [0.75]Covidt ×Volatilityt
 2
 1 test statistic            76.78 77.67            18.89        13.59      16.54         5.04




                                                  28
a one standard deviation increase in the vulnerable volatility index during

the pandemic period. That change is almost two dollars per 100 face value,

a huge difference. For some perspective on the 180 bps decrease, note that

the standard deviation of AAA CLO tranche prices in the pre-pandemic

period was 8 bps.

    Figure 6 shows the AAA tranche prices by the top and bottom

quartiles, with one standard deviation bounds. This graphically shows

the differentiation between CLO tranches.

    That investors are distinguishing between different CLO tranches means

that they are distinguishing between different loans. We can also look at

the loans in CLO portfolios. Panel (a) of Figure 7 shows loan prices by

quartile. It is clear that, indeed, investors were differentiating been good

and bad loans. And this was at the root of differential AAA tranche pricing.

But note that it is not the case that the price dispersion is simply due to

the pandemic shock to the vulnerable industries. Panel (b) of Figure 7

shows vulnerable loan prices by quartile.




4    The Informed and the Uninformed

According to a Bloomberg article, on May 20, 2020, J.P. Morgan

sent an extraordinary email to its clients warning them of "information




                                    29
Figure 6: AAA CLO tranche prices by quartile. The figure shows the
median AAA-rated tranche price ± one standard deviation for the tranches that are
traded in the top and bottom quartiles of the price distributions. Source: Authors'
calculations from data provided by TRACE, Bloomberg LP, Moody's Analytics, S&P,
and Fitch.




asymmetries" in the fast-moving CLO market.9 The cited cause for concern

was originators, sponsors, and even managers that were interested in

buying their own CLO tranches based on nonpublic information about "the

potential effects of Covid-19 on the portfolio" that "may constitute insider

information". In this section we examine the risk to investors from such

information asymmetries.

      Investors produce information about investment-grade debt securities

when it is profitable to do so. After a corporate bond has been issued

there are few subsequent analyst reports. Resources are only devoted

to information production when the bond starts to deteriorate. Johnson,
  9
   "JPMorgan Warns on Insider Trading Risk in Fast-Moving CLO Market" by Alastair
Marsh and Sally Bakewell, published May 20, 2020, 9:58AM EDT.


                                       30
Figure 7: Loan prices by quartile. The figure shows the median loan price
± one standard deviation for the leveraged loans in the top (high) and bottom (low)
quartiles of their price distributions. The left panel shows the prices for all leveraged
loans and the right panel shows the prices for loans to firms in industries identified by
Moody's as vulnerable to the pandemic shock. Source: Authors' calculations from data
provided by Moody's Analytics.


                 (a) All loans                   (b) Loans to vulnerable firms




Markov and Ramath (2009) write that: "the amount of resources devoted

to debt research depends on the debt's price sensitivity to information

about the value of the asset. Intuitively, the sensitivity of the price of debt

determines how much one can profit from information about the company's

assets in the debt market" (p. 92).

    In the case of AAA-rated CLO tranches there are never analysts'

reports. But there are monthly CLO trustee reports. In the first subsection,

we ask whether the information in those reports was used once the

pandemic started. Then we look at a measure of disagreement between

third-party loan price suppliers. These agents see the trustee reports but

have no direct knowledge of the loan market. They proxy for uninformed

agents.

    To be clear, informed agents are those who have produced private

                                          31
information, meaning credit analysis of the loans in a CLO portfolio. These

agents need to invest significantly in the technology required to produce

the information. As Guggenheim Partners put it: "[analyzing a CLO]

requires the expertise to perform rigorous bottom-up research on individual

bank loans . . . managers must have significant corporate credit research

capabilities".10 This costly technology is the reason that investment firms

manage multiple CLOs and may well have other credit products. Bain

Capital, for example, has 310 employees in Bain Capital Credit.11



4.1    The Informed

The first step in producing information about CLO tranche is finding out

what loans are in the portfolio. This must be checked repeatedly because

the CLO manager can trade the loans in the portfolio. Portfolio information

comes from studying trustee reports, which are published monthly for each

CLO. Each CLO has a trustee, a fiduciary, who carries out a number

of tasks including reporting on the CLO's portfolio composition, as well

as its compliance with the many requirements of the CLO's indenture,

e.g., checking over-collateralization tests, the loan ratings, and the account

balances. The trustee also maintains the CLO assets in custody and is

responsible for paying funds to investors on coupon dates.
 10
     See                   https://www.guggenheimpartners.com/perspectives/
portfolio-strategy/collateralized-loan-obligations-clos.
  11
     See https://www.baincapitalcredit.com/approach.



                                     32
   The trustee reports are informative but, as mentioned above, they are

only the starting point. The second step is credit analysis of the firms which

borrowed money and whose loans are in the portfolio. Credit analysts

are necessary to take the information in the trustee reports and make it

meaningful. We do not observe this second step except insofar as the

AAA-tranche price changes. Further, and perhaps most importantly, the

correlations between loans in the portfolio have to be studied.

   Figure 8 shows the percentage change in the price of AAA-rated

tranches on the day the trustee report is released and the day after. Prior

to the pandemic, the percentage price change was essentially zero (the tall

bar), while after the pandemic the price changes are spread out, suggesting

that there was valuable information in the trustee reports. Note that

sometimes the percentage price change is positive. This can happen if

the CLO manager took positive trading actions or a loan improved.



4.2    The Uninformed

Bonds and loans are traded over-the-counter so there is no price discovery

in the sense that a price aggregates many agents' information sets. Like

bond mutual fund managers, CLO managers engage a third-party pricing

service to track the value of their loans, that is obtain a "price" for each

loan. Loans do not trade frequently so these prices are essentially informed

guesses. Pricing services use models and rely heavily on communication

                                     33
Figure 8: Price changes around trustee report dates. The histogram
shows the distribution of percentage price changes of AAA-rated CLO tranches traded
on the same day or the day after each trustee report was released. Source: Authors'
calculations from data provided by TRACE, Moody's Analytics, Bloomberg LP,
Moody's Analytics, S&P, and Fitch.




from traders and the trustee reports. In other words, it is hard to come up

with such prices.

   This difficulty has been shown by Cici, Gibson and Merrick (2011) who

study bonds. In the case of bonds, the "prices", called "marks", are supplied

by dealers using different methodologies. These are not transaction prices.

Cici et al. (2011) study the dispersion of month-end mark-to-market prices

for identical bonds held by many bond mutual funds. The marks from

different dealer banks differ substantially (in normal times), even for AAA-

rated bonds and the dispersion increases the lower the rating.

   In the case of loans, Markit and Reuters provide loan marks, "prices".

The basis for these prices is proprietary, but likely involve anecdotal

                                       34
evidence from loan traders and models. These companies do not have

large teams of credit analysts.     Because these companies also see the

trustee reports, they can proxy for uninformed traders who cannot

analyze or understand the reports. To measure the degree to which the

pandemic created problems and/or disagreements between these essentially

uninformed agents we can measure the percentage difference between

Markit and Reuters prices for the same vulnerable leveraged loan on the

same date and compare that distribution to the distribution of the mark

difference in pre-pandemic times.

    Figure 9 shows that disagreement increased significantly once the

pandemic started.    But there is no statistical difference between the

disagreement about vulnerable and non-vulnerable industries.




5    Information-Sensitivity, Adverse Selection

The preceding analysis showed that AAA CLO tranches became information-

sensitive. In this section we argue that the switch from insensitive to

sensitive coincided with the arrival of adverse selection or the fear of

adverse selection. Prior to the pandemic, investors had not been producing

information. There was no need to and it would not pay to produce

information. In fact, they may not know how to produce information. It

is not sufficient to just look at the portfolio. An investor must understand



                                    35
Figure 9: Loan price disagreement by industry vulnerability.
The figure shows monthly distributions of the percentage difference between Markit
and Reuters prices for the same leveraged loan on the same date. Source: Authors'
calculations from data provided by Moody's Analytics.




how the loans to different industries are correlated and understand the

internal workings of the CLO. Without this the investor risks facing a

better informed trader.

       In this section we look at evidence of adverse selection. In the first

subsection below we look at the imputed roundtrip trading cost (IRC), a

measure of the bid-ask spread. Glosten and Milgrom (1985) show that the

bid-ask spread widens when there is an increase in adverse selection.12

       Then in the second subsection we look at the evidence for adverse

selection using the IRC. The bid-ask spread is a common measure of adverse

selection in fixed income markets. For example, Benmelech and Bergman
  12
    There are also interest costs and regulatory costs associated with holding an
inventory. But agency trades are intraday. And, in any case, these did not change
over our sample period.


                                       36
(2018) use it in their study of corporate bonds and Wittenberg-Moerman

(2008) uses it in her study of the secondary loan market.



5.1     Trading Costs

We measure trading costs in the secondary trading market for CLO tranches

using the method proposed by Feldhütter (2012). The imputed roundtrip

trading cost (IRC) is the difference in the price paid by a dealer to purchase

a bond from a client and the price charged by a dealer to sell the same

amount of the same security to a client.13 Measuring the time between

trades is important for markets with relatively thick trading and where the

dealer is willing to carry risk in so-called "principal" trades. When trading

CLO tranches, dealers almost always match clients in advance, in "agency"

trades, and make very few principal trades. For this reason, the liquidity

measure based on principal trades proposed by Choi and Huh (2017) is

uninformative in our setting. The ratio of agency trades to principal trades,

both by number and by volume, is close to one.14 We identify agency trades

as those with two or three trades in a given CLO tranche with the same

trade size that take place within a calendar day.15
  13
     We also estimated the realized bid-ask spread, calculated as the difference between
the volume-weighted average prices paid to dealers by their clients and the volume-
weighted average prices paid by dealers to clients. The two measures of liquidity are
highly correlated.
  14
     This measure underestimates the number and volume of agency trades because it
treats as principal trades those transactions that the dealer split over two or more clients.
  15
     Dick-Nielsen, Feldhütter and Lando (2012) calculate a similar measure of agency
trades using corporate bond transactions within one day



                                            37
   To calculate the IRC, we first identify within-day roundtrip trades,

composed of a sale from a client to a dealer and a purchase by a client

from a dealer, potentially with inter-dealer trades. Following Dick-Nielsen

et al. (2012), if we observe two or three trades in a given CLO tranche

with the same trade size on the same day, and there are no other trades

with the same size on that day, we define the transactions as part of

a roundtrip trade.      For each such trade, we calculate the IRC as the

percentage difference between the maximum and minimum prices contained

in this roundtrip trade. We then calculate a daily weighted-average IRC

over all roundtrip trades, where the weights are the volume of each trade.



5.2    Adverse Selection

Figure 10 shows the estimated structural breaks in the IRC time series

from applying the method of Bai and Perron (2003) for identifying multiple

structural breaks in a single time series. The shaded areas are 95 percent

confidence intervals.

   The first structural break is estimated to have occurred between

March 3 and March 12, 2020, overlapping with the first break in the

standard deviation of trading prices (Figure 13) and coinciding with the

March 11 declaration by the World Health Organization of the pandemic.

   The second structural break in the IRC occurred between March 24

and April 23, 2020, with a point estimate of April 2. This break likely

                                    38
Figure 10: Structural breaks in the imputed roundtrip cost
(IRC). This figure shows the estimated structural breaks from applying the method of
Bai and Perron (2003) for identifying multiple structural breaks in a single time series.
Source: Authors' calculations from data provided by TRACE, Bloomberg LP, Moody's
Analytics, S&P, and Fitch.




reflects the significant actions taken by the Federal Reserve to improve

financial intermediation. In particular, on March 20, the PDCF became

operational and accepted AAA-rated CLO tranches. On March 23, the

Board of Governors announced the establishment of the TALF, PMCCF,

and SMCCF as well as expanding the role of the Money Market Mutual

Fund Liquidity Facility (MMLF) and Commercial Paper Funding Facility

(CPFF). On April 1, the Board announced that it was relaxing the

supplementary leverage ratio requirements "to allow banking organizations

to expand their balance sheets as appropriate to continue to serve as

financial intermediaries".

    The third, and final, structural break in the IRC occurred between

                                          39
May 13 and June 17, with a point estimate of May 14. The timing of this

break overlaps (partly) with the second structural break in the standard

deviation of trading prices. Two proximate actions were intended to further

improve banks' financial intermediation services. The Board of Governors

modified the liquidity coverage ratio (May 5) and the supplementary

leverage ratio (May 15).

   Figure 11 shows that imputed roundtrip costs were differentially affected

by the pandemic. We separate the CLOs in our sample into two groups:

Those above and those below the median holdings of loans to firms in

vulnerable industries identified by Sallerson (2020). To avoid any potential

confounding effect of secondary loan market trading, we calculate each

CLO's exposure to vulnerable industries from the last trustee report prior

to the declaration of the pandemic.

   We find generally higher and more variable imputed roundtrip costs

of trading CLOs that were more exposed to vulnerable industries during

the pandemic. Nonparametric tests confirm that the two distributions

are statistically different. We implemented both Anderson-Darling and

Kruskal-Wallis rank tests using the trade data after the WHO declared the

pandemic. In both cases, we reject with a p-value less than 5 percent the

null hypothesis that the samples are drawn from a common distribution.

Full details and the results of the tests are provided in appendix 9.

   We provide further evidence consistent with an increase in adverse


                                      40
Figure 11: The distributions of imputed roundtrip costs by
industry vulnerability. The figure shows weekly distributions of imputed
roundtrip costs (IRC). The CLOs are separated into two groups that are determined
by the portfolio of loans held as collateral. Source: Authors' calculations from data
provided by TRACE, Moody's Analytics, Bloomberg LP, S&P, and Fitch.




selection during the pandemic using quantile regressions of IRC on

transaction prices (see Benmelech and Bergman (2018)). The dependent

variable IRCit is the imputed roundtrip cost of trading CLO tranche i on

day t, conditional on a trade taking place. Trading priceit is the weighted-

average price of the CLO tranche i on day t, where the weights are the

transaction volumes. Covidt takes the value 0 before March 1, 2020 and 1




                                        41
thereafter. The specification is given by:



  QIRCit ( |Covidt , Trading priceit ) = i + 1 ( )Covidt

                                     + 2 ( )Trading priceit

                                     + 3 ( )Covidt × Trading priceit ,     (2)



with quantile   {0.25, 0.5, 0.75} and where i is the CUSIP fixed effect.

Table 5 shows the results.

   Column 1 of table 5 shows that the negative correlation between the IRC

and the transaction price for AAA-rated CLOs is consistent with adverse

selection and the quantile regression reveals that the negative correlation

is stronger for more illiquid (higher IRC quantile) CLOs. Moreover, the 2

test of the null hypothesis of equality between the 25th and 75th percentile

coefficients on the interaction terms (Covidt ×Trading priceit ) indicates that

the negative correlation became stronger for those illiquid CLOs during

the pandemic. By contrast, column 2 of the same table shows that the

information sensitive E-class tranches did not experience the same shift. Of

course, these results cannot be interpreted causally because the pandemic

likely affected the liquidity of CLOs through several channels, not only

through the decline in prices. Nevertheless, the findings are consistent with

AAA-rated CLOs becoming information-sensitive during the pandemic.




                                     42
Table 5: Adverse selection in AAA-rated CLOs during the
pandemic ­ quantile fixed effect regression. This table shows there
was an increase in the negative correlation between the imputed roundtrip cost (IRC)
and the price of AAA-rated CLOs during the pandemic. The dependent variable is the
weighted average price of CLO tranche i on day t, where the weights are the transaction
volumes. Covidt takes the value 0 before March 1, 2020 and 1 thereafter. Column 1
includes only the CLO tranches rated AAA by at least one of the three main credit rating
agencies. The quantile fixed effect regressions are implemented using the penalized fixed-
effects estimation method proposed by Koenker (2004). Percentiles are indicated in the
square parentheses. Clustered bootstrapped standard errors (1,000 replications) are
implemented using the generalized bootstrap of Chatterjee and Bose (2005) with unit
exponential weights sampled for each individual CUSIP, and reported in parentheses.
Source: Authors' calculations from data provided by TRACE, Bloomberg LP., Moody's
Analytics, S&P, and Fitch.  p<0.01,  p<0.05,  p<0.1

                                           (1) AAA               (2) E

          [0.25]Covidt                       -120.56             -1.33
                                            (147.47)            (44.9)
          [0.25]Traded priceit              -3.26                -0.68
                                              (1.43)            (0.45)
          [0.25]Covidt × Traded priceit        1.18              -0.03
                                              (1.48)            (0.46)

          [0.5]Covidt                        38.67               62.82
                                            (161.16)            (49.86)
          [0.5]Traded priceit               -3.92                 -0.72
                                             (1.62)              (0.48)
          [0.5]Covidt × Traded priceit        -0.42               -0.75
                                             (1.61)              (0.52)

          [0.75]Covidt                      319.23               29.99
                                            (183.09)            (70.74)
          [0.75]Traded priceit              -4.94               -2.03
                                             (1.78)               (0.7)
          [0.75]Covidt × Traded priceit      -3.22                -0.46
                                             (1.83)              (0.72)

          CUSIP FE                                Y                Y
          Observations                          4,551            3,013


                            
          21 test statistic               13.22               0.44
          
           H0 : [0.25]Covidt ×Traded priceit = [0.75]Covidt ×Traded priceit




                                           43
6     CLOs during the Pandemic

During the pandemic, CLOs have continued to be issued.           But their

structure has been altered significantly to avoid adverse selection.     A

key issue is how much discretion the portfolio manager has to trade the

portfolio, meaning that loans go in and out (see Table 3). More trading

would require constant monitoring of new loans. As reported by Millar

(2020) "New issues were largely either static or had one-year reinvestment

periods in April..." In other words, the managerial discretion to alter the

portfolio has been significantly reduced. This shift is shown in Figure 12.

The dark shaded part of a bar is the number of CLOs that had a five-year

reinvestment period, i.e., the manager could trade the portfolio during the

first five years.

    Another key issue is how incentive compatible the manager's stake is in

the CLO. Deals have been restructured to decrease managerial discretion

and also to increase the incentives of managers not to engage in insider

trading of the sort J.P. Morgan warned about. Also, new deals are being

driven by affiliated equity (equity from elsewhere in the firm that is not

consolidated with the CLO managers). Small CLO managers do not have

access to affiliated equity and so cannot issue new CLOs. Only those with

reputation risk are able to issue, using affiliated equity.




                                      44
Figure 12: US CLO count by reinvestment period. The bar chart
shows the monthly count of newly-issued CLOs by the period over which managers
have reinvestment discretion. Source: Authors' calculations from data provided by S&P
Global Market Intelligence.




7     Concluding remarks

We traced the adverse selection dynamics in the CLO market, focusing

on AAA tranches, before and after the pandemic. When securities are

information-insensitive, it is not profitable to produce private information

about their fundamentals ex ante and everyone knows this. AAA CLO

tranches trade at par. Adverse selection is avoided. When AAA-rated

CLO tranches become information-sensitive, as they did in the pandemic,

uninformed traders are not prepared to produce information (see Hanson

and Sunderam (2013)). They had not invested in the technology to do so

(e.g., buying data, hiring analysts). The price of the security plummeted

in part because uninformed investors do not know what the price should

be. They face adverse selection. But informed investors do know what


                                        45
the price should be. The price goes down but the dispersion of prices goes

up because of the informed traders. In this paper we documented these

dynamics of adverse selection in the CLO market when the pandemic hit.

   Note that if it were an economy-wide shock that introduced a risk

premium for AAA-rated CLOs, then their prices would drop uniformly

and there would not be dispersion across CLOs. The information about

each CLO's exposure to vulnerable industries in the trustee reports is not

sufficient to explain the dispersion in prices. Importantly, it is one thing

to know the exposure and another thing to know how loans/industries

will perform. We showed in Figure 7 that there is dispersion in loan

prices within the vulnerable/not industries and we showed in Figure 9 that

there is price disagreement within the vulnerable/not industries. For these

reasons, we believe that investors are producing private information about

the loans held by CLOs. In normal times, investors don't produce this

private information.

   We used the variation in vulnerable/not industries to tease out further

evidence for adverse selection. The quantile regression (Table 4) showed

that only the lowest transaction prices for AAA-rated CLOs became

correlated with uncertainty about the vulnerable industries during the

pandemic. At the same time, the IRC increased more for those CLOs that

were heavily exposed to vulnerable industries. The combination of these

results is difficult to rationalize outside an environment where investors are


                                     46
producing private information.

   When adverse selection sets in, the market becomes less liquid in the

precise sense that the securities are information-sensitive; there is adverse

selection. Such price drops have often been referred to as "fire sales" or

"selling pressure". These notions seem to imply that there are no buyers

with available cash to invest, though no evidence has been shown that this

is the case. It would also seem to imply that all the prices should drop

more or less uniformly. We showed, contrary to these ideas, that the prices

drop and become more dispersed due to adverse selection.


References

Akerlof, George, "The Market for `Lemons': Quality Uncertainty and the
 Market Mechanism," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1970, 84, 488­500.

Bai, Jushan and Pierre Perron, "Computation and Analysis of Multiple
 Structural Change Models," Journal of Applied Econometrics, 2003, 18
 (1), 1­22.

Bao, Jack, Maureen O'Hara, and Xing Alex Zhou, "The Volcker
 Rule and Market-Making in Times of Stress," Journal of Financial
 Economics, 2018.

Benmelech, Efraim and Nittai Bergman, "Debt, Information,
 and Illiquidity," Working Paper 25054, National Bureau of Economic
 Research September 2018.

Brancati, Emanuele and Marco Macchiavelli, "The Information-
 Sensitivity of Debt in Good Times and Bad Times," Journal of Financial
 Economics, 2019, 133 (1), 99­112.




                                    47
Bruche, Max, Frederic Malherbe, and Ralf R Meisenzahl, "Pipeline
 Risk in Leveraged Loan Syndication," The Review of Financial Studies,
 03 2020.

Caballero, Ricardo, Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gour-
 inchas, "The Safe Assets Shortage Conundrum," Journal of Economic
 Perspectives, 2017, 31 (3), 29­46.

Chatterjee, Snigdhansu and Arup Bose, "Generalized Bootstrap for
 Estimating Equations," The Annals of Statistics, 2005, 33 (1), 414­436.

Choi, Jaewon and Yesol Huh, "Customer Liquidity Provision:
 Implications for Corporate Bond Transaction Costs," Finance and
 Economics Discussion Series 2017-116, Federal Reserve Board 2017.

Cici, Gjergji, Scott Gibson, and John Merrick, "Missing the Marks?
  Dispersion in Corporate Bond Valuations across Mutual Funds," Journal
  of Financial Economics, 2011, 101, 206­2262.

Dang, Tri Vi, Gary Gorton, and Bengt Holmström, "Ignorance,
 Debt and Financial Crises," Working Paper, Columbia University 2018.

  , , and , "The Information View of Financial Crises," Working Paper
  26074, National Bureau of Economic Research July 2019.

DeMarco, Laurie, Emily Liu, and Tim Schmidt-Eisenlohr, "Who
 Owns U.S. CLO Securities? An Update by Tranche," Technical Report,
 Federal Reserve Board June 2020.

Dick-Nielsen, Jens, "Liquidity Biases in TRACE," Journal of Fixed
 Income, 2009, 19 (2), 43­55.

  , Peter Feldhütter, and David Lando, "Corporate bond liquidity
  before and after the onset of the subprime crisis," Journal of Financial
  Economics, 2012, 103 (3), 471­492.

Feldhütter, Peter, "The Same Bond at Different Prices: Identifying
  Search Frictions and Selling Pressures," The Review of Financial Studies,
  2012, 25 (4), 1155­1206.



                                   48
Gallagher, Emily, Lawrence Schmidt, Allan Timmermann, and
 Russ Wermers, "Investor Information Acquisition and Money Market
 Fund Risk Rebalancing during the 2011-2012 Eurozone Crisis," Review
 of Financial Studies, 2020, 33 (4), 1445­1482.

Glosten, Lawrence and Paul Milgrom, "Bid, Ask and Transaction
 Prices in a Specialist Market with Heterogeneously Informed Traders ,"
 Journal of Financial Economics, 1985, 14, 71­100.

Gorton, Gary, "The history and economics of safe assets," Annual Review
 of Economics, 2017, 9 (1).

  , Stefan Llewellen, and Andrew Metrick, "The Safe Asset Share,"
  American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (3), 101 ­ 106.

Haddad, Valentin, Alan Moreira, and Tyler Muir, "When Selling
 Becomes Viral: Disruptions in Debt Markets in the COVID-19 Crisis and
 the Fed's Response," Working Paper 27168, National Bureau of Economic
 Research May 2020.

Hanson, Samuel and Adi Sunderam, "Are There Too Many
 Safe Securities? Securitization and the Incentives for Information
 Production," Journal of Financial Economics, 2013, 108, 565­584.

Johnson, Rick, Stanimir Markov, and Sundaresh Ramath, "Sell-
  Side Analysts," Journal of Accounting and Finance, 2009, 47, 91­107.

Kargar, Mahyar, Benjamin Lester, David Lindsay, Shuo Liu,
 Pierre-Olivier Weill, and Diego Zuniga, "Corporate Bond Liquidity
 During the COVID-19 Crisis," mimeo, 2020.

Koenker, Roger, "Quantile Regression for Longitudinal Data," Journal
 of Multivariate Analysis, 2004, 91 (1), 74­89.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, "The
 Aggregate Demand for Treasury Debt," Journal of Political Economy,
 2012, 120 (2), 233­267.

Liu, Emily and Tim Schmidt-Eisenlohr, "Who Owns U.S. CLO
  Securities?," Technical Report, Federal Reserve Board July 2019.


                                  49
Logan, Lorie, "The Federal Reserve's Recent Actions to Support the Flow
  of Credit to Households and Businesses," 2020. Speech at the Foreign
  Exchange Committee, FRB New York, New York City.

Millar, Luke, "CLO market remains resilient in Q3, though concerns
 persist," S&P Global, 2020.

Monnet, Cyril and Erwan Quintin, "Rational Opacity," Review of
 Financial Studies, 2017, 30, 4317­4348.

Nadauld, Taylor and Michael Weisbach, "Did Securitization Affect
 the Cost of Corporate Debt?," Journal of Financial Economics, 2012,
 105 (2), 332­352.

Perignon, Christophe, David Thesmar, and Guillaume Vuillemey,
 "Wholesale Funding Dry-Ups," Journal of Finance, 2018, 73, 575­617.

Powell, Jerome, "Business Debt and Our Dynamical Financial System,"
 2019. Speech at "Mapping the Financial Frontier: What Does the Next
 Decade Hold?", 24th Annual Financial Markets Conference, sponsored
 by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Amelia Island, Florida.

Sallerson, Peter, "CLO Deal & Manager Exposure Analysis by
  Industries Impacted Due to Coronovirus (COVID-19)," Moody's
  Analytics Research, March 2020.

van Binsbergen, Jules, William Diamond, and Marco Grotteria,
  "Risk-free Interest Rates," Working Paper 26138, National Bureau of
  Economic Research August 2019.

Wittenberg-Moerman, Regina, "The role of information asymmetry
 and financial reporting quality in debt trading: Evidence from the
 secondry loan market," Journal of Accounting and Economics, 2008, 44,
 240­260.




                                  50
8     Data appendix ­ For Online Publication

This appendix provides the details on data construction to replicate the

analysis in the paper.



8.1    Bloomberg

We begin our data construction using the asset-backed security Backoffice

data from Bloomberg.     We identify the universe of collateralized loan

obligations (CLOs) using the identifier " mtg_deal_typ" column in the

Backoffice data. Bloomberg provides cross-sectional information for every

tranche issed by each CLO, including CUSIP identifiers.



8.2    Regulatory TRACE

We use the CUSIP variable from the Bloomberg data to identify

individual transactions on CLO tranches in the Trade Reporting and

Compliance Engine (TRACE), created by the Financial Regulatory

Authority (FINRA).



8.3    Ratings

We also use the CUSIP variable from the Bloomberg data to identify ratings

actions by Moody's, S&P, and Fitch. Our rating information comes from

direct daily feed from Moody's, S&P, and Fitch that are added to the


                                   51
initial historical baseline refresh that cover every security in our sample.

The rating actions include when an agency places a tranche on watch to

forewarn investors of a potential change in rating.



8.4    Moody's loan-level data

We combine loan-level information about the CLOs in our analysis from

Moody's.    The majority of this information is obtained from monthly

trustee reports prepared by each CLO and processed by Moody's. In

addition, Moody's provides further information from pricing specialists

(e.g. Loanx and Reuters) and in-house assessments.

   We link the loan-level data to the other datasets using a cross-walk

provided by Moody's to the Bloomberg identifier " mtg_deal_name".



8.5    Barchart data

Download the seven sectors listed in the table below from the website

(https://www.barchart.com/stocks/sectors/rankings) and stack the

files in a single .csv file. Our measure of volatility is the difference between

the intra-day high and low log prices. We combine the seven sectors into

a single weighted-average measure of volatility in the vulnerable sectors,

where the weights are the volumes.




                                      52
Table 6: Mapping Moody's vulnerable sectors to Barchart
sectors. The table below provides the seven sectors we used to calculate
our measure of volatility.

 Moody's Sector             Barchart Sector
 Automotive                 Automobiles
 Consumer Goods: Durable    Consumer Goods: Durable Household Products
 Energy: Oil & Gas          Oil & Gas Producers
 Hotel, Gaming & Leisure    Hotels
 Retail                     Retail
 Transportation: Cargo      Industrial Transportation
 Transportation: Consumer   Transportation Services




                                   53
9     Additional results ­ For Online Publication

9.1    Testing the difference between IRC distributions

Figure 11 showed that the imputed roundtrip cost (IRC) of trading a CLO

depends on whether that CLO is more or less exposed to the industries

identified by Moody's as vulnerable to the pandemic shock. We formally

test this hypothesis using the Anderson-Darling and Kruskal-Wallis rank

tests for whether k samples are drawn from a common distribution. We

divide all the IRC observations in the month following the declaration of

the pandemic into two samples: Above and below the median market value

of loans in the CLO collateral pool. Table 7 reports that there were roughly

equal number of observations in the two samples.

    The left-hand panel and right-hand panels of Table 7 report the results

from the Anderson-Darling and Kruskal-Wallis tests, respectively. The

tables report both the asymptotic and simulated p-values, as well as two

versions of the Anderson-Darling test that differ in how they treat "ties" i.e.

identical values in a sample. In all cases, we can reject the null hypothesis

that the two samples are drawn from a common distribution at less than

5 percent.




                                     54
Table 7: Testing for significant differences between distributions
of imputed roundtrip costs by vulnerability. Panels A and B
show the results from Anderson-Darling and Kruskal-Wallis rank tests for
differences in two distributions of imputed roundtrip costs (IRC). The
two distributions are formed by separating CLOs into those above and
those below the median share of their market value that is exposed to the
industries identified by Moody's as vulnerable to the pandemic shock. We
calculate the exposure from the last trustee report prior to the pandemic.
Source: Authors' calculations from data provided by TRACE, Bloomberg
LP, and Moody's.

       (a) Anderson-Darling Test                  (b) Kruskal-Wallis Test

    Number of samples: 2                      Number of samples: 2
    Sample sizes: 314, 395                    Sample sizes: 314, 395
    Number of simulations: 10,000             Number of simulations: 10,000


                                 asympt.     sim. test       asympt.    sim.
                  AD     T.AD    p-value    p-value
                                                 statistic   p-value   p-value
    version 1:   3.967   3.908    0.009     0.00865.101       0.0239   0.0243
    version 2:   3.980   3.931    0.009     0.0087




                                       55
9.2   Loan transaction summary statistics without ramp-

      up period

This table repeats the analysis in Table 3 excluding the transactions

that occurred during the ramp-up period between the CLO closing date

and the completion of the initial portfolio purchases. Because the data

do not include a date for the end of the ramp-up period, we excluded

all transactions that occurred in the two months after a CLO's closing

date. The ramp-up period typically lasts one or two months, so this is a

conservative approach.16



9.3   Structural breaks in Class E CLO tranches

Figure 13 presents the structural breaks in both the AAA rated CLO

tranches (Panel A) and the Class E CLO tranches (Panel B). These results

complement the presentation of Panel A only in Figure 5. The Class E

tranches in Panel B are the most junior tranches that are debt. CLO

equity is junior to the Class E tranche and does not trade. The results

from the quantile fixed effects regression in Table 4 showed that Class E

tranches were information-sensitive prior to the pandemic.




 16
   https://www.pinebridge.com/insights/investing/2019/09/
clo-beyond-the-complexity


                                   56
Table 8: Loan transactions summary statistics. The table shows
summary statistics for leverage loan transactions per CLO in the pre-
pandemic period (January 1, 2020--March 1, 2020) and the pandemic
period (March 2, 2020--June 30, 2020). These summary statistics exclude
transactions in a CLO's ramp-up period by removing transactions in the
two months immediately after a CLO's closing date. The statistics are
provided for all leveraged loans and separately for the sectors that Moody's
identified as vulnerable to the pandemic shock. Source: Moody's Analytics.


Variable              Statistic     All transactions      Vulnerable sector    Non-vulnerable sector
(units)                           Pre    Post p-value    Pre   Post p-value    Pre    Post p-value

Number of sales       Mean        47.16 82.79      0     6.83 10.99      0     45.09 78.77      0
(per CLO)             SD          59.33 136.29     0     16.41 23.03     0     53.49 127.75     0
                      N           1,581 1,625             493   603            1,579 1,624

Mean sales value      Mean        0.80     0.72    1     0.57    0.53   0.82   0.81    0.73     1
($mn per CLO)         SD          0.76     0.78   0.1    0.64    0.62   0.25   0.76    0.79    0.08
                      N           1,581   1,625          493     603           1,579   1,624

Number of purchases Mean          62.66 102.43     0       6   12.73     0     58.79 94.8       0
(per CLO)           SD            63.55 146.42     0     13.52 29.2      0     55.96 130.94     0
                    N             1,549 1,592            1,001 961             1,549 1,591

Mean purchase value   Mean        1.16     0.84    1      1.1    0.77    1     1.17    0.85     1
($mn per CLO)         SD          0.91     0.86   0.01   1.01      1    0.37   0.92    0.86     0
                      N           1,549   1,592          1,001   961           1,549   1,591




                                                    57
Figure 13: Structural breaks in the standard deviation of CLO
prices. This figure shows the estimated structural breaks from applying
the method of Bai and Perron (2003) for identifying multiple structural
breaks in a single time series. For each tranche, we calculate a daily
weighted-average price, where the weights are transaction volumes. We
then calculate the standard deviation across tranches. The optimal
number of breaks to explain the time series is determined by the Bayesian
Information Criterion. The solid line is the standard deviation of daily
prices. The blue dot-dashed line is the fitted values of the regression
including the structural breaks. The vertical dashed lines are the locations
of the structural breaks. Source: Authors' calculations from data provided
by TRACE, FRED, and Bloomberg, LP.

             (a) AAA rated                       (b) Class E




                                    58
9.4    Attachment points


Figure 14: The distributions of AAA-rated CLO tranche
attachment point by CLO vintages for the current population
of CLO outstanding and the population of CLO traded in 2020.
Roughly half of the triple A CLO population is traded in 2020 (779 cusip
out of 1684 triple A are traded in 2020). Source: Authors' calculations from
data provided by Bloomberg LP, Fitch, Standard & Poor's and Moody's.




                                    59
