                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        RETAIL FINANCIAL INNOVATION AND STOCK MARKET DYNAMICS:
                     THE CASE OF TARGET DATE FUNDS

                                       Jonathan A. Parker
                                       Antoinette Schoar
                                           Yang Sun

                                      Working Paper 28028
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28028


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2020




For helpful comments, we thank Daniel Bergstresser, Stephen Cecchetti, Winston Dou, Richard
Evans, Joshua Goodman, Pierre Gourinchas, Blake LeBaron, Debarshi Nandy, Pegaret Pichler,
Jonathan Reuter, Clemens Sialm, and participants in seminars at Brandeis. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Jonathan A. Parker, Antoinette Schoar, and Yang Sun. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Retail Financial Innovation and Stock Market Dynamics: The Case of Target Date Funds
Jonathan A. Parker, Antoinette Schoar, and Yang Sun
NBER Working Paper No. 28028
October 2020
JEL No. G12,G23,G51

                                           ABSTRACT

The rise of Target Date Funds (TDFs) has moved a significant share of retail investors into
contrarian trading strategies that rebalance between stocks and bonds so as to maintain age-
appropriate portfolio shares. We show that i) TDFs actively rebalance within a few months
following differential asset-class returns to maintain stable portfolio shares, ii), this rebalancing
drives contrarian rebalancing flows across funds held by TDFs, iii) investors do not move funds
into or out of TDFs to offset these flows, and iv) these flows impact the prices of stocks. Across
otherwise similar stocks, those with higher (indirect) TDF ownership experience lower returns
after higher market-wide performance, a results that holds when looking only at variation in TDF
ownership driven by S&P index inclusion. Consistent with this price impact, the stock market
exhibits more reversion at the monthly frequency during the recent TDF era. Together, our results
suggest that continued growth in TDFs may affect return dynamics and the relation between
stock and bond returns.

Jonathan A. Parker                                Yang Sun
MIT Sloan School of Management                    Brandeis International Business School
100 Main Street, E62-642                          415 South Street MS032
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347                          Waltham, MA 02453
and NBER                                          yangs@brandeis.edu
JAParker@MIT.edu

Antoinette Schoar
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-638
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
aschoar@mit.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28028
    Over the past two decades, one of the most important financial innovations for people
investing their retirement saving has been the rise of target date funds (TDFs, also called life-
cycle funds). TDFs are designed to provide investors with an age-appropriate portfolio of
stocks and bonds that depends on the investor's expected retirement date ­ or `target date'
­ following the proscriptions of partial-equilibrium models of optimal portfolio choice.1
Thus, over time and as their investors age, a TDF slowly reduces risk by rebalancing
across asset classes, out of stocks and into bonds. More importantly for our purposes, to
maintain the age-appropriate share of stocks relative to bonds, TDFs actively rebalance
to undo changes in this share that are caused by differential returns across these asset
classes. Facilitated by the by the Pension Protection Act (PPA) of 2006, which qualified
TDFs as default options in defined contribution retirement saving plans, TDFs have risen
from managing less than $8 billion dollars in 2000 to more than $2.3 trillion dollars (of the
roughly $21 trillion in US mutual funds) in 2019.2
    This paper shows that, while possibly not an original intention of this financial in-
novation, TDFs have moved a significant fraction of US retail investors to an actively
`market-contrarian' trading strategy that trades against aggregate stock market momentum
and fluctuations. Traditionally, many retail investors are either passive ­ letting their port-
folio shares rise and fall with the returns on different asset classes ­ or they are active and
tend to reallocate their assets into asset classes or funds with better past performance, a be-
havior known as `positive feedback trading' or `momentum trading' that can amplify price
fluctuations.3 In contrast, by rebalancing to maintain age-appropriate asset allocations,
TDFs trade against excess returns in each asset class, stocks or bonds.
    We have three main findings. First, following high returns in an asset class, funds in that
asset class experience outflows in proportion to their TDF ownership shares, which reduces
the relationship between past fund performance and inflows to that fund. Importantly,
investors do not move funds into or out of TDFs to offset these flows. Second, stocks with
   1 Merton (1969), Viceira (2001), Cocco, Gomes, and Maenhout (2005) study the characteristics of the optimal

mix of stocks and bonds as people age. Campbell (2016) Section 5.1 discusses some of the benefits and pitfalls
of TDFs as a solution to the lifecycle portfolio problem.
   2 This number includes $0.9 trillion in target date collective investment trusts (CITs) which, for data reasons

are not in our analysis, but which presumably have similar market impact. CITs invest like TDFs but have
lower fees than the equivalent mutual funds. Dollar amounts are from Investment Company Institute (2020),
figures 2.2 and 8.20, and Morningstar (2020).
   3 Agnew, Balduzzi, and Sunden (2003) and Ameriks and Zeldes (2004) show widespread passivity of retail

investors in retirement accounts, and Calvet, Campbell, and Sodini (2009) and De Long et al. (1990) and
Hong and Stein (1999) discuss of the effects of momentum trading on stock returns.


                                                        1
higher TDF exposure (through the funds held by TDFs) have lower returns after higher
market performance, consistent with TDFs altering the return dynamics of individual
stocks. We show that this correlation appears to be driven by TDFs' price impact, and
is not simply the result of TDFs investing in stocks that have less exposure to market
momentum. Specifically, stocks included in the S&P 500 index have higher shares of TDF
ownership than otherwise similar stocks that are not included (e.g. for reasons of index
`balance' across industries). Consistent with price pressure from TDF rebalancing, we find
lower returns following high equity market returns for stocks included in the S&P Index
relative to similar stocks not in the Index. This return differential does not exists in previous
decades prior to the rise of TDFs. Finally, the time series momentum in the S&P 500 index
declines from the pre-TDF to the post-TDF period, a change that we speculate could by
partly due to the rise of TDFs dampening aggregate market fluctuation.
   We reach these findings by first confirming that the trading behavior of TDFs follows
their stated allocation strategies across asset classes. TDFs with different target dates have
different desired equity shares. A typical TDF allocates 80 to 90 percent of its assets to
diversified equity funds and the remainder to bond funds until 25 years before the target
retirement date, at which point the equity share typically starts to decline smoothly over
time to reach 30 to 40 percent 10 years after the target date. This variation implies different
trading behavior by different TDFs in response to market returns. Specifically, the amount
of rebalancing by a TDF is a quadratic function of the desired equity share. A fund with
a desired equity share of 50% is most sensitive to returns on the stock market. When the
stock market returns 20% more than the bond market, such a fund needs to convert 4.5% of
its portfolio from stocks to bonds. In contrast, a TDF invested entirely in one asset class or
the other would not have to rebalance at all. Importantly for our purpose, the share of its
assets that a TDF invests in each asset class depends only on the calendar year relative to
the target date, and so does not depend either on the composition of the market portfolio
or on past or expected future returns on different asset classes.
   Our first result is that TDFs rebalance across equity and fixed income mutual funds
within a few months and behave almost exactly as predicted by their desired equity shares
given realized asset returns. Using quarterly data on TDF holdings during 2008-2018, we
show that in quarters when the equity market returns exceed those on the bond market, the
average TDF sells some of its holdings of equity mutual funds and increases its holdings of


                                               2
fixed income mutual funds in the same quarter and in the following quarter. For each dollar
of rebalancing predicted by their strategies, the actual rebalancing in the current quarter is
50 cents and in the following quarter is (less precisely estimated) 45 cents, implying that
most rebalancing occurs within the first three months of a market movement.4 Consistent
with the quadratic relationship between desired equity share and required rebalancing,
we observe a greater magnitude of rebalancing in the group of TDFs with more equal
allocations between equity and bonds, i.e., equity shares between 25% and 75%. These are
also the TDFs that have most assets under management, since this asset allocation applies
to older people.
   Second, we show that the market-contrarian trading of TDFs is a quantitatively signifi-
cant part of equity fund flows. For an excess return on the stock market of 10% in a quarter,
the average equity mutual fund receives additional investment flows that increase its size
by 2.5% in that quarter. Using differences across funds in the degree of TDF ownership,
this relationship is reduced by one sixth for mutual funds with a 6% TDF ownership, which
is the mean percent held by TDFs among mutual funds with non-zero TDF ownership. At
the aggregate level, we estimate that TDF rebalancing offsets about 20% of this 'aggregate
trend-chasing' by retail investors in mutual funds in 2019. In sum, at both the individual
and aggregate level, flows to mutual funds in response to market returns are mitigated by
TDF contrarian trading.
   Our third result is that this contrarian trading by TDFs dampens the sensitivity of
individual stock returns to recent market performance. Given the share of each fund held
by TDFs and the stocks held by each funds, we calculate the (indirect) stock level holdings
of each TDF. Looking across all stocks, greater (indirect) TDF ownership is associated with
lower returns in the months following higher stock market returns. Specifically, when the
excess return of the equity asset class is 10% in a month, stocks with one standard deviation
(0.6%) higher share of TDF ownership have 0.24% lower return in the following month.
Given the size of the TDF sector, this is a large price effect. However, several pieces of
evidence suggest that this price impact is not driven by other characteristics of stocks that
are correlated with TDF ownership share. Specifically, our findings are unchanged when
   4 Based on our conversations with practitioners, in order to avoid any expected price impact being
exploited by arbitrageurs, TDFs do not employ fixed trading schedules and do not tightly adhere to target
allocations. While they maintain an allocation within a narrow band around the target allocation, many
funds make use of continuous inflows and outflows to rebalance through flow allocation when possible.



                                                   3
we measure the effect using only variation in TDF ownership for the same stock over time,
when comparing stocks only to others within the same industry (including stock fixed
effects and including month-by-industry fixed effects), and when controlling for risk factor
exposures. We also conduct a falsification test and find that there is no correlation between
(later) TDF ownership share and stock returns following aggregate market returns prior to
the PPA and so prior to the rise of TDFs.
    To provide further evidence on the price impact of rebalancing by TDFs, we show that
once stocks are included in the S&P 500 index they have a discretely higher TDF ownership.
Subsequently their momentum returns go down, i.e. their returns are less sensitive to
lagged market performance compared to otherwise similar stocks not included in the
index.5 Membership in the S&P 500 is set by an index committee based not only on a
set of eligibility criteria related to size but also on other considerations such as industry
balance. We assume that these other considerations are uncorrelated with the specific
return sensitivity to market performance other than through the trading of TDFs. Among
a set of (large-cap) stocks matched on industry, size and liquidity, being included in the
S&P 500 leads to a reduction in the stock return sensitivity to lagged market performance.
Following a 10% excess return on the stock market in a month, the index stocks have a 1%
lower return in the following month compared with similar non-index stocks. Again, a
falsification test finds no similar effect before the rise of TDFs.6
    Lastly, and most speculatively, our findings on fund flows and individual stock returns
raise the possibility that the market-contrarian strategies of TDFs that lead TDFs to sell
stock funds and buy bond funds following positive stock market returns actually affect
stock market prices and returns. Focusing on the S&P 500, there is a significant negative
time series correlation in monthly returns during 2010-2019 that is not present in the periods
1986-1995 or 1996-2005. As a rough calculation, if the value of the stock market decreases
by $5 when TDFs sell a dollars of the market, as Gabaix and Koijen (2020) estimate, then the
rise of TDFs can account for a tenth to a fifth of this change in the time-series momentum
of the stock market.
    Our findings have several implications. First, our estimates imply a large response of
   5 The S&P 500 index is a common benchmark for TDF-invested equity funds.
   6 While existing research has documented that index inclusion affects the price level of a stock (Shleifer,
1986) and its co-movement (Barberis, Shleifer, and Wurgler, 2005) with other stocks in the index, those effects
are present even in the earlier period, whereas the lowered momentum effect that we document is unique to
the TDF period.


                                                      4
market prices to the stock trading by TDFs. A back of the envelope calculation implies that
an increase of demand for a stock of 0.1% of its market capitalization by ETFs raises the
price by roughly 0.7%, which implies a price `multiplier' in the sense of Gabaix and Koijen
(2020) of 7 which is much larger than previous estimates, although these estimates are
based on changes in idiosyncratic demand for stocks. Our paper further implies that TDFs,
by trading across asset classes, reduce the price response to asset-class-specific changes in
demand from other sources. That is, TDFs lower price multipliers.
   Second, our results suggest that to the extent that momentum or other anomalies are
(or were) due to trend-chasing by retail investors, these anomalies may disappear (or may
have already) as more retail investor money follows market-contrarian strategies. A related
implication is that as TDF assets increase, they may lead to different anomalies or even to
persistent mis-pricing, because simple rebalancing rules of this type do not account for
changes in the market portfolio. Of course, TDFs may adopt more sophisticated strategies
and/or other investors may change their trading behavior in response.
   Finally, because TDFs actively re-balance between stocks and bonds, they add to co-
movement in returns between these markets. An implication of this is that TDFs propagate
movements in interests rates from bond markets to stock markets. Thus, TDFs automati-
cally transmit expansionary policies such as quantitative easing from the bond market to
the stock market.


Related Literature   Our paper builds on the previous literature documenting that mutual
fund flows can alter return dynamics and affect market volatility. Warther (1995) and
Edelen and Warner (2001) find a positive relationship between aggregate mutual fund
flows and concurrent monthly, weekly, or daily market returns. Da et al. (2018) uses defined
contribution pension data from Chile to show that asset allocation advice from a major
financial adviser significantly affects stock prices and increases return volatility. Coval
and Stafford (2007) demonstrates that flow-driven fire sales by mutual funds lead to a
price impact followed by a reversal, and Lou (2012) shows that the momentum effect
could be caused by a significant price impact of retail flows to mutual funds. Vayanos and
Woolley (2013) and Gabaix and Koijen (2020) develop models that show how changes in
asset demand can cause substantial price effects due to financial frictions. Our paper adds
causal evidence on price effects, focuses on contrarian rather than momentum trading, and


                                             5
ultimately on 'time series' rather than cross-sectional momentum.
     We also add to a smaller literature studying TDFs that measures the effect of retirement
plans, of retail financial advice, and of competition among funds on the rise of TDFs.
Mitchell and Utkus (2020), using data from one large 401(k) provider, shows that plan-level
features, such as auto-enrollment, are key drivers for adoption, and that the introduction
of TDFs into 401(k) plans makes a sizable impact on the portfolios of the adopters. Related,
Chalmers and Reuter (forthcoming) uses TDFs to construct counterfactual portfolios of
retail investors in absence of financial advice. On the competition in the TDF market,
Balduzzi and Reuter (2019) documents the dispersion in the risk and return profiles even
among TDFs with similar target retirement dates and attribute the heterogeneity to risk-
taking by market followers. Shoven and Walton (2020) shows that returns on lower-cost
TDFs tend to track their performance benchmarks, while returns on higher-cost TDFs tend
to under-perform their benchmarks. In this literature, our paper is the first to study the
impact of the TDF innovation on asset prices.



1      Target date funds
     While mutual funds have helped retail investors become more diversified, they mostly
hold only one asset class, such as domestic stocks or foreign bonds. In contrast, TDFs are
funds-of-funds that invest in domestic equity, foreign equity and fixed income mutual
funds. TDFs seek to maintain given portfolio shares in different asset classes, with the
shares based on the time to `target date.' TDFs typically start with a large desired share
of equity ­ on the order of 90 percent ­ until roughly 25 years before retirement, at which
point the desired equity share declines linearly over time to each roughly 40 percent ten
years after the target date. Figure A.1 presents the proscribed equity share over the life
cycle, or `glide path,' for the Vanguard TDF series (which have a roughly 40% market
share). Not only do TDFs have to rebalance as their target equity shares change over time,
but they have to rebalance in response to market movements to maintain their proscribed
shares of given asset classes.7
     The use of TDFs has risen dramatically over the past 15 years due to financial innovation
and financial regulation. As shown in Figure 1, total assets invested in TDFs increased
    7 See   Mitchell and Utkus (2020) for further details on TDFs.


                                                        6
from less than $8 billion dollars in 2000, to $109 billion at the end of 2006, and then rapidly
increased to $1.4 trillion at the end of 2019. TDFs with retirement years in 2020-2040 account
for the majority of this increase.
    The financial innovation that is TDFs followed from research by academics and prac-
titioner on the optimal lifecycle portfolio choice. The specific timing of the rise of TDFs
however follows the passage of the Pension Protection Act in August of 2006 which
qualified target-date funds to be used as default options (Qualified Default Investment
Alternative, or `QDIA') in 401(k) retirement saving plans. In 2019, $942 billion out of the
$1.4 trillion TDF assets are held in 401(k) plans (67%) and $260 billion are held through
IRAs (19%) (ICI Factbook, 2020, Figure 8.20).
    Most TDFs are structured as mutual funds or collective investment trusts (CITs). Accord-
ing to Morningstar estimates, total assets invested in CITs are about 60% of that invested
in target date mutual funds as of 2019 and are growing rapidly. The CITs are negotiated
between plan sponsors and providers and are usually at lower cost compared with TDFs.
We focus on target date mutual funds in this paper due to data availability and use TDFs to
refer to target date mutual funds exclusively. Since CITs follow almost identical strategies
as TDFs, we underestimate the investment of all target date strategies. Portfolio funds held
by TDFs include both open-end mutual funds and exchange-traded funds (ETFs). For the
simplicity of reference, we call both `mutual funds' henceforth.



2    Desired equity shares and TDF rebalancing
    This section shows that the amount of equity that a TDF must sell in response to a
positive excess return on the stock market is quadratic in its desired equity share with
a maximum at a 50% equity share. We first derive this result assuming no net flows to
the TDF. We then consider a general case of rebalancing with flow-driven trades (investor
purchase or redemption allocated pro rata to existing positions) and show that rebalancing
trades in these two cases are the same.
    Table 1 shows that TDFs rebalancing in response to excess stock market returns is
heterogeneous in desired equity share, S . Consider a TDF with $1 of assets, a target
weight of S invested in equity funds and a target weight of 1 - S invested in bond
funds. Further assume that the TDF is at target allocations at the beginning of the period


                                              7
and that the target shares do not change (move along the glide path) by the period end.
Assume no investor flows (panel A). Following equity and bond asset returns of R E and
R B respectively, the total portfolio value is 1 + R B + S R E - R B (column 1). To restore
the original asset allocation, the TDF needs to bring the equity and bond fund values to
 1 + R B + S R E - R B    S and 1 + R B + S R E - R B       (1 - S ) respectively (column 2).
Thus, the TDF needs to sell the equity fund in the amount of -S (1 - S ) R E - R B , and
buy the bond fund in the amount of S (1 - S ) R E - R B (column 3). The two rebalancing
trades sum up to zero in dollar amounts due to zero net flows. The important result is that
the amounts of trading is quadratic in desired equity share, with a maximum at an equity
share of 50%.
   Panel B considers the case of rebalancing when the TDF receives a net flow of F from
investors following the returns. In this case, the total portfolio value becomes 1 + R B +
S R E - R B (column 1) and the fund then receives a net flow of F. Following the same
procedure as in Panel A, we calculate the desired holding as shares S and 1 - S of the
total value of the fund including fund flows (column 2), and the necessary total net trades
to restore that allocation (column 3). As shown in column 4, for the purpose of allocating
net flows only, the TDF only needs to allocate new flows to asset classes in proportion to its
desired holdings by buying FS in equity (or selling - FS if F < 0) and F (1 - S ) in fixed
income. Subtracting these flow-driven trades from the total net trades, we can back out the
rebalancing trades, which are the same as those in panel A, and thus are also quadratic
with a with a maximum at an equity share of 50%. It is important to note that while TDFs
experiencing inflows or redemptions can rebalance through allocating the flows, the net
effect of TDF trades on asset demand is still given by Table 1 panel B.
   One issue that affects our analysis is that TDFs do not rebalance continuously to
maintain their desired equity share exactly. In fact, according to conversations with asset
managers (confirmed in our later findings), they tend to trade back to their desired equity
shares over a month or two in order to reduce transaction costs relative to more exact
tracking of their targets. This savings from slower adjustment can be substantial if inflows
allow rebalancing purely from re-directing purchases. As shown in Panel B, as long as
FS - S (1 - S ) R E - R B has the same sign as F (that is, R E - R B is small relative to
F, a case that is more prevalent for large TDFs), rebalancing can be achieved simply by
allocating the net flows to new positions instead of adjusting existing positions.


                                              8
    In our subsequent analysis, we focus on rebalancing trades (as in panel A) but also
report results for total trades (as in panel B). We focus on rebalancing trades because they
do not include trades driven automatically by auto-enrollment, incomes, auto-escalation,
withdrawals, and menu choice decisions that change flows over time. Rebalancing trades
also omit flows to and from TDFs, and so do not include potentially spurious co-movement
between these flows and market returns such as from the trend of positive inflows to
TDFs the strong average performance of the stock market and economy. However, we
also present results for total trades which represent the net change in demand for assets
through TDFs, with the caveat that total trade measures can potentially be biased and noisy.
In practice we find similar point estimates with both measures, consistent with investors
in TDF funds not actively rebalancing in response to market movements. However, the
estimates for total flows are less statistically significant, consistent with the greater noise
in this series. This lack of active investor flows to and from TDFs is consistent with
existing evidence that the vast majority of TDF assets are held through defined contribution
retirement plans and IRAs where switching decisions by investors are infrequent. For
example, Mitchell and Utkus (2020) demonstrates that most flows in and out of TDFs are
explained by plan sponsor actions combined with passive plan participant behavior rather
than past returns. In addition, in our conversations with practitioners, they believe that
investors defaulted into TDFs are less likely to trade in response to market movements
than those defaulted into other types of funds.



3    Data
    We construct a dataset of TDFs, the underlying mutual funds they hold, and, the
individual stocks held by TDFs through these underlying mutual funds.
    At the TDF level, we obtain fixed characteristics and quarterly total net assets (TNA)
from the CRSP Mutual Fund Database. TDFs in the database are identified from fund
names containing target retirement years at five-year intervals ranging from 2000 to 2065,
then manually cleaned using the TDF series names listed in the Morningstar annual TDF
research reports.
    We obtain the quarterly holdings of the TDFs from CRSP. TDFs are funds of funds, thus
most holdings are other mutual fund share classes, which we link to the CRSP mutual


                                              9
fund database using the CUSIP code. We use this matching to categorize each holding as
domestic equity, foreign equity, or fixed income. The match or data do not appear to be
perfect, and we drop a few observations where the value of a holding is larger than the
total asset size of the mutual fund share class, or where the sum of holdings exceeds 110%
of the TNA of the TDF. Further, the quality and coverage of the CRSP holdings data vary
across time and are problematic for several quarters. Figure A.2 plots the aggregate total
value of TDF holdings that can be mapped to mutual fund share classes, and as a reference,
it also shows the total assets under management of TDFs over time. We base the sample
selection on the ratio of total holdings to total assets and restrict the main sample period to
2008Q3-2018Q4.8 We also drop the holding data in quarters 2010Q2, 2010Q3 and 2015Q2
due to unusually low ratio of holdings to total assets that can indicate data errors. The
quarters immediately following these are subsequently excluded when lagged holdings
are used as an input into calculations. Further, we exclude small TDFs with TNA below $
10 million.
   Table 2 panel A presents the summary statistics on the TDFs in our sample. The mean
asset size is $ 2.2 billion while the median is $ 276 million, implying a high degree of market
concentration. Each TDF on average holds 16 mutual funds. The average equity weight
is 73% , out of which 49% is in domestic equity and 24% in foreign equity, and the fixed
income weight is 27% . The fund flow rate to TDFs suggests high growth during this period
­ the average TDF grows by 6% per quarter from net inflows.
   To measure the effect of TDFs on funds, we also construct a quarterly dataset on the
underlying mutual funds from CRSP. We combine different share classes of the same fund
to the fund level. We focus on domestic equity mutual funds that can be classified as retail,
that is, those where the fraction of assets invested through retail share classes is above 50%.
For each mutual fund, we calculate the percent ownership by TDFs as the sum of TDF
holdings across all share classes of the fund divided by the total fund size.
   Table 2 panel B shows the mutual funds' summary statistics. The average mutual fund
experiences a quarterly inflow at 1.3% of lagged assets, while the median fund experiences
an average quarterly outflow of 1.7%. The sample average of TDF ownership is low (0.5%)
due to many zeros (only 8% of mutual fund quarterly observations have positive TDF
   8 Thevalue of available holdings as a fraction of total assets rises from 60% in 2008Q1 to 80% in 2008Q2
and stays around 80% afterwards. We start the sample in 2008Q3 to allow one quarter of lagged TDF holdings
data.


                                                    10
ownership). Among the mutual funds which TDFs invest in, the mean TDF ownership is
6.4% and the median is 1%.
    Lastly, we assemble a panel dataset of monthly stock return, price, volume and market
capitalization from CRSP, and S&P 500 membership from Compustat, the summary statis-
tics of which are presented in panel C of Table 2. The sample contains stocks traded on
the New York Stock Exchange, NASDAQ, and American Stock Exchange. Roughly 18% of
the stock-monthly observations represent S&P 500 stocks. We calculate stock-level TDF
ownership as the total fraction of shares outstanding that are held by TDFs through mutual
funds. Quarterly mutual fund holdings data are from Thomson Reuters which are linked
to the CRSP mutual fund dataset using MFLINKS. The average TDF ownership is 0.54%.
We will show in Section 6 that significant variation exists in TDF ownership across stocks,
which we then employ to estimate the impact of TDFs on stock return dynamics.
    Finally, we measure the return on stocks as an asset class, R E , as the value weighted
total return of the US stock market obtained from CRSP, and the return on on bonds as an
asset class, R B , as the pre-fee return on the Vanguard Total Bond Market Index Fund.9



4     TDF rebalancing
    While TDF providers sell age-appropriate portfolios as a key product feature, some
TDFs might also be pursuing other cross-asset class strategies such as momentum or market
timing, and so their trades might be no different than those of any other fund. This section
establishes that TDFs in fact do rebalance to their desired equity shares as in Table 1, and
that they do so within two quarters of a market movement.
    We use our panel dataset of holdings at the TDF-by-mutual-fund-share-class level to
calculate rebalancing trades in equity and fixed income by TDF k in quarter t in three steps.
First, we calculate the dollar amount of the `total trade' for each pair of TDF and fund share
class as the change in the value of holdings in excess of the value predicted by the quarterly
share class return, that is, TotalTradeckt = MVckt - MVckt-1 (1 + rct ) where k indicates the
TDF, c stands for a mutual fund share class, and t represents a quarter. The calculation
          the US stock market return to approximate for the return of the equity asset class R E introduces
    9 Using

measurement errors when a fraction of the TDF holdings is in foreign equity. We have verified that our
rebalancing results are similar if we calculate a weighted average R E based on the weights in domestic equity
and foreign equity. Since the focus of this paper is to understand the return dynamics in the US stock market,
we present the results only using the US stock market returns as R E .

                                                     11
includes the cases of investment initiations (where MVckt-1 = 0) and terminations (where
MVckt = 0). Second, we aggregate the observations from each holding to the TDF-by-
                                                  y
asset-class level and obtain TotalTradekt where y stands for either the equity (E) or the
fixed income ( B) asset class.10 Third, we calculate the `flow-driven trade' by a TDF of an
asset class as the dollar flow to the TDF allocated pro rata to lagged portfolio weight of
the asset class (as in Frazzini and Lamont, 2008).11 We calculate `rebalancing trade' from
                                  y                   y                          y
the difference: Rebalancingkt = TotalTradekt - FlowDrivenTradekt .12 To match the setup in
Table 1, where the total assets of the TDF are assumed to be one dollar, we normalize the
dollar rebalancing trades by the lagged total dollar holdings of the TDF.
    Our first exercise focuses on the directions of rebalancing and tests whether the average
TDF sells equity funds and buys fixed income funds when the stock market goes up relative
to the bond market, and vice versa. Since rebalancing can be implemented with a delay, we
estimate the following specifications with both the current quarter and the lagged quarter's
asset returns:

                            E
                 Rebalancingkt = E RE - RB                     +  E RE - RB           + i +   E
                                                                                              kt              (1)
                                                           t                   t -1
                            B
                 Rebalancingkt = B RE - RB                     +  B RE - RB           + i +   E
                                                                                              kt              (2)
                                                           t                   t -1


where we include TDF fixed effects, i , to account for the different and unknown desired
equity shares of different TDFs.
    Table 3 present the estimates of equations (1) and (2) using quarterly rebalancing at the
individual TDF-by-asset-class level during 2008-2018. Panel A, columns 1 and 4 use the
entire sample of TDFs. The coefficient on ( R E - R B )t suggests that if the equity market
moves up (down) by 10% in excess of the bond market in a quarter, the average TDF sells
(buys) equity funds by 0.8% of the lagged portfolio value in the same quarter and buys
(sells) fixed income funds by 0.6% of the lagged portfolio value at the same time. The
coefficients on ( R E - R B )t-1 further imply that the rebalancing continues in the following
  10 We  combine both domestic equity and foreign equity into equity, because most glide paths are based on
an equity-fixed income allocation without specifying separate weights for the domestic­foreign allocation.
   11 We follow the formula commonly used in the literature to impute net fund flows: DollarFlow
                                                                                                              kt =
TN Akt - TN Akt-1 (1 + rkt ), where TN Akt is the total net assets of TDF k in quarter t and rkt is the net return
of the TDF.
   12 Because funds can trade continuously and one can observe portfolio holdings only at discrete (quarterly)

intervals, the formulae in Table 1 are only approximations. We are assuming all rebalancing trades are made
at the end of each period after returns are realized and before the fund reports its portfolio.


                                                          12
quarter. However, the delayed effect has lower statistical significance, suggesting that the
most concentrated action of TDF rebalancing occurs during the quarter of the return.
   A further prediction from Table 1 relates to the cross-sectional heterogeneity across
TDFs. The magnitude of the predicted rebalancing trade S (1 - S )( R E - R B ) is a concave
quadratic function of the target equity share S . Thus, for a given R E - R B , the expected
rebalancing should be greater for TDFs with equity shares close to the vertex, or 0.5. In
columns 2-3 and 5-6, we split the TDF sample by equity share, and expect that the group
with equity share in the range between 0.25 and 0.75 (which we call `moderate allocation
TDFs') to exhibit greater rebalancing than the group with equity share either below 0.25
or above 0.75 (`conservative or aggressive allocation TDFs'). Since we do not observe the
target equity shares, we classify funds based on the observed equity shares at t - 1, or
St-1 . The results are consistent with this prediction: For an equity market return that
exceeds the fixed income market by 10%, the TDFs with moderate allocations on average
sell equity holdings by 1.2% of portfolio value, significant at the 0.01 level, while TDFs with
conservative or aggressive allocations sell equity holdings by 0.4%, which is statistically
insignificant. In addition, the rebalancing by the latter group appears more delayed
compared with the former group. At the bottom of panel A, we report the cumulative
effect which is still stronger for the TDFs with moderate allocations. An explanation is that
the same magnitude of equity market shock throws the TDFs with moderate allocations off
their glide paths by more and that is more likely to exceed the TDF manager's discretion.
   Table 3 panel B presents the effect of rebalancing on TDF trades at the aggregate level.
The aggregate estimate puts higher weights on larger TDFs. The result suggests stronger
rebalancing in response to current quarter performance compared with panel A and implies
that larger TDFs rebalance at higher frequency than smaller TDFs do, consistent with their
rebalancing through flow allocations. We also observe more equal magnitudes in the
trading of equity and bond funds in panel B, which indicates that larger TDFs adhere closer
to the rebalancing formula. We can consider the magnitudes of these effects in the context
of the total asset size under management by in the TDF market. Given the $2.3 trillion as
the total asset size invested in target date strategies (including both TDFs and target date
CITs) at the end of 2019, the estimate in panel B column 1 suggests that TDFs on aggregate
should purchase around $81 billion (0.16 × 22% × 2300) of equity funds and sell around the
same amount of bond funds in the first two quarters of 2020 as the stock market dropped


                                              13
by around 22% relative to the bond market in 2020Q1.
   In Table 4, we compare the actual rebalancing with the predicted values by estimating
the following equations based on Table 1:

           E
Rebalancingkt =  E Skt-1 (1 - Skt-1 ) R E - R B              +  E Skt-1 (1 - Skt-1 ) R E - R B           +   E
                                                                                                             kt
                                                         t                                        t -1
           B         B                        E      B           B                      E     B              E
Rebalancingkt    =  Skt-1 (1 - Skt-1 ) R - R                 +  Skt-1 (1 - Skt-1 ) R - R                 +   kt
                                                         t                                        t -1


where Skt-1 measures (possibly with error) the desired equity share of TDF k. The in-
dependent variables S(1 - S)( R E - R B ) in t and t - 1 are the predicted magnitude of
rebalancing in the current and subsequent quarter respectively. Immediate rebalancing
predicts  E = -1 and  B = 1, and  E = 0 and  B = 0. However, the estimates,  E and  B ,
may be closer to zero for several reasons. First, rebalancing may not be immediate. TDFs
may rebalance with a time lag, for example to save costs by re-allocating inflows until the
desired equity share is reached. The lagged terms, St-1 (1 - St-1 )( R E - R B )t-1 , allow for
and measure such delayed adjustment. If complete adjustment occurs withing the two
quarters, then  and  should sum to one. Second, due to the cost of rebalancing, a TDF
manager may allow the portfolio weights deviate from the target without intervention,
especially when the market movement is small.13 Third, we approximate the desired equity
share by St-1 , with the observed lagged equity share. If the observed share at t - 1 is not
equal to the desired share or if the desired allocation changes as proscribed by the glide
path, then St-1 measures the true desired equity share with noise. These three reasons for
measurement error suggest that our estimates of  and  may be attenuated and so may
sum to less than one.
   Table 4 panel A uses TDF level data and shows that  E is about 0.5, suggesting that
for each dollar of predicted rebalancing, the actual rebalancing is about 50 cents in the
current quarter. The estimated fraction of predicted rebalancing done in the subsequent
quarter is about 45 cents per dollar, but is not be precisely estimated. The sum of the
coefficients (reported in `cumulative effect') is below one, but quite close to one. When
we split TDFs by the target equity weight, we find that the group of moderate allocation
TDFs follow the formula more closely than the rest do. The same result is seen in panel
  13 That
        is, if there is inertia driven by fixed costs of adjustment, partial adjustment models such as ours
tend underestimate adjustment.



                                                    14
B estimated with aggregate data. This pattern is consistent with TDFs not responding to
small deviations from desired equity shares since TDFs with extreme desired equity shares
see only small movements away from their target allocations for the same asset market
fluctuations, making rebalancing less important.



5    The Effect of TDFs on net flows to equity mutual funds
    Section 4 illustrates that TDFs trade against market movements. In this section, we look
across equity mutual funds with different levels of TDF ownership to measure how these
TDF trades influence total retail fund flows, both at the level of the mutual fund and at the
level of the entire market.
    We base our analysis on the hypothesis that, because of TDF rebalancing, mutual funds
with high TDF ownership receive lower net inflows following good returns in their asset
class relative to mutual funds in the same asset class with low TDF ownership. To focus
on retail investor behavior, we restrict our sample to mutual funds with the majority of
assets held through retail share classes. Using quarterly data at the mutual fund level from
2008Q3-2018Q4, we estimate the following specification


FundFlow jt =  1 ExcessEquityRett +  2 ExcessEquityRett × Frac.TDFjt-1 +  3 ExcessEquityRett-1
            +  4 ExcessEquityRett-1 × Frac.TDFjt-1 + Frac.TDFjt-1 + X jt +     jt         (3)


where the dependent variable is the fund flow rate for mutual fund j in quarter t measured
as the growth rate in assets in excess of the realized net fund return. We allow flows to
respond to both the current quarter and the lagged quarter's asset class performance in
proportion to the fraction of their shares owned by TDFs. The coefficients of interest are
those on the two interaction terms which measure the contemporaneous (  2 ) and lagged
(  4 ) effect of greater TDF ownership on fund flows following a positive return on the asset
class of the fund. Our hypothesis, based on TDF trading behavior, is that  2 and  4 are
negative.
    We explore two versions of the excess equity returns for the following reason. While
TDF trades respond to the difference between U.S. stock and bond market returns, R E - R B ,
retail flows to equity mutual funds may react to different aggregate performance metrics,


                                             15
such as simply stock market performance. Thus, we examine the response not just to,
R E - R B , which is the right measure for TDFs trades, but also to R E - R f , which may be
the right measure of retail investor flows.14
    To measure TDF ownership, we calculate the fraction of the mutual fund's assets that
are held by TDFs at the end of the previous quarter. Control variables X jt include fund
characteristics that have previously been found to affect fund flows, specifically fund size,
fund family size, fund age, expense ratio, and return volatility. To allow for the correlations
in errors in cross sections and within the same fund over time, we cluster standard errors
two-ways by time and fund.
    Column 1 of Table 5 presents the estimates of equation (3) using the excess return,
R E - R B , as our measure of returns. Fund flows significantly chase equity asset class
returns. For an equity mutual fund that is not held by TDFs, an R E - R B of 10% leads to
a higher net flow at about 2.5% of the lagged size of the fund in the contemporaneous
quarter and an additional 0.75% in the following quarter relative to when R E - R B is zero.
The coefficients on the interaction terms with TDF ownership (  2 and  4 ) suggest that the
trend-chasing relationship is significantly reduced for funds with TDF ownership. For
example, if 6% of a mutual fund's assets are held by TDFs (the mean in the subsample with
positive TDF investment), the contemporaneous return-chasing tendency is reduced by
about one sixth (0.645×0.06/0.250  16%).15 In column 2, we replace the variables that
vary only with time with time fixed effects. The coefficients on the interaction terms with
TDF ownership shrink slightly but remain economically and statistically significant. Retail
flows to mutual funds are related to their ownership by TDFs as predicted.
    In columns 3-4 of Table 5, we measure the excess equity return as the return of the
equity market less the risk-free rate. The estimates are quite similar as those in columns 1-2
and imply that TDF investment reduces the individual fund flow sensitivity to the stock
market excess return. For this reason and because common asset pricing tests are based on
  14 The mutual fund flow literature has largely focused on the within asset-class abnormal performance.
On cross-sectional raw return or market-adjusted return, see Chevalier and Ellison (1997), Sirri and Tufano
(1998), Bergstresser and Poterba (2002). On asset-pricing model adjusted return, see Barber, Huang, and
Odean (2016) and Berk and van Binsbergen (2016). On the role of rating agencies, see Del Guercio and Tkac
(2008), Evans and Sun (forthcoming) and Ben-David et al. (2019). Studies on the flow sensitivity to asset class
performance are fewer. Cooper, Gulen, and Rau (2005) and Greenwood and Nagel (2009) show that investors
respond to hot investment styles (subsets of the equity asset class), which impacts fund strategies. Bailey,
Kumar, and Ng (2011) shows that trend-chasing is correlated with proxies for investor biases.
  15 Fund flows are negative following a positive excess return on the stock market for funds with TDF

ownership exceeding 38%, which applies to only 0.25% of the observations.


                                                     16
excess returns over the risk-free rate, we focus on the sensitivity of stock returns to past
market excess returns in the subsequent section, but our results are similar if we instead
examine the sensitivity to R E - R B which is the variable directly implied by our model.
    Are these fund-level flows important for aggregate flows to and from the stock market
through mutual funds? We calculate the total dollar net flow to each fund by all retail
investors as the increase in assets above the level implied by that fund's return, TN At -
TN At-1 (1 + rt ) where rt is the net quarterly return of the share class. In cases where TDFs
also invest in retail share classes, we deduct those TDF trades from retail flows. We sum all
such flows into or out of all retail share classes of all U.S. domestic equity mutual funds
to construct a measure of aggregate retail investor trades as follows. We compare these
aggregate flows with aggregate TDF trades measured as the aggregate dollar rebalancing
trades by TDFs in domestic equity funds.16
    Excess returns on the stock market in a quarter are associated with increased inflows to
domestic equity funds by retail investors, but to significant outflows from domestic equity
funds by TDFs. Figure 2 shows these contrarian flows by plotting the aggregate dollar
amounts of retail flows (Panel A) and TDF flows (Panel B) to and from domestic equity
funds by quarter along with the concurrent excess stock market return over the bond
market, R E - R B . TDF rebalancing trades in domestic equity funds move in the opposite
direction as R E - R B . The different right-hand-side scales on the two Panels which differ
by a factor of 5, suggesting that TDFs offset roughly a fifth of retail investor flows.17
    To more precisely quantify the relative magnitudes of trend-chasing trades by retail
investors and the market-contrarian trades by TDFs, we regress aggregate retail and TDF
flows in quarter t, normalized by their respective assets under management in quarter
t - 1, on the return difference between equity and fixed income ( R E - R B ) in both quarter
t and quarter t - 1.18 Table 6 panel A shows that TDF rebalancing, especially by those
  16 Note  that the aggregate time series for TDF rebalancing analyzed here are slightly different from the
rebalancing trades in equity studied in Table 3. Here we sum up only the trades in domestic equity mutual
funds while Table 3 includes the trades in foreign equity also.
   17 Figure 2, panel A also suggests that retail flows are negative in most quarters during the sample period,

consistent with Boyson (2019), which documents that dual-registered investment advisers have converted
clients' investments from retail share classes to institutional share classes since 2007. We present an alternative
version of Figure 2 in Figure A.3, where we combine flows through retail and institutional share classes. Our
result remains unchanged that the retail/institutional mutual fund flows are trend-chasing, while TDFs are
contrarian.
   18 The regressions estimate a constant term which is omitted from the table. Standard errors are estimated

using the Huber-White heterokedasticity-consistent approach.


                                                       17
TDFs with moderate equity shares, offsets a significant fraction of the trend-chasing in
retail mutual fund flows. When the excess return, R E - R B , is 10%, net aggregate flows to
equity mutual funds through retail investors is 1.2% higher than the baseline, measured as
a fraction of lagged assets held by this investor type (column 1). Meanwhile, TDF trades
of equity mutual funds out of rebalancing is 0.9% lower, measured as a fraction of lagged
asset size of TDFs (column 2).
    To interpret these results in dollar amounts, we can apply these flow ratios to the assets
outstanding in retail share classes and TDFs in 2019. According to our calculation, the total
asset size of retail share classes of domestic equity mutual funds is at $5 trillion in the fourth
quarter of 2019, and the total asset size managed by TDFs is at $1.4 trillion. Therefore, for
a 10% excess performance of the equity market, retail flows are $60 billion(=5000×1.2%)
higher than the baseline, but TDF rebalancing trades are $12 billion(=1400×0.9%) lower,
thereby offsetting about 20% of the trend-chasing tendency of retail flows in the same
quarter as the realized asset class returns. The cumulative effects ­the sum of the two
quarters effect reported in the final row of the Table ­ further suggest that TDF rebalancing
trades offset (1400 × 20.7%)/(5000 × 13.6%) = 42% of the retail flows by the end of the
following quarter.
    An important point is that these TDF trades are not offset by investors buying and
selling TDFs in a pattern related to past returns. In Panel B of Table 6, we replicate Panel A
but, in columns 2-4, we include in TDF trades any active movement by retail investors into
and out of TDFs rather than just their rebalancing trades. Overall, TDF net flows including
flow-driven trades from TDF investors is less contrarian in the concurrent quarter, and
columns 3-4 suggest this is mainly driven by the TDFs with more extreme desired equity
shares.19 The cumulative effects, on the other hand, show similar magnitudes as those in
panel A, but with more noise. Thus, even including investor flows into and out of TDFs, the
behavior of total TDF trades differ significantly from that of retail flows and is contrarian.
In the next section 6.3 we investigate whether this contrarian trading by TDFs alters applies
flow-driven price pressure on the underlying assets and affects stock returns.
  19 This could be because these investors are more active or because of a correlation between TDF investments

by young investors corresponding with periods of relatively strong stock market growth.




                                                     18
6       TDF ownership and stock returns
      In this section, presents evidence that the contrarian trading of TDFs that we have
documented impacts stock prices and returns. The first subsection documents two major
determinants of stock ownership by TDFs: their size as measured by their market capital-
ization and whether they are included in the S&P 500 index. The second subsection shows
that stocks with high actual or expected TDF ownership exhibit lower `market momentum'
or sensitivity to recent market performance, in that they generate lower returns after market
rises, consistent with TDF rebalancing putting downward price pressure on the stocks
that they hold following high stock returns. Note that our notion of market momentum
is with respect to recent market performance, and so is different from the cross-sectional
momentum that is widely documented in the literature, which refers to the phenomenon
that cross-sectional winner stocks are likely to continue outperforming in the medium term
(as in Jegadeesh and Titman, 1993, 2001).20 Note further that the cross-sectional pattern of
market momentum could be driven by other characteristics correlated with TDF ownership
(e.g. factors correlated with size) rather than by trading by TDFs. So, in the last subsection
of this section, we show that we find a reduced momentum for stocks included in the S&P
index relative to similar stocks that are not and for stocks when they are included the index
relative to when they are not.


6.1         Determinants of TDF ownership
      We begin by documenting the distribution of TDF ownership across stocks in order to
identify the set of stocks that are most affected by TDF rebalancing. Given the demand for
low fees by plan fiduciaries and the common usage of broad-market-based low-cost funds
such as S&P 500 index funds in TDF portfolios, we expect size to be a main factor affecting
stock-level TDF ownership.21
      Figure 3 examines the relationship between TDF ownership and market capitalization.
We measure TDF ownership at the stock level as TDFpctit =  jk aijt b jkt for stock i in quarter
    20 Infocusing on the sensitivity of stock returns to recent aggregate market (or more precisely, the aggregate
TDF portfolio) performance, our study is more similar to the `time series momentum' documented in
Moskowitz, Ooi, and Pedersen (2012).
   21 In 2013, DOL issued a set of tips to plan fiduciaries for the selection of TDFs, which include an empha-

sis on low fees. See https://www.dol.gov/sites/dolgov/files/EBSA/about-ebsa/our-activities/resource-
center/fact-sheets/target-date-retirement-funds.pdf


                                                       19
t where aijt is the fraction of stock i held by mutual fund j and b jkt is the fraction of mutual
fund j held by TDF k and take the average market capitalization and TDF ownership during
our sample 2008Q3-2018Q4 for each stock. Figure 3 panel A plots the equal-weighted and
value-weighted average TDF ownership by these market-cap deciles and shows that TDF
ownership is the highest among the top four deciles of stocks, where the TDF ownership is
three times the level of the other deciles. In panel B, we provide a two-way histogram on the
joint distribution between market capitalization and TDF ownership. While confirming a
positive correlation between the two variables, panel B also illustrates that TDF ownership
is not perfectly co-linear with size, which we later exploit to estimate the effect of the TDFs
that is separate from a size effect. Further, we later hypothesize that rule- or index-based
investment strategies of TDFs may contribute to the dispersion in TDF ownership among
stocks of similar size.
   Now we rely on regression analysis to confirm the result from Figure 3. Table 7 estimates
the determinants for TDF ownership using observations at the stock-by-quarter level. The
dependent variable is the time varying indirect TDF ownership, calculated by TDFpctit =
 jk aijt b jkt where aijt is the fraction of stock i held by mutual fund j in quarter t, and b jkt is
the fraction of mutual fund j held by TDF k. TDFpctit is expressed in percentages. First,
we examine the dispersion in TDF ownership across all stocks. Column 1 controls for
time fixed effects but no stock fixed effects, thus focusing on the cross-sectional dispersion
in TDF investment. The result suggests that a 10% increase in size (measured by market
capitalization) is associated with a 1.2 basis point increase in the stock-level TDF ownership.
In column 2 which controls for stock fixed effects, we see that an increase in market
capitalization of 10% in the same stock implies a 1 basis point higher TDF ownership.
These rates of increases appear small as they represent the average among all stocks.
   Next, we ask whether rules, such as index inclusion into the S&P 500, affect stock-level
TDF ownership. S&P 500 index funds are a common choice for equity allocation in TDF
portfolios. The S&P 500 inclusion rule is based on a set of eligibility criteria, including
domicile, stock exchange, years since IPO, financial viability, market capitalization, and
liquidity. After the eligibility criteria are satisfied, the `index committee' at S&P Global has
discretion over the selection, in particular, a `sector balance' is considered.22 However, it is
  22 Please
          refer to https://us.spindices.com/documents/methodologies/methodology-sp-us-indices.pdf /:
for more details.



                                                 20
conceivable that in a group of stocks similarly eligible for the index, the actual inclusion
decisions are uncorrelated with expected TDF ownership or stock return dynamics. Under
this assumption, index inclusion into the S&P 500 among a set of similar stocks offers
plausibly exogenous variation in the extent of TDF ownership.
   To understand whether being included in the S&P 500 index leads to an increase in TDF
ownership and consequently different return dynamics, we construct a group of control
stocks for stocks in the S&P 500, following the methodology in Denis et al. (2003). First,
based on the eligibility criteria, we screen the full sample of stocks and restrict to stocks that
are domiciled in the U.S., traded on the eligible exchanges, at least one year from the IPO,
and have positive sum of earnings in the recent four quarters as well as positive earnings
in the most recent quarter. Second, in each of the 12 Fama-French industry portfolios, we
first divide the stocks into 3 groups based on terciles of market capitalization, with equal
numbers of stocks in each group, and then further divide each industry and size group
into another three based on liquidity (defined as the annual trading volume divided by the
number of shares outstanding). This way we obtain 108 portfolios. Third, we map the S&P
500 stocks to the 108 portfolios (multiple S&P stocks can be mapped to the same portfolio)
and use the other stocks in the corresponding portfolios that are not included in the index
as a control for the index-included stocks. Throughout the sample period, 53 out of the 108
portfolios can be matched with S&P 500 stocks.
   The regressions in columns 3-4 of Table 7 use the sample of stocks in the portfolios that
can be matched with S&P 500 stocks, i.e., the S&P 500 stocks and control stocks that are
matched on industry, market capitalization and liquidity. We mainly exploit the changes in
S&P 500 status by including stock fixed effects in these two columns. In addition, column 4
further includes the peer portfolio by time fixed effects, thus controlling for time varying
impacts of stock characteristics. The result suggests that being added to the S&P 500 index
leads to a 0.13% to 0.19% increase in TDF ownership (or about 20% of the mean TDF
ownership in the matched subsample), relative to similar stocks that are not included in
the index.


6.2   TDF ownership and stock returns following market movements
   In this subsection, we show that stocks with higher TDF ownership exhibit lower market
momentum by estimating the extent to which the sensitivity of monthly stock returns to

                                               21
the lagged market return varies by level of TDF ownership. We then estimate the extent
to which this relationship is plausibly causal using variation in TDF ownership driven by
inclusion in the S&P 500 index in the following subsection.
   Using our dataset of monthly stock returns from 2010 to 2018, we run the following
regression at the individual stock level:


          Retit = (r MKT - r f )t-1 × TDFOwnershipiq-1 + (r MKT - r f )t-1 × Xit
                           + TDFOwnershipiq-1 + Xit + t +        it                        (4)


where i indexes the stocks and t represents a month. (r MKT - r f )t-1 represents the lagged
market excess return. The key parameter of interest is , the differential sensitivity to
market momentum by different levels of TDF ownership. TDF trading pressure is opposite
to recent market movements, so if it has an effect on stock prices, we expect ^ to be negative.
We windsorize the dependent variable, raw monthly return, at 1% and 99% to account
for the fat tails due to extreme movements unrelated to TDF trading. Market return is
measured as the monthly excess return of the market over the risk-free rate. Since TDF
holdings are available only quarterly, TDF ownership is measured at the latest quarter
end indexed as q - 1. Our analysis controls for the typical co-movement (or sensitivity) of
stock return to the lagged market excess return among the stocks by including time fixed
effects (t ). The control variables in the main specification include the natural logarithms
of lagged market value and lagged trading volume. Moreover, it is important to note that
we include the market excess return (r MKT - r f )t-1 interacted with these control variables
to allow the baseline market momentum to vary by these characteristics. In other words,
we estimate the TDF effect beyond the selection into different characteristics. The analysis
clusters the standard errors two-ways by time (year-month) and stock.
   In Table 8, column 1, our baseline specification, we find that higher TDF ownership is
associated with lower market momentum. Stocks with one standard deviation (0.6%) higher
TDF ownership is associated with a 0.024 (=0.6×0.04) reduction in the sensitivity of the
stock return to the lagged market return. That is, when the market rises by 10% in a month,
stocks one standard deviation higher in TDF ownership have 0.24% lower return in the
following month. In addition, size appears to have a separate but marginally insignificant
effect on the return sensitivity that is in the same direction as that of TDF ownership.


                                              22
Column 2 shows that the baseline result is robust when we control for time-varying,
industry-specific shocks measured at the level of Fama-French 12 industry classifications.
   Our main prediction about the TDF trading pressure applies to raw (not risk-adjusted)
stock returns. If stocks with different risk factor exposures have different propensities for
TDF investment, that is part of the variation we want to capture. However, if stocks with
different factor risks have differential sensitivity to market momentum due to their factor
loadings rather than TDF ownership, that would invalidate our inference. In columns
3-4, we show that differences in the factor exposures of stocks do not explain the way
differences in market momentum are related to TDF ownership, at least according to two
sets of factor exposure estimates based on current and lagged 4 factor returns. In column 3,
we control for the exposures of stock returns to the contemporaneous Fama-French three
factors and the momentum factor, which are estimated using a pre-TDF window. That is,
                                                                                f
using an estimation window of 1996-2005, we run the regression rit - rt = i +  i1 (r MKT -
r f ) t +  i2 r t
                SMB +  r HML +  r MOM +
                      i3 t     i4 t           it , where in each regression we use monthly returns

during the estimation window and require at least 60 observations.23 We then include
these beta estimates multiplied by the factor returns in the same month as the stock return
measure in equation (4) as controls. This procedure is similar to using the 4-factor alpha as
the dependent variable. In column 5, we control for the exposures of stock returns to the
lagged Fama-French three factors and momentum factor. Again using a window of 1996-
2005, we estimate the exposures of stocks to returns of the 4 factors in the previous month,
                    f
following: rit - rt = i + L  i1 (r MKT - r f )t-1 + L  i2 rt
                                                           SMB + L  r HML + L  r MOM +
                                                             -1    i 3 t -1   i 4 t -1                it .

Then we include the L  estimates multiplied by the previous month's factor returns as
controls in equation (4). If TDFs simply hold stocks with low betas with respect to the
contemporaneous or lagged market factor, the coefficient on the interaction term between
the market return and TDF ownership would be explained away once we directly control
for estimated betas multiplied by the contemporaneous or lagged market factors. Columns
3-4 suggest that this is not the case. The estimated effect of TDF ownership is unaffected by
the inclusion of these additional controls.
   As another approach to checking whether these results are indeed driven by the trading
of TDFs, we conduct falsification tests using two earlier periods 1996-2005 and 1986-1995
  23 The numbers of observations in columns 3-4 drop significantly from those in columns 1-2 because the
use of a pre-TDF estimation window restricts the sample to older stocks.



                                                  23
before the PPA of 2006 set off the growth of the TDF market. Of course, the rise of TDFs
is not the only change that occurred in financial markets over this period and so other
factors may account for differences between the pre- and post-TDF periods.24 That said,
using TDF ownership measured as the average during 2010-2018, we conduct our analysis
in these two earlier periods. Columns 5-6 suggest that stocks that would have high TDF
ownership stocks in the modern period did not have lower market momentum before the
PPA. Before 2006, the high- and low-TDF stocks exhibit similar sensitivity to the lagged
market performance. While this test is again not perfect because of the many differences
between the first two periods and the third, these results show that the results documented
in Table 8 are unique to the TDF era.
    A back-of-the-envelope calculation using the estimated coefficient on (r MKT - r f )t-1 ×
TDFOwnership in Table 8 (detailed in the next paragraph), implies that each dollar of TDF
rebalancing moves a stock's total outstanding value (market capitalization) by about 6.6
dollars. Put differently, these estimates imply a demand elasticity of other investors of
-0.15. This elasticity is substantially lower (or price impact higher) than the micro elasticity
documented by the previous literature.25 But there is a substantial difference between
these previous studies and ours. Previous studies have looked at idiosyncratic changes in
demand for one stock as compared to similar stocks. We are looking at systematic changes
in demand for a set of similar stocks (as shown in Section 6.1). This may explain why
our estimate is quantitatively more similar to the asset-class level estimates of Gabaix and
Koijen (2020). Another possible explanation for the difference is that our TDF trades are
actually trading in the same direction as arbitrageurs who are trading against general retail
flows. In this case, there is no arbitrage working against TDF trades to lower the price
impact. A final possibility for large price impact is that arbitrageurs have not (yet) noticed
and traded against the TDF price impacts that we document.
    The calculation of the price multiplier is as follows. Consider a 10% increase in the
U.S. equity market in month t - 1, and suppose stock i has X % TDF ownership. To
  24 Although the rise of TDFs is one of the largest changes for retail investors, there have been other strategies

newly offered by retail funds, and momentum strategies in particular might interact with the dynamics we
are measuring. However relative to TDFs, these are small. To date, funds pursuing momentum strategies
only amount to roughly $25 billion under management in 2019.
  25 See Wurgler and Zhuravskaya (2002) and Gabaix and Koijen (2020) for a summary and discussion of the

stock demand elasticity literature. The majority of this literature examines index inclusions as a laboratory
and reports an elasticity of around -1 (e.g., Shleifer, 1986; Chang, Hong, and Liskovich, 2015).



                                                       24
calculate % Price in the numerator, we start with ^ from Table 8, which measures the
incremental return (or change in price) due to each 1% of TDF ownership, -0.04. We divide
this coefficient by 1.6 to account for the fact that CITs that have identical portfolios and
strategies as the TDFs, and hold 60% of the assets of the TDFs (and are not accounted
for in our TDF (%) measure). We use 1996-2005 as the base period for the counterfactual
with no TDFs, which provides us with ^ = -0.018 which is the value that would occur
for reasons other than trading by TDFs. These two adjustments yield an adjusted-^
of (-0.04 - (-0.018))/1.6 = -0.014. This coefficient implies that the return of stock
i is -0.014 × 10% × X lower in month t due to TDF trading. For % Demand in the
denominator, we estimate that for the same increase in the equity market, the aggregate TDF
sells equity at -0.7 × 0.3 × 10% = -2.1% of its portfolio value (the aggregate fraction of
TDF assets invested in equity is about 70%). Suppose the TDF sells all stocks in its portfolio
in proportion to portfolio weights, then it sells -2.1% of its holding of stock i. The multiplier
is therefore (-0.014 × 10% × X )/(-2.1% × X /100) = (0.14% × 100)/2.1% = 6.6.
    Table 9 shows that we find the same effect of TDF ownership as we showed in Table
8 but only comparing similar stocks in our matched sample of S&P 500 stocks matched
to their peer groups based on industry, size, and liquidity, as described in subsection
6.1. All regressions control for time-by-peer-group fixed effects, thus controlling for time-
varying shocks to stocks within narrow ranges of characteristics. We also estimate an
additional specification (not in Table 8) in column 4 which includes stock fixed effects
interacted with the lagged market excess return, thus controlling for the average sensitivity
of the stock to the market and only exploiting the changes in TDF ownership.26 The
within-stock comparison yields slightly larger magnitude for the TDF effect. Throughout
Table 8, size no longer has an independent effect on the sensitivity to market momentum,
because identification comes from differences in dynamics among stocks with highly similar
characteristics. However, even though these stocks are quite similar, TDF ownership still
affects stock returns following market returns. The magnitudes of the estimated TDF effect
displayed in Table 9 are similar to those displayed in Table 8, providing further evidence
that these stock price dynamics are driven by TDF ownership rather than by correlated
other factors like size, industry, or liquidity.
  26 The specification in column 4 is not estimated for Table 8, because the large number of fixed effects make
the estimation infeasible in the full sample.



                                                      25
6.3   Evidence from S&P 500 index inclusion
   Though the above tests alleviate many mechanical explanations for the results in Table
8, they do not completely eliminate the possibility that reduced stock-level sensitivity to
market momentum is at least partly driven by TDF selection into certain types of stocks.
To further shed light on the causal relationship, we use inclusion into the S&P 500 Index as
a quasi-exogenous source of variation for TDF ownership. We assume that, ceteris paribus,
TDF funds prefer stocks that are included in the S&P 500 Index because, as noted, it is a
common benchmark. Further, we assume that, among similar stocks, inclusion in the index
is partly determined by index-specific factors (such as industry balance) that are unrelated
with differences in return dynamics relative to similar stocks. Lastly, we assume that the
other things that vary with inclusion S&P Index ­ discussed at the end of this subsection ­
either are also driven by TDF ownership or do not affect the sensitivity of the stock return
to market momentum.
   Using the matching procedure explained in section 6.1 to form a control group for the
S&P 500 stocks which are matched on industry, size, and liquidity, we estimate the causal
impact of TDF ownership on stock returns with the regression:


              Retipt = (r MKT - r f )t-1 × S& P500it-1 + (r MKT - r f )t-1 × Xit
                               +S& P500it-1 + Xit +  pt +    ipt                            (5)


where i stands for a stock, p refers the peer group that the stock belongs to, and t indexes
time (year-month). Equation 5 estimates  from a difference-in-differences type specifica-
tion that compares the responses of stocks with different levels of treatment, within each
industry-size-liquidity group. The highly-treated group are the stocks included in the S&P
500 Index, which as shown in Section 6.1, have higher TDF ownership. The less-treated
group are the stocks not included in the Index, which have relatively lower TDF ownership.
With the inclusion of the peer group by time fixed effects  pt , the identifying assumption
is that within each peer group, stocks with different levels of treatment (TDF ownership)
would have behaved similarly in response to market shocks if they had not been affected
by TDF investments. The plausibility of this assumption was discusssed in Section 6.1.
Conditional on the eligibility criteria, the decision to include a stock into the S&P 500 index
is plausibly orthogonal to the expected stock return dynamics, but leads to a discrete and


                                              26
sizable increase in TDF ownership.
    Table 10 presents the index inclusion results for the matched sample. Column 1 shows
that, compared with peer stocks matched on characteristics, being included in the S&P
500 leads to a 0.11 reduction in the sensitivity to market momentum, which implies that
when the market rises by 10% in a month, the index stocks have 1.1% lower return in the
following month compared with similar non-index stocks. Columns 2-3 show that the
result is robust to controlling for the impact of risk factor exposure on the return sensitivity
to market momentum. In column 4, we see the effect doubles in magnitude if we control
for time-invariant return sensitivity at the stock level and exploit only the changes in S&P
500 status within the same stock. This suggests that our results are driven by the switches
into and out of the S&P 500 index. Finally, we conduct a falsification tests using data over
1996-2005 and 1986-1995, when TDFs were not a significant presence in the stock market.
Being included in the S&P 500 did not lower the sensitivity to market momentum in those
early periods. Thus, it is a phenomenon only present in our main sample period that has a
substantial TDF market.
    In sum, the evidence in this section ­ using only variation in TDF ownership share
driven by S&P inclusion ­ provides further evidence that the market-contrarian trading
strategies of TDFs have changed the price dynamimcs of the stocks they hold.27 However,
a lot of things may change for a stock when it is included in the S&P 500 Index. Consistent
with S&P membership leading to greater demand for the stock (e.g. from S&P 500 Index
funds), index inclusion leads to an increase in price (Harris and Gurel, 1986; Shleifer, 1986;
Wurgler and Zhuravskaya, 2002; Chang, Hong, and Liskovich, 2015). It also leads to excess
daily return volatility due to exchange-traded fund (ETF) trading (Ben-David, Franzoni,
and Moussawi (2018)), to more co-movement with other stocks in the Index (Barberis,
Shleifer, and Wurgler, 2005; Boyer, 2011), and to changes the investment and financial
policies of the firm (for the worse) (Bennett, Stulz, and Wang, 2020).
    Our analysis focuses on a different dimension of returns than the above papers: Our
analysis of the sensitivity of stock return to the lagged market returns would be unaffected
by any return-level effect of inclusion in the Index. Thus, our results are very unlikely
to be driven by a general increase in demand for a stock on inclusion in the Index. Our
  27 InTable A.1, we present a two-stage least squares estimate of the effect of TDFs using S&P 500 member-
ship as an instrumental variable for TDF ownership. It is relegated to the Appendix because the instruments
are quite weak.


                                                   27
results is also quite distinct from the ETF-induced excess volatility. Our conversations
with practitioners suggest that TDFs rebalance at much lower frequency than the trading
strategies of ETFs, motivating our choice of monthly rather than daily returns. Finally,
co-movement concerns the correlation between contemporaneous stock return and market
performance, while we focus on the relation with lagged market returns. Obviously, if the
market return follows a random walk, co-movement does not generate any prediction on
the effect of index inclusion on the stock-level market momentum. If the market return
were serially positively correlated, then co-movement would predict an increase in the
sensitivity to market momentum in index-included stocks rather than the negative effect
we find. However, we find, only in the recent period with TDFs, that the S&P Index has
negative serial correlation, as we discuss in the next section.



7    Stock market return predictability during TDF era
    In this final section, we speculate about whether the market-contrarian trading strategies
of TDFs are affecting aggregate stock market returns. Because the rise of TDFs is relatively
recent, the time series that we can investigate is relatively short and statistical power is
relatively low. Further, the rise of TDFs is far from the only change in equity markets
during the period we study relative to earlier periods, so there is no way to cleanly separate
the effects of TDFs from other changes in investment strategies, financial regulation and so
forth. However, our results in section 6 show that individual stock that have the greatest
TDF ownership respond negatively to recent market returns.
    Keeping these caveats in mind, we study the time series of S&P 500 returns since these
large cap stocks have the greatest TDF ownership. We investigate changes in stock market
momentum, or serial correlation in returns, by estimating the following simple regression:

                                 SP          SP              SP
                                rt  =  +  h rt -h to t-1 +   t                             (6)


where rt is the monthly return of the S&P 500 index in month t and rt-h to t-1 represents
the lagged cumulative return of the S&P 500 during the h months ending in month t - 1.
We explore h values of 1, 3, 6, and 12.
    Consistent with the hypothesis that the rise of TDFs has lead to negative time series


                                              28
correlations in the S&P 500 index returns, S&P monthly returns respond negatively to the
medium-term lagged performance within the most recent period and not before. Table
11 reports the estimated  h for the S&P 500 index during three 10-year periods 1986-1995,
1996-2005 (before the PPA of 2006), and 2010-2019. The first two periods had limited impact
from the TDFs, and the third period represents an era when TDF investments have a sizable
impact. Column 1 shows that before the rise of the TDFs, there was weakly negative but
insignificant time series correlation between the monthly returns of the S&P 500 index from
one month to the next, in line with a lack of predictability in the equity market returns
(e.g., Fama, 1970; Malkiel, 1973). However, during 2010-2019 which had a sizable TDF
market, the monthly returns of the S&P 500 show a borderline significant negative time
series correlation, which is consistent with the findings in Table 10. Columns 2-4 confirm
that the time series reversal observed for the S&P 500 index during 2010-2019 is robust
under cumulative measures of lagged performance calculated over 3-month, 6-month, or
12-month horizons. Thus, there is statistically weak evidence that rejects the null hypothesis
that there was no change in serial correlation of aggregate returns, as well as the potential
for other factors to have altered the stochastic process for returns.
   That said, how much of the change in the aggregate return dynamics of the S&P 500
index estimated in Table 11 (point estimates) can be attributed to TDF trading? For a given
return of the U.S. equity market, Table 1 implies a corresponding quantitative difference in
demand for equity in the world with TDF rebalancing and the world without following the
same return. Gabaix and Koijen (2020) shows that aggregate demand by other investors is
price inelastic, and estimate that the aggregate price multiplier is about 5: $1 additional
investment in the stock market increases the aggregate value of the market by about $5.
Taking the Gabaix-Koijen multiplier and the current size of the TDFs, we estimate that
about one tenth to one fifth of the change that we observe in Table 11 can be attributed to
TDFs.
   We obtain the above estimates with the following calculation. According to our data,
TDF owns about 1% of the total market capitalization of the S&P 500 stocks (on average
during 2010-2018). Since our dataset only includes the target-date mutual funds, we
increase the aggregate TDF ownership by 60% (to 1.6%) to account for CITs that are offered
by the same fund families and follow the same target-date investment strategies (see
Section 1). The equity share in the aggregate TDF portfolio is about 70%, implying that


                                             29
rebalancing trades would amount to -0.034% (= -1.6% × 0.7 × 0.3 × 10%) of the market
capitalization of the S&P 500 index after a 10% increase in the market, assuming zero
return in the bond market. Applying a price multiplier of 5, this suggests that after a 10%
increase in the equity market, S&P 500 return would be 0.034% × 5 = 0.17% lower in the
subsequent period in a world with TDFs compared with a world without. The estimates
in Table 11, columns 1-2 imply that after a 10% increase in the S&P 500 index over month
t - 1 or months t - 3 to t - 1, the index return in month t is 1.5% or 0.9% lower in the most
recent period than in the previous periods.28 Therefore, between 0.17%/1.5% = 11% and
0.17%/0.9% = 19% of these changes may be explained by the rise of the TDFs. Given the
large standard errors in Table 11, this range should be interpreted as a rough estimate.



8      Concluding remarks
     Target date funds are an important financial innovation for retail investors saving for
retirement. They relieve retail investors of the burden of choosing the relative shares of
stock funds and bond funds in their portfolios, replacing this decision with an automatic
age-dependent rule designed by professional money management companies. Since the
2006 Pension Protection Act which qualified TDFs to serve as default options in 401(k)
plans, the TDF market has seen exponential growth. Today 90% of employers offer TDFs
as the default options in their retirement plans. As a result, many retirement plan investors
are holding investment vehicles that automatically rebalance their portfolios across asset
classes to age-appropriate allocations.
     This paper points out an important implication of TDF investment strategies: TDFs
rebalance portfolios by selling stocks when the stock market goes down and buying stocks
when the market rises, and so acting as a market-stabilizing force. We find that in the past
15 years, the growth of TDFs has significantly changed the patterns of fund flows and the
time series dynamics in stock returns. If, as expected, the amount of funds invested through
TDFs continues to grow, their market stabilizing effects may become more pronounced.
We argued that TDFs may weakening momentum in aggregate stock prices caused by
trend-chasing.
    28 We
      focus on backward-looking returns over 1 month and 3 months because most TDF rebalancing is
implemented within the same quarter as the realized asset class returns.



                                               30
   However, TDFs may also create anomalies or mispricing. Roughly half of stock market
fluctuations are driven by permanent changes in dividends, which can lead to persistent
changes in the effective amount of equity relative to bonds. TDFs trade against these
fundamental changes in value also. That is, because TDFs have a micro-optimal view of
portfolio choice, they do not adjust equity shares to permanent changes in the market
portfolio.
   Finally, by investing across stock and bond markets, TDFs may change the relationship
between the returns on these two markets and thus change the way in which changes in
interest rates that raise bond prices ­ such as pursued by quantitative easing ­ operate.
Interest rate declines may lead to stronger stock market responses, as an increasingly large
amount of funds invested in TDFs trades out of bonds and into stocks.




                                            31
References
Agnew, J., P. Balduzzi, and A. Sunden. 2003. Portfolio choice and trading in a large 401 (k)
  plan. American Economic Review 93:193­215.

Ameriks, J., and S. P. Zeldes. 2004. How do household portfolio shares vary with age?
  Working Paper, working paper, Columbia University.

Bailey, W., A. Kumar, and D. Ng. 2011. Behavioral biases of mutual fund investors. Journal
  of Financial Economics 102:1­27.

Balduzzi, P., and J. Reuter. 2019. Heterogeneity in target date funds: strategic risk-taking or
  risk matching? The Review of Financial Studies 32:300­37.

Barber, B. M., X. Huang, and T. Odean. 2016. Which factors matter to investors? evidence
  from mutual fund flows. Review of Financial Studies 29:2600­42.

Barberis, N., A. Shleifer, and J. Wurgler. 2005. Comovement. Journal of financial economics
  75:283­317.

Ben-David, I., F. Franzoni, and R. Moussawi. 2018. Do etfs increase volatility? The Journal
  of Finance 73:2471­535.

Ben-David, I., J. Li, A. Rossi, and Y. Song. 2019. What do mutual fund investors really care
  about? Working Paper, available at SSRN 3292317 .

Bennett, B., R. M. Stulz, and Z. Wang. 2020. Does joining the s&p 500 index hurt firms?
  Fisher College of Business Working Paper .

Bergstresser, D., and J. Poterba. 2002. Do after-tax returns affect mutual fund inflows?
  Journal of Financial Economics 63:381­414.

Berk, J. B., and J. H. van Binsbergen. 2016. Assessing asset pricing models using revealed
  preference. Journal of Financial Economics 119:1­23.

Boyer, B. H. 2011. Style-related comovement: Fundamentals or labels? The Journal of
  Finance 66:307­32.




                                               32
Boyson, N. 2019. The worst of both worlds? dual-registered investment advisers. Working
  Paper, working paper, Northeastern University.

Calvet, L. E., J. Y. Campbell, and P. Sodini. 2009. Fight or flight? portfolio rebalancing by
  individual investors. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 124:301­48.

Campbell, J. Y. 2016. Restoring rational choice: The challenge of consumer financial
  regulation. American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 106:1­30.

Chalmers, J., and J. Reuter. forthcoming. Is conflicted investment advice better than no
  advice? Journal of Financial Economics .

Chang, Y.-C., H. Hong, and I. Liskovich. 2015. Regression discontinuity and the price
  effects of stock market indexing. The Review of Financial Studies 28:212­46.

Chevalier, J., and G. Ellison. 1997. Risk taking by mutual funds as a response to incentives.
  Journal of Political Economy 105:1167­200.

Cocco, J. F., F. J. Gomes, and P. J. Maenhout. 2005. Consumption and portfolio choice over
  the life cycle. The Review of Financial Studies 18:491­533.

Cooper, M. J., H. Gulen, and P. R. Rau. 2005. Changing names with style: Mutual fund
  name changes and their effects on fund flows. The Journal of Finance 60:2825­58.

Coval, J., and E. Stafford. 2007. Asset fire sales (and purchases) in equity markets. Journal
  of Financial Economics 86:479­512.

Da, Z., B. Larrain, C. Sialm, and J. Tessada. 2018. Destabilizing financial advice: Evidence
  from pension fund reallocations. The Review of Financial Studies 31:3720­55.

De Long, J. B., A. Shleifer, L. H. Summers, and R. J. Waldmann. 1990. Positive feedback
  investment strategies and destabilizing rational speculation. the Journal of Finance 45:379­
  95.

Del Guercio, D., and P. A. Tkac. 2008. Star power: The effect of monrningstar ratings on
  mutual fund flow. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 43:907­36.

Denis, D. K., J. J. McConnell, A. V. Ovtchinnikov, and Y. Yu. 2003. S&p 500 index additions
  and earnings expectations. The Journal of Finance 58:1821­40.

                                               33
Edelen, R. M., and J. B. Warner. 2001. Aggregate price effects of institutional trading: a
  study of mutual fund flow and market returns. Journal of Financial Economics 59:195­220.

Evans, R. B., and Y. Sun. forthcoming. Models or stars: The role of asset pricing models
  and heuristics in investor risk adjustment. The Review of Financial Studies .

Fama, E. F. 1970. Efficient capital markets: A review of theory and empirical work. The
  Journal of Finance 25:383­417.

Frazzini, A., and O. A. Lamont. 2008. Dumb money: Mutual fund flows and the cross-
  section of stock returns. Journal of Financial Economics 88:299­322.

Gabaix, X., and R. S. Koijen. 2020. In search of the origins of financial fluctuations: The
  inelastic markets hypothesis. Available at SSRN .

Greenwood, R., and S. Nagel. 2009. Inexperienced investors and bubbles. Journal of Financial
  Economics 93:239­58.

Harris, L., and E. Gurel. 1986. Price and volume effects associated with changes in the
  s&p 500 list: New evidence for the existence of price pressures. The Journal of Finance
  41:815­29.

Hong, H., and J. C. Stein. 1999. A unified theory of underreaction, momentum trading, and
  overreaction in asset markets. The Journal of Finance 54:2143­84.

Investment Company Institute. 2020. Investment company fact book. Investment Company
  Institute, Washington, DC.

Jegadeesh, N., and S. Titman. 1993. Returns to buying winners and selling losers: Implica-
  tions for stock market efficiency. The Journal of Finance 48:65­91.

------. 2001. Profitability of momentum strategies: An evaluation of alternative explana-
  tions. The Journal of Finance 56:699­720.

Lou, D. 2012. A flow-based explanation for return predictability. The Review of Financial
  Studies 25:3457­89.

Malkiel, B. G. 1973. A random walk down wall street. W.W. Norton & Company.


                                              34
Merton, R. C. 1969. Lifetime portfolio selection under uncertainty: The continuous-time
  case. The Review of Economics and Statistics 247­57.

Mitchell, O. S., and S. Utkus. 2020. Target date funds and portfolio choice in 401(k) plans.
  Working Paper, working paper 26684, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Morningstar. 2020. 2020 target-date strategy landscape .

Moskowitz, T. J., Y. H. Ooi, and L. H. Pedersen. 2012. Time series momentum. Journal of
  Financial Economics 104:228­50.

Shleifer, A. 1986. Do demand curves for stocks slope down? The Journal of Finance 41:579­90.

Shoven, J. B., and D. B. Walton. 2020. An analysis of the performance of target date funds.
  NBER Workingpaper, W27971 .

Sirri, E. R., and P. Tufano. 1998. Costly search and mutual fund flows. The Journal of Finance
  53:1589­622.

Vayanos, D., and P. Woolley. 2013. An institutional theory of momentum and reversal. The
  Review of Financial Studies 26:1087­145.

Viceira, L. M. 2001. Optimal portfolio choice for long-horizon investors with nontradable
  labor income. The Journal of Finance 56:433­70.

Warther, V. A. 1995. Aggregate mutual fund flows and security returns. Journal of Financial
  Economics 39:209­35.

Wurgler, J., and E. Zhuravskaya. 2002. Does arbitrage flatten demand curves for stocks?
  The Journal of Business 75:583­608.




                                             35
                                     Figure 1: Growth of TDF assets

This figure plots the sum of total net assets (TNA) of TDFs during 2000Q1-2019Q4 broken down by target
retirement years. TDFs in the CRSP mutual fund database are identified from fund names containing target
retirement years at five-year intervals ranging from 2000 to 2065. TDFs with target retirement years at the
middle of a decade (20x5) are grouped together with TDFs with target retirement years at the beginning of
the decade (20x0). The TD2010- category in this figure includes TD2000 and TD2010. The TD2050+ category
includes TD2050 and TD2060.




                                                    36
             Figure 2: Aggregate retail flows and TDF flows to U.S. domestic equity funds

This figure plots the aggregate quarterly dollar flows to U.S. domestic equity mutual funds through retail
share classes (panel A) and TDF rebalancing (panel B) during 2008Q3-2018Q4.




                                        (a) Aggregate retail flows




                                  (b) Aggregate TDF rebalancing trades
                                                   37
                      Figure 3: Stock-level distribution of size and TDF ownership

This figure illustrates the relationship between market capitalization and TDF ownership (both variables
calculated as averages during 2008Q3-2018Q4) at the stock level. Panel A plots the average TDF ownership
expressed in percentages by size decile among all stocks traded on the NYSE, NASDAQ and AMEX, where
decile 10 represents the largest stocks. Panel B presents a two-way histogram for the number of stocks in
each of 25 cells constructed by combining market capitalization quintiles (large, Q4, Q3, Q2, small) and TDF
ownership quintiles (high, Q4, Q3, Q2, low).




                                 (a) TDF ownership by market cap decile




                           (b) Two-way histogram by size and TDF ownership




                                                    38
                                                                             Table 1: TDF rebalancing formulae


     This table derives the one-period rebalancing formulae that restore the target asset allocations of a TDF after realized asset class returns R E (equity)
     and R B (bond). The target equity share is S and the target bond share is 1 - S . The TDF is assumed to hold the target allocations at the beginning of
     the period. TDF asset value at the beginning of the period before the asset class returns is normalized to $1. Panel A represents the case of zero net flow
     to the TDF. Panel B considers non-zero net flow to the TDF.


                                                          (1)                                 (2)                                      (3)                         (4)                 (5)
                                  Asset class        Value before                          Desired                                   Total                    Flow-driven         Re-balancing
                         Weight     return         trades and flows                        holdings                                net trades                    trades              trades


      A. No fund flows
      Equity Fund          S          RE              S  (1 + R E )              [1 + R B + S ( R E - R B )]S               -S (1 - S )( R E - R B )               0         -S (1 - S )( R E - R B )
      Bond Fund          1 - S        RB           (1 - S )(1 + R B )         [1 + R B + S ( R E - R B )](1 - S )            S (1 - S )( R E - R B )               0         S (1 - S )( R E - R B )
      Total                 1                   1 + R B + S ( R E - R B )          1 + R B + S ( R E - R B )                          0                            0                  0




39
      B. With fund flows of F
      Equity Fund          S          RE              S  (1 + R E )            [1 + R B + S  ( R E - R B ) + F ] S         FS - S (1 - S )( R E - R B )            FS        -S (1 - S )( R E - R B )
      Bond Fund          1 - S        RB           (1 - S )(1 + R B )       [1 + R B + S ( R E - R B ) + F ](1 - S )   F (1 - S ) + S (1 - S )( R E - R B )    F (1 - S  )   S (1 - S )( R E - R B )
      Total                 1                   1 + R B + S ( R E - R B )        1 + R B + S ( R E - R B ) + F                         F                            F                 0
                                        Table 2: Summary statistics
This table presents statistics on quarterly data on TDFs (panel A) and mutual funds (panel B), and on
monthly data on stocks (panel C). In panel A, TDF holdings are classified using the CRSP objective
codes. Flow to TDF is calculated as the dollar growth in TDF assets in excess of the growth that would
have occurred given the net return. Rebalancing trade in an asset class is calculated as i) the total trade,
measured as the change in the value in excess of the value implied by the returns of the underlying
mutual funds, less ii) the flow-driven trade, measured as the flow into the TDF allocated to the asset class
based on the lagged share in that asset class. In panel B, fund flow rate is the quarterly growth rate in
assets in excess of that implied by net fund return. Return volatility is one-year standard deviation in
the monthly returns. Fraction held by TDFs is calculated as the total value of TDF holdings of a fund
divided by the fund total net assets. In panel C, monthly excess return is the monthly return minus the
risk-free rate. S&P 500 membership equals one if a stock is included in the S&P 500 in a month, and
zero otherwise. TDF ownership refers to the fraction of a stock owned by TDFs through mutual funds.

                                                              N      Mean      p25      p50      p75      SD
 A. TDF quarterly
 Target year                                                 9,016   2031.8    2020     2030     2045      14.6
 Total net assets ($ million)                                9,016   2185.9    63.2    276.2    1513.8   4896.2
 No. funds held                                              9,016    15.9       9       15       21       8.6
 Frac. portfolio in equity                                   9,016    0.734   0.588    0.778    0.899    0.185
 - Domestic equity                                           9,016    0.486   0.389    0.508     0.597   0.143
 - Foreign equity                                            9,016    0.248   0.172    0.240    0.306     0.113
 Frac. portfolio in fixed income                             9,016    0.266   0.101    0.222     0.412   0.185
 Flow to TDF, t / TNA, t-1                                   9,016    0.060   -0.007   0.031    0.084    0.126
 Rebal. trade in equity, t / Total holding, t-1              9,016   -0.011   -0.022   -0.008    0.002    0.067
 Rebal. trade in fixed income, t / Total holding, t-1        9,016    0.004   -0.003   0.003    0.012    0.030
 B. Mutual fund quarterly
 Fund flow rate (%)                                      58,200       1.27    -4.64    -1.69     1.99    32.16
 Fund size ($ billion)                                   58,200        2.1     0.1      0.3      1.2      11.2
 Fund family size ($ billion)                            58,200      249.8     2.9     28.9     130.8    579.7
 Fund age (year)                                         58,200      18.9     10.0     16.0     23.0      14.0
 Expense ratio (%)                                       58,200      1.18     0.91     1.19     1.45      0.46
 Return volatility (%)                                   58,200       4.29    2.84     4.00      5.50     1.91
 Frac. held by TDFs (%)                                  58,200      0.52     0.00     0.00     0.00      4.05
 Frac. held by TDFs among non-zero (%)                   4,669       6.43     0.19     1.05     5.45     12.90
 C. Stock monthly
 Monthly excess return (%)                               274,167     0.89     -5.36    0.63     6.57     12.51
 S&P 500 membership                                      274,167     0.18     0.00     0.00      0.00     0.38
 Market capitalization ($ billion)                       274,167     6.89     0.13     0.72      3.22    27.89
 Volume (million)                                        274,167     33.73    0.90     5.39     23.07    173.92
 TDF ownership (%)                                       274,167     0.54     0.10     0.40      0.73     0.62




                                                        40
                           Table 3: TDF rebalancing in response to asset class movements
This table estimates the relationship between TDF rebalancing and asset class returns during 2008Q3-2018Q4.
Panel A uses TDF quarterly observations. The dependent variable in columns 1-3 (columns 4-6) is the ratio of
rebalancing trade of a TDF in equity (fixed income) in quarter t divided by the total value of holdings (sum of
equity and fixed income) of this TDF in quarter t - 1, and winsorized at 1% and 99%. Panel B uses aggregate
quarterly observations. The dependent variable in columns 1-3 (columns 4-6) is the aggregate dollar amount
of rebalancing trades in equity (fixed income) in quarter t divided by the aggregate portfolio value of all
TDFs in quarter t - 1. The largest and smallest values of the aggregate time series are winsorized, equivalent
to winsorizing at 5% and 95%. R E represents the quarterly return of the total U.S. stock market from CRSP.
R B is the quarterly return of the U.S. bond market, measured as the pre-fee return of the Vanguard Total
Bond Market Index Fund. Equity share S is measured as the fraction of a TDF portfolio invested in equity at
the end of quarter t - 1. Standard errors in panel A are clustered two ways by TDF and quarter and in panel
B are estimated following the Huber-White heterokedasticity-consistent approach. Cumulative effect reports
the sum of coefficients on ( R E - R B )t and ( R E - R B )t-1 and its standard errors are calculated using the delta
method. *p < .1; **p < .05; ***p < .01.

                                     (1)       (2)          (3)            (4)          (5)          (6)
                                        Rebalancing into Equity                  Rebalancing into Bonds
      A. TDF quarterly              Rebal (E), t / Total holding, t-1     Rebal (B), t / Total holding, t-1
      Equity share (S)              All     [.25, .75] [0, .25)(.75,1]    All     [.25, .75] [0, .25)(.75,1]
      ( R E - R B )t               -0.080**   -0.121***     -0.042       0.056***     0.094***     0.021*
                                    (0.036)    (0.038)     (0.035)        (0.017)      (0.026)     (0.011)
      ( R E - R B ) t -1            -0.096*     -0.083     -0.105*       0.031**      0.035**       0.025
                                    (0.053)    (0.055)     (0.053)        (0.015)      (0.017)     (0.016)
      TDF FE                         Yes        Yes             Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes
      Observations                  8,002      3,681           4,290      7,932        3,681        4,219
      R-squared                     0.093      0.134           0.098      0.103        0.124        0.127
      Cumulative effect            -0.176**   -0.204**     -0.147*       0.086***     0.129***     0.046**
                                    (0.078)    (0.082)     (0.078)       (0.024)      (0.033)      (0.022)


      B. Aggregate quarterly        Rebal (E), t / Total holding, t-1     Rebal (B), t / Total holding, t-1
      Equity share (S)              All     [.25, .75] [0, .25)(.75,1]    All     [.25, .75] [0, .25)(.75,1]
      ( R E - R B )t               -0.107**   -0.142***    -0.064        0.105***     0.142***     0.056***
                                    (0.040)    (0.040)     (0.043)        (0.020)      (0.025)      (0.014)
      ( R E - R B ) t -1             -0.051    -0.054      -0.068          0.042        0.054        0.025
                                    (0.042)    (0.046)     (0.049)        (0.027)      (0.035)      (0.017)
      Observations                    34        34              34         34           34           34
      R-squared                     0.248      0.316           0.168      0.475        0.556        0.301
      Cumulative effect            -0.158**   -0.196***    -0.131        0.146***     0.196***     0.081***
                                    (0.065)    (0.065)     (0.078)       (0.035)      (0.047)      (0.019)




                                                          41
                                 Table 4: TDF rebalancing relative to prediction
This table estimates the relationship between actual TDF rebalancing and the predicted rebalancing magnitude
following Table 1. Panel A uses TDF quarterly observations. The dependent variable in columns 1-3 (columns
4-6) is the ratio of rebalancing trade of a TDF in equity (fixed income) in quarter t divided by the total
value of holdings (sum of equity and fixed income) of this TDF in quarter t - 1, and winsorized at 1% and
99%. Panel B uses aggregate quarterly observations. The dependent variable in columns 1-3 (columns 4-6)
is the aggregate dollar amount of rebalancing trades in equity (fixed income) in quarter t divided by the
aggregate portfolio value of all TDFs in quarter t - 1. The largest and smallest values of the aggregate time
series are winsorized, equivalent to winsorizing at 5% and 95%. R E represents the quarterly return of the
total U.S. stock market from CRSP. R B is the quarterly return of the U.S. bond market, measured as the
pre-fee return of the Vanguard Total Bond Market Index Fund. Equity share S is measured as the fraction
of a TDF portfolio or the aggregate TDF portfolio invested in equity at the end of quarter t - 1. Standard
errors in panel A are clustered two ways by TDF and quarter and in panel B are estimated following the
Huber-White heterokedasticity-consistent approach. Cumulative effect reports the sum of coefficients on
S(1 - S)( R E - R B )t and S(1 - S)( R E - R B )t-1 and its standard errors are calculated using the delta method.
*p < .1; **p < .05; ***p < .01.

                                    (1)       (2)          (3)            (4)          (5)          (6)
                                       Rebalancing into Equity                  Rebalancing into Bonds
      A. TDF quarterly             Rebal (E), t / Total holding, t-1     Rebal (B), t / Total holding, t-1
      Equity share (S)             All     [.25, .75] [0, .25)(.75,1]    All     [.25, .75] [0, .25)(.75,1]
      S(1 - S)( R E - R B )t     -0.498**   -0.516***         -0.443    0.369***     0.409***     0.241**
                                  (0.189)    (0.164)         (0.286)     (0.105)      (0.115)     (0.095)
      S(1 - S)( R E - R B )t-1     -0.453    -0.357           -0.837     0.152*      0.153**       0.154
                                  (0.293)    (0.238)         (0.521)     (0.080)      (0.074)     (0.132)
      TDF FE                        Yes       Yes             Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
      Observations                 8,002     3,681           4,290       7,932        3,681        4,219
      R-squared                    0.093     0.134           0.098       0.110        0.125        0.128
      Cumulative effect          -0.951**   -0.872**      -1.280*       0.521***     0.562***     0.395*
                                  (0.427)    (0.356)      (0.712)       (0.146)      (0.145)      (0.197)


      B. Aggregate quarterly       Rebal (E), t / Total holding, t-1     Rebal (B), t / Total holding, t-1
      Equity share (S)             All     [.25, .75] [0, .25)(.75,1]    All     [.25, .75] [0, .25)(.75,1]
      S(1 - S)( R E - R B )t     -0.508**   -0.583***         -0.431    0.510***     0.592***     0.382***
                                  (0.203)    (0.166)         (0.271)     (0.098)      (0.100)      (0.082)
      S(1 - S)( R E - R B )t-1     -0.239    -0.232           -0.500      0.200        0.228        0.175
                                  (0.212)    (0.200)         (0.361)     (0.133)      (0.152)      (0.123)
      Observations                   34       34              34          34           34           34
      R-squared                    0.235     0.311           0.179       0.477        0.558        0.314
      Cumulative effect          -0.747**   -0.815***     -0.931*       0.710***     0.820***     0.557***
                                  (0.333)    (0.276)      (0.516)       (0.170)      (0.197)      (0.126)




                                                        42
                          Table 5: Effect of TDF ownership on mutual fund flows
This table estimates the effect of TDF ownership on the mutual fund flow-performance relationship. Obser-
vations are at the mutual-fund-by-quarter level. The sample is restricted to retail domestic equity mutual
funds where the fraction of assets invested in retail share classes is above 50%. The dependent variable is the
quarterly fund flow rate, defined as the growth rate in fund assets in excess of the realized net fund return.
Observations where the lagged asset size is less than $10 million, and where the flow rate is larger than
1,000% or smaller than -90%, are dropped. Asset-class return is measured as the difference between equity
and bond market returns R E - R B in columns 1-2, and the excess return of equity over the risk-free rate
R E - R f in columns 3-4. R E is the quarterly return of the US equity market from CRSP. R B is the quarterly
return of the US bond market approximated with the pre-fee return of the Vanguard Total Bond Market Index
Fund. R f is the quarterly return on the 1-month treasury. Frac. held by TDFs is measured as the fraction of
fund assets held by TDFs. The control variables include logs of the lagged fund size and fund family size, log
of fund age measured for the oldest share class of a fund, the annual expense ratio, and the lagged yearly
standard deviation of monthly returns. Standard errors are clustered two ways by time and fund. *p < .1; **p
< .05; ***p < .01.

                                                              (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)
                                                                          Fund flow rate, t
       Asset-class return measure:                                  RE - RB              RE - R f
       Asset-class return, t                                0.250***                  0.256***
                                                             (0.078)                   (0.067)
       Asset-class return, t × frac. held by TDFs, t-1     -0.645***      -0.368*    -0.682***   -0.440**
                                                             (0.182)      (0.194)      (0.180)    (0.188)
       Asset-class return, t-1                                0.075                     0.097
                                                             (0.059)                   (0.081)
       Asset-class return, t-1 × frac. held by TDFs, t-1    -0.282*        -0.132      -0.344*     -0.118
                                                            (0.160)       (0.202)      (0.198)    (0.250)
       Frac. held by TDFs, t-1                                0.023         0.037       0.033     0.042*
                                                            (0.021)       (0.024)      (0.021)    (0.022)
       ln (Fund size), t-1                                 -0.014***     -0.015***   -0.015***   -0.015***
                                                            (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.003)    (0.003)
       ln (Fund family size), t-1                           0.005***     0.005***     0.005***   0.005***
                                                            (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)    (0.001)
       ln (Age), t                                         -0.022***     -0.019***   -0.021***   -0.019***
                                                            (0.003)       (0.004)      (0.003)    (0.004)
       Expense ratio, t                                    -1.588***     -1.705***    -1.563**   -1.706***
                                                            (0.575)       (0.579)      (0.581)    (0.579)
       Return volatility, t-1                                 0.320        -0.048       0.243      -0.048
                                                            (0.325)       (0.251)      (0.317)    (0.251)
       Time FE                                                 N             Y           N           Y
       Observations                                         57,828        57,828      57,828      57,828
       R-squared                                             0.016         0.049       0.016       0.049




                                                     43
                        Table 6: Aggregate retail vs. TDF flows to U.S. equity funds
This table presents the regression coefficients of net aggregate flows to US equity funds in quarter t on the
excess performance of the equity market in quarters t and t - 1, by retail investors, all TDFs and subsets
of TDFs at quarterly frequency over 2008Q3-2018Q4. The dependent variable in column 1 is the aggregate
dollar flows to retail share classes of domestic equity funds in quarter t divided by the total assets under
management in retail share classes in quarter t - 1 and is the same in panel A and panel B. In cases that
any retail fund share class is traded by TDFs, the TDF trades are deducted before aggregating up the retail
flows. The dependent variable in column 2 is the aggregate dollar trades of domestic equity funds in quarter
t divided by the total assets of TDFs in quarter t - 1. The aggregate TDF dollar trades are measured as
rebalancing trades in panel A and as total trades in panel B. The dependent variables in columns 3 and 4 are
constructed using the subsamples of TDFs with equity shares between 25% and 75% and equity shares below
25% or above 75%, respectively. R E - R B represents the quarterly return differential between equity and
fixed income, and is calculated as the US total equity market return from CRSP minus the pre-fee return of
the Vanguard Total Bond Market Index Fund. Robust standard errors are reported. Cumulative effect reports
the sum of coefficients on ( R E - R B )t and ( R E - R B )t-1 and its standard errors are calculated using the delta
method. *p < .1; **p < .05; ***p < .01.


                   Panel A                   (1)        (2)           (3)              (4)
                   Flows series            Retail               TDF rebalancing trades
                                                        All      S[0.25,0.75] S[0,0.25)(0.75,1]
                   RS - R B , t           0.119***   -0.092**      -0.114***          -0.066
                                           (0.041)    (0.042)       (0.041)          (0.042)
                   RS - R B , t-1           0.017      -0.115        -0.118           -0.109
                                           (0.021)    (0.079)       (0.081)          (0.075)
                   Observations              37          37           37              37
                   R-squared               0.562       0.276         0.326           0.228
                   Cumulative effect      0.136**    -0.207**      -0.233**         -0.175*
                                          (0.050)     (0.101)       (0.102)         (0.097)


                   Panel B                   (1)        (2)           (3)              (4)
                   Flows series            Retail                  TDF total trades
                                                        All       S[0.25,0.75] S[0,0.25)(0.75,1]
                   RS - R B , t           0.119***     -0.049       -0.074*           -0.012
                                           (0.041)    (0.044)       (0.042)          (0.050)
                   RS - R B , t-1           0.017      -0.136        -0.126           -0.162
                                           (0.021)    (0.098)       (0.090)          (0.113)
                   Observations              37          37           37              37
                   R-squared               0.562       0.209         0.252           0.187
                   Cumulative effect      0.136**      -0.184       -0.200*           -0.174
                                          (0.050)     (0.121)       (0.112)          (0.138)




                                                        44
                          Table 7: Determinants for TDF ownership at stock level
This table shows the determinants for stock-level TDF ownership. Observations are at stock-by-quarter level
during 2008Q3-2018Q4. Columns 1-2 include the full sample. Columns 3-4 include the matched sample
of S&P 500 stocks and control stocks within the same industry-by-size-by-liquidity peer group. Following
Denis et al. (2003), the peer groups are obtained in each quarter by sorting stocks on market capitalization
and annual trading volume (divided by shares outstanding) within each Fama-French-12 industry. The
dependent variable is the fraction (expressed in percentages) of the stock ultimately owned by TDFs through
mutual funds and calculated for each stock i in quarter t as TDFpctit =  jk aijt b jkt where aijt is the fraction of
stock i held by mutual fund j in quarter t, and b jkt is the fraction of mutual fund j held by TDF k. ln(Market
cap) is the log of market capitalization in billion dollars. ln(Vol) is the log of monthly trading volumne in
million shares. S&P 500 is an indicator that equals one if the stock is included in the S&P 500 index quarter t
and zero otherwise. Standard errors are clustered by stock.

                                                      (1)         (2)        (3)            (4)
                                                                TDF Ownership (%), t
                                                        All stocks    S&P 500 matched sample
             S&P 500, t                                                   0.134**        0.190**
                                                                          (0.064)        (0.074)
             ln (Market cap, t-1)                   0.120***   0.099***    -0.033         -0.098
                                                    (0.004)    (0.007)    (0.053)        (0.061)
             ln (Volume, t-1)                        0.003      -0.005      0.019          0.005
                                                    (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.047)        (0.046)
             Time FE                                   Y          Y          Y              Y
             Stock FE                                  N          Y          Y              Y
             Time-by-matched peer group FE           N/A        N/A          N              Y
             Observations                           122,009    121,791     7,949          7,910
             R-squared                               0.216      0.600      0.614          0.675




                                                        45
           Table 8: TDF ownership and stock return sensitivity to lagged market performance
This table examines the relationship between TDF ownership and monthly stock return sensitivity to recent
market performance during 2010-2018 in the full sample of stocks. The dependent variable is the raw monthly
return winsorized at 1% and 99%. TDF (%), the fraction of a stock indirectly owned by TDFs and expressed
in percentages, is available at quarterly frequency and measured at the end of the previous quarter. Industry
dummies are defined by Fama-French 12 industries. Exposures to current and lagged factors are estimated
using monthly returns during 1996-2005. Controls for current factors include estimated betas on current
factor returns multiplied by the factor returns in month t. Controls for lagged factors include estimated betas
on lagged factor returns multiplied by the factor returns in month t - 1. TDF ownership in the falsification
tests is measured as an average during 2010-2018. Standard errors in this table are clustered two ways by
time and stock.

                                       (1)        (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
                                                   Net return, t                          Falsification
                                                    2010-2018                        1996-2005 1986-1995
     Mkt, t-1 × TDF (%), q-1        -0.040***   -0.029*      -0.045***   -0.048***     -0.018      0.003
                                     (0.015)    (0.015)        (0.016)    (0.017)     (0.028)     (0.023)
     Mkt, t-1 × ln (Mktcap, t-1)      -0.040     -0.040       -0.055**     -0.049     -0.082*    -0.101***
                                     (0.027)    (0.026)        (0.027)    (0.030)     (0.044)     (0.032)
     Mkt, t-1 × ln (Vol, t-1)         -0.002     -0.002          0.014      0.009      0.035       0.045*
                                     (0.031)    (0.029)        (0.027)    (0.032)     (0.046)     (0.024)
     TDF (%), q-1                   0.003***    0.003***     0.002***    0.002***     0.010***    0.005***
                                     (0.001)    (0.001)        (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)
     ln (Mktcap, t-1)                0.002**    0.002**          0.001      0.001    -0.006***   -0.003***
                                     (0.001)    (0.001)        (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.002)     (0.001)
     ln (Vol, t-1)                    -0.001     -0.001         -0.001     -0.001      0.003      0.003***
                                     (0.001)    (0.001)        (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.002)     (0.001)
     Time FE                            Y          Y            Y           Y            Y          Y
     Time-by-industry FE                N          Y            N           N            N          N
     Controls for current factors       N          N            Y           N            N          N
     Controls for lagged factors        N          N            N           Y            N          N
     Observations                    400,728    400,720      226,132     226,132      314,121    161,877
     R-squared                        0.123      0.148        0.154       0.148        0.116      0.120




                                                        46
Table 9: TDF ownership and stock return sensitivity to lagged market performance in matched sample
This table examines the relationship between TDF ownership and stock return sensitivity to recent market
performance in a matched sample of S&P 500 stocks with control stocks. The dependent variable is the raw
monthly return winsorized at 1% and 99%. TDF (%), the fraction of a stock indirectly owned by TDFs and
expressed in percentages, is available at quarterly frequency and measured at the end of the previous quarter.
Exposures to current and lagged factors are estimated using monthly returns during 1996-2005. Controls for
current factors include estimated betas on current factor returns multiplied by the factor returns in month t.
Controls for lagged factors include estimated betas on lagged factor returns multiplied by the factor returns
in month t - 1. TDF ownership in the falsification tests is measured as an average during 2010-2018. Standard
errors in this table are clustered two ways by time and stock.

                                       (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)
                                                   Net return, t                           Falsification
                                                    2010-2018                         1996-2005 1986-1995
     Mkt, t-1 × TDF (%), q-1         -0.040*    -0.068***     -0.068***    -0.098**     0.031      0.096
                                     (0.021)     (0.022)       (0.022)      (0.049)    (0.063)    (0.276)
     Mkt, t-1 × ln (Mktcap, t-1)       0.000     -0.013        -0.011        0.101      0.031      0.137
                                     (0.024)     (0.022)       (0.023)      (0.107)    (0.066)    (0.197)
     Mkt, t-1 × ln (Vol, t-1)         -0.014     -0.010        -0.012       -0.059      -0.031    -0.283*
                                     (0.022)     (0.020)       (0.020)      (0.061)    (0.063)    (0.161)
     TDF (%), q-1                      0.001      0.001         0.001        0.001      0.001      -0.007
                                     (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.006)
     ln (Mktcap, t-1)               -0.005***   -0.004***     -0.004***   -0.051***   -0.019***    -0.010
                                     (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.006)    (0.003)    (0.007)
     ln (Vol, t-1)                     0.001      0.001         0.001        0.003     0.009***    0.000
                                     (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.002)    (0.003)    (0.006)
     Time FE                           Y           Y             Y            Y           Y         Y
     Time-by-peer group FE             Y           Y             Y            Y           Y         Y
     Controls for current factors      N           Y             N            N           N         N
     Controls for lagged factors       N           N             Y            N           N         N
     Mkt, t-1 × Stock FE               N           N             N            Y           N         N
     Observations                    27,659      18,543        18,543      27,659      15,810     1,204
     R-squared                       0.360       0.406         0.405        0.430       0.306     0.422




                                                         47
         Table 10: S&P 500 inclusion and stock return sensitivity to lagged market performance
This table examines the effect of S&P 500 index inclusion on the sensitivity of monthly stock returns to recent
market performance. The sample includes the matched sample of S&P 500 stocks with control stocks. The
dependent variable is the raw monthly net return winsorized at 1% and 99%. S&P 500, t-1 equals one if a
stock is included in the S&P 500 index in month t-1, and zero otherwise. Exposures to current and lagged
factors are estimated using monthly returns during 1996-2005. Standard errors in this table are clustered two
ways by time and stock.

                                       (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)
                                                   Net return, t                           Falsification
                                                    2010-2018                         1996-2005 1986-1995
     Mkt, t-1 × S&P 500, t-1        -0.114***   -0.115***     -0.114***    -0.234**     0.040      0.139
                                     (0.039)     (0.032)       (0.031)      (0.092)    (0.080)    (0.437)
     Mkt, t-1 × ln (Mktcap, t-1)       0.022       0.011         0.012        0.083     -0.001     0.071
                                     (0.024)     (0.021)       (0.021)      (0.098)    (0.063)    (0.209)
     Mkt, t-1 × ln (Vol, t-1)        -0.003        0.001        -0.001      -0.033      -0.019    -0.257*
                                     (0.021)     (0.019)       (0.019)      (0.058)    (0.056)    (0.152)
     S&P 500, t-1                     -0.001      -0.002        -0.002       -0.001    0.017***    0.013
                                     (0.002)     (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.006)    (0.004)    (0.013)
     ln (Mktcap, t-1)               -0.004***   -0.003***     -0.003***   -0.047***   -0.021***   -0.013*
                                     (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.006)    (0.003)    (0.008)
     ln (Vol, t-1)                     0.001       0.000         0.001        0.002    0.007***    -0.000
                                     (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.002)    (0.003)    (0.006)
     Time FE                           Y           Y             Y            Y           Y         Y
     Time-by-peer group FE             Y           Y             Y            Y           Y         Y
     Controls for current factors      N           Y             N            N           N         N
     Controls for lagged factors       N           N             Y            N           N         N
     Mkt, t-1 × Stock FE               N           N             N            Y           N         N
     Observations                    27,659      18,543        18,543      27,659      15,810     1,204
     R-squared                       0.379       0.426         0.425        0.442       0.311     0.423




                                                         48
                          Table 11: Time series correlation in the S&P 500 index
This table reports the estimated time series correlations in the returns of the S&P 500 index during three
                                                                          SP =  +  r SP            SP
subsamples: 1986-1995, 1996-2005 and 2010-2019. The regressions follow rt           h t-h to t-1 + t , where
 SP                                                                                 SP
rt represents the monthly excess return of the S&P 500 index in month t and rt-h to t-1 represents the
1-month, 3-month, 6-month, or 12-month cumulative excess return of the index ending in month t - 1. The
beta coefficients and their standard errors are reported. Each regression has 120 monthly observations.

                                                  (1)      (2)        (3)        (4)
                      Lagged return measure       1m       3m         6m        12m
                      1986-1995                  -0.020    -0.044     -0.056     -0.056
                                                (0.092)   (0.054)    (0.043)    (0.036)
                      1996-2005                  -0.018    -0.003     0.012      0.029
                                                (0.092)   (0.054)    (0.039)    (0.024)
                      2010-2019                 -0.172*   -0.113*   -0.123**   -0.087**
                                                (0.091)   (0.061)    (0.048)    (0.037)




                                                    49
