                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 MULTI-PRODUCT FIRMS IN ELECTRICITY MARKETS:
                       IMPLICATIONS FOR CLIMATE POLICY

                                      Jesse F. Buchsbaum
                                      Catherine Hausman
                                      Johanna L. Mathieu
                                           Jing Peng

                                      Working Paper 28027
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28027


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2020




We are grateful to Severin Borenstein, Karl Dunkle Werner, Jenya Kahn-Lang, Justin
Kirkpatrick, and Matt Tarduno for helpful comments. This research was funded by the Alfred P.
Sloan Foundation. The authors do not have any other financial relationships that relate to this
research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Jesse F. Buchsbaum, Catherine Hausman, Johanna L. Mathieu, and Jing Peng. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Multi-Product Firms in Electricity Markets: Implications for Climate Policy
Jesse F. Buchsbaum, Catherine Hausman, Johanna L. Mathieu, and Jing Peng
NBER Working Paper No. 28027
October 2020
JEL No. L21,L94,L98,Q42,Q48,Q53,Q58

                                          ABSTRACT

In electricity markets, generators are rewarded both for providing energy and for enabling grid
reliability. The two functions are compensated in separate markets: energy markets and ancillary
services markets. We provide evidence of changes in the fuel mix in the energy market that is
driven by exogenous changes in an ancillary services market. We provide quasi-experimental
evidence and a theoretical framework for understanding the mechanism, showing that it results
from the multi-product nature of conventional power plants combined with discontinuities in
costs. As a result, policy changes relating to grid operations, grid reliability, or climate change
could have unintended effects. As an example, our results have particular relevance given the
increased deployment of batteries for ancillary services -- we show that such deployment has the
potential to increase carbon dioxide emissions in the short term.

Jesse F. Buchsbaum                               Johanna L. Mathieu
University of California at Berkeley             University of Michigan
jesse_buchsbaum@berkeley.edu                     4116 EECS
                                                 1301 Beal Avenue
Catherine Hausman                                jlmath@umich.edu
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy
University of Michigan                           Jing Peng
735 South State Street                           University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109                              1301 Beal Avenue
and NBER                                         Ann Arbor, MI 48109
chausman@umich.edu                               jingpeng@umich.edu
1       Introduction
In electricity markets, generators are rewarded both for providing energy and for enabling
grid reliability. The two functions are compensated in separate markets ­ energy provision
is compensated in the energy market, while grid reliability is compensated in the ancillary
service market. To date, the economics literature has largely focused on energy provision
markets, even as other academic literatures, policymakers, and grid regulators have more
carefully considered ancillary service markets. Ancillary service markets are interesting and
important in their own right: they procure services that prevent brownouts and blackouts
and ensure power quality. Moreoever, changes in ancillary services markets can impact the
behavior of generators in the much-larger energy market. While these market interactions
have been extensively studied by engineers using optimization models and simulations, quasi-
experimental evidence is largely lacking. In this paper, we show that exogenous policy
changes implemented in the ancillary services portion of a large East Coast electricity market
have changed the behavior of conventional (coal and natural gas) generators in the energy
market, and as a result have had unintended environmental impacts.
    Specifically, we focus on the frequency regulation market in PJM. PJM is the largest
wholesale electricity market in the US, serving major population centers on the East Coast
and dispatching nearly one fifth of all generation capacity in the lower 48 states. Frequency
regulation refers to the short-timescale balancing of supply and demand by grid operators;
we describe it in depth below. We leverage policy-induced quasi-experimental variation in
the amount of frequency regulation required by grid operators. As a result, we identify
how changes in the provision of frequency regulation by conventional power plants impact
the electricity market as a whole. We show that every 100 MW increase in the required
frequency regulation capacity causes around 550 MWh of fuel switching in the course of one
hour in the energy market.1 Specifically, we see that increases in the regulation requirement
lead to short-term decreased coal generation and increased natural gas generation. These
results are qualitatively similarly across a broad suite of robustness checks, with estimated
fuel switching of 290 to 700 MWh.
    As a result, for every 100 MW of increased frequency regulation, CO2 emissions fall by
300 metric tons per hour in our sample, with robustness checks showing a range of 100 to
450 tons. This represents a decrease of 0.7% of CO2 emissions, or an annual total of 2.6
    1
     We use megawatts (MW) throughout to measure capacity, and megawatt-hours (MWhs) to measure
generation. A 1 MW unit operating at its full capacity for one hour generates 1 MWh of electricity. The
regulation requirement is a market-wide capacity or power requirement and is thus measured in MWs.
Electricity generation is sold as a function of energy provided over the course of some time frame and is thus
measured in MWhs.



                                                      1
million tons of reduced CO2 . This is roughly equal to the total emissions of around two
to four additional coal-fired units (at around one or two plants) in PJM. Valued at the
IWG Social Cost of Carbon, the impact of these short-term generation changes was reduced
climate damages of $120 million per year.2 Recent peer-reviewed estimates would place the
value even higher (Pindyck, 2017; Moore et al., 2017; Ricke et al., 2018; Bastien-Olvera and
Moore, 2020).
    At first glance, the magnitude of the fuel switching is surprising ­ it is a greater than
one-to-one effect. We next provide a simple model to analyze the mechanisms behind this.
Key features of the model include (1) conventional power plants are multi-product suppliers;
(2) conventional power plants tend to operate within a somewhat narrow operational range
defined by non-zero minimum and maximum constraints; (3) policy and market changes
can cause conventional power plants to switch from fully off to operating at minimum load.
Importantly, the minimum load at many generators (a physical constraint) is non-negligible ­
while the related literature frequently ignores this constraint, it may be as high as 50 percent
or more of capacity. To summarize, changes along the extensive margin ­ which units are
turned on ­ can lead ancillary services markets to have outsized impacts on generation
markets.
    We then provide empirical evidence of extensive margin changes. We show that increasing
the regulation requirement causes coal boilers to be dispatched at lower levels of generation
in our sample (i.e., a change along the intensive margin). However, natural gas plants (both
combined cycle and combustion turbines) are dispatched more frequently (i.e., a change along
the extensive margin). These effects are consistent both with the overall generation impacts
and with the stylized model.
    These results make several contributions to the energy and environmental economics and
the industrial organization literatures. First, we contribute to a still-small empirical liter-
ature in energy economics that analyzes electricity markets other than the energy market.
One strand of the economics and engineering literature explores ancillary services markets
with optimization models or simulation approaches (Hirst and Kirby, 1998; Just and Weber,
2008; Yu and Foggo, 2017). However, empirical analysis of ancillary services markets, par-
ticularly in how they interact with energy markets, is limited,3 despite there being a large
empirical literature on wholesale electricity markets.4 We show that ignoring the ways that
   2
      We use the 2015 SCC from the Interagency Working Group on Social Cost of Greenhouse Gases (2016)
and convert to 2019 dollars using the CPI, implying a value of $44 per metric ton.
    3
      A few exceptions are Knittel and Metaxoglou (2008), which examines ancillary services in the context of
the California electricity crisis and Schwenen (2015), which examines New York's capacity market. Jha and
Wolak (2020) examines the impact of "explicit virtual bidding" on the cost of electricity provision, focusing
on fuel costs but also incorporating the costs of ancillary services provision.
    4
      See Borenstein, Bushnell and Wolak (2002); Fabrizio, Rose and Wolfram (2007); Reguant (2014); Boren-


                                                     2
energy markets interact with these other markets can lead to incorrect conclusions about
the impacts of policy changes.
    Second, we contribute to a strand of the electricity literature that emphasizes the im-
portance of understanding how technical constraints impact power plant behavior. Perhaps
most closely related is Mansur (2008), which shows that ignoring intertemporal constraints
gives an inflated estimate of the welfare impact that restructuring electricity markets had
in the late 1990s. Previous empirical papers had focused on merit-order dispatch without
considering intertemporal constraints such as minimum load, startup costs, and ramping.
Also related is Reguant (2014), which estimates markups using firms' bidding behavior in
the presence of these intertemporal constraints. Similarly to these papers, we show that
minimum load constraints can have a large impact on plant behavior. We additionally show
that the existence of multiple markets can have significant impacts on plant behavior. We
argue that power plants should be considered multi-product firms, and that limiting atten-
tion to just one of the markets might lead to incorrect or incomplete conclusions about plant
behaviors.
    The behavior of multi-product firms has been the focus of a growing body of work in
industrial organization and in international trade. Researchers have shown that examining
how firms optimize across different products plays a key role in understanding productivity
differences across firms; the behavior of firms with market power; and the impacts of trade
policy, exchange rate movements, demand shocks, and more (Johnson and Myatt, 2006;
Eckel and Neary, 2010; De Loecker, 2011; Chatterjee, Dix-Carneiro and Vichyanond, 2013).
Nonetheless, studies of the electricity market have tended to treat firms as providers of a
single good ­ electricity generation ­ rather than multiproduct firms, with the exception
of an older literature on the optimal regulation of natural monopolies that provide multi-
ple goods (for instance, Mayo, 1984). Our ability to model the production of electricity
with an engineering-based model makes clear how the degree of complementarity versus
substitutability in production matters for outcomes in multi-product firms. Given the large
number of industries with multi-product features (refining, airlines, freight transportation,
manufacturing, to name a few), these mechanisms are of widespread relevance.
    Third, this paper contributes to policy discussions about several ongoing developments
in electricity markets: changes in the way frequency regulation is procured and compen-
sated, the introduction of utility-scale batteries, and the increasing deployment of renewable
electricity (MIT Energy Initiative, 2011; Department of Energy, 2013, 2016; Hledik et al.,
2017). Across the country, frequency regulation markets have seen multiple changes in recent
sten and Bushnell (2015); Cicala (2015); Cullen and Mansur (2017); Davis and Hausman (2016); Holland
et al. (2016); Hortacsu et al. (2019), among many others.



                                                 3
years. In 2011, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) issued Order 755 (Fed-
eral Energy Regulatory Commission, 2011), which required grid operators to change their
frequency regulation compensation mechanisms; we give details below. Various electricity
markets across the US have responded with differing changes to their frequency regula-
tion markets (Department of Energy, 2013; Tabari and Shaffer, 2020). These compensation
mechanisms favor some resource types more than others, so supply in the regulation market
(and therefore dispatch in the energy market) is likely to be affected. The extent to which
these changes in compensation mechanisms have impacted electricity markets has not been
thoroughly analyzed in the energy economics literature.
    Moreover, there has been a growing interest in energy storage devices, such as utility-
scale batteries, to provide frequency regulation and other grid support services. Within the
PJM market we study, batteries have largely been deployed for frequency regulation, rather
than for the intertemporal arbitrage5 potential explored in energy economics papers (Carson
and Novan, 2013; Antweiler, 2018; Holladay and LaRiviere, 2018; Kirkpatrick, 2018; Linn
and Shih, 2019; Castro, 2020). Worldwide, a primary use of battery storage is for frequency
regulation (International Renewable Energy Agency, 2017; Deloitte, 2018). The behavior of
batteries providing ancillary services may differ tremendously from that of batteries providing
arbitrage ­ both because of the way the relevant markets are designed and because of the
timescale of use (e.g., seconds versus hours).
    Our empirical results on the impact of changes to the regulation requirement provide a
useful analogy for the entry of batteries in the regulation market, since their entry will lower
the residual demand for regulation from conventional generators. Many proponents argue
that the entry of batteries for grid reliability will lead to lower emissions (Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission, 2011). In contrast, engineering models and simulations show the
possibility of increased emissions when batteries provide frequency regulation (Ryan et al.,
2018), for which our analysis provides the first empirical corroboration.
    Finally, the rise of intermittent renewables such as wind and solar generation can increase
the amount of frequency regulation required in electricity markets (Kirby, 2004; MIT Energy
Initiative, 2011).6 As generating technologies continue to evolve and batteries and renewable
resources play a larger role in both markets, the interactions between energy and ancillary
services markets are likely to continue to be important.
   5
      For batteries, arbitrage involves charging from the grid when the price is low and selling electricity to
the grid when the price is high. As we discuss later, this is not the primary use of most grid-connected
batteries in PJM.
    6
      Ovaere and Gillingham (2019) examines the empirical impact of renewables on the cost of ancillary
services provision.




                                                      4
2     Background
2.1     Ancillary Services and Frequency Regulation
Electricity markets are actually made up of numerous separate markets: energy, capacity, and
several types of ancillary services markets.7 The energy market is the most studied and best
understood by economists ­ this is where firms are compensated for generating electricity to
be used by residential, commercial, and industrial customers. In ancillary service markets,
generators are compensated for providing services that enable grid reliability ­ for example,
frequency regulation and other types of reserves. Because the same generators participate
in both the energy market and ancillary services market, the structure of ancillary service
markets may have important spillovers in the energy provision market. Despite this, there
has been very little empirical research into ancillary service markets. In this paper, we focus
on frequency regulation, motivated by ongoing policy changes in this market.
    Electricity markets are unique in that demand must constantly equal supply, a respon-
sibility that falls on grid operators. However, there are frequent fluctuations in demand
and supply, creating small mismatches between the two. When supply exceeds demand,
frequency (the number of cycles per second of the alternating current) rises above the nom-
inal frequency (i.e., 60 Hz in North America); when demand exceeds supply frequency falls
below the nominal frequency. If the grid frequency departs enough from the nominal level,
it can cause damaged equipment or brownouts and blackouts for customers (Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission, 2011).
    To prevent this from happening, system operators have created markets to regulate the
frequency of the grid, a service called "frequency regulation," "regulation reserves," "load
frequency control, "secondary frequency control," or simply "regulation."8 In the typical
market, the system operator sets a frequency regulation requirement ­ this is the total
capacity (in MW) that must be set aside for provision of frequency regulation. It is sometimes
time-invariant, sometimes a function of forecasted demand, or possibly also a function of
renewables forecasts. Generators can then bid a portion of their capacity to be available
to grid operators to either increase or decrease generation (relative to their set point) at
any time (within the frequency regulation contract duration), depending on the needs of the
     7
       By energy market, we refer to the sale of electricity, in MWh, in a wholesale market. In PJM, this is
called simply the "energy market." In this paper, we sometimes refer to "energy provision" to distinguish
it from energy markets more generally such as natural gas and oil markets. Since the electricity economics
literature frequently does not cover ancillary services markets, it frequently uses terms like "electricity
market," "power market," and "wholesale market" without specifying whether the market is for providing
energy or capacity or ancillary services or some combination thereof.
     8
       Background on frequency regulation and other ancillary services is provided in Hirst and Kirby (1997);
Kirby (2004); Hummon et al. (2013); Tacka (2016); Zhou, Levin and Conzelmann (2016).


                                                     5
                               Figure 1: Example Regulation Signals
                 (a) RegA Signal                                       (b) RegD Signal




Note: This figure shows the RegA and RegD signals in PJM from 4 pm to 5 pm on July 19, 2019. Data are
from PJM.


grid. The independent system operator9 sends out a signal (automatic generation control,
or AGC) to participating units, to which they automatically make small adjustments in
their generation to balance supply and demand.10 Typically, these small adjustments are
made within seconds (Zhou, Levin and Conzelmann, 2016). An example signal is shown in
Figure 1.
    Some system operators use separate signals for "regulation up" versus "regulation down."
The PJM market that we study does not use separate signals for up and down movements.
For the time period we analyze, this signal is energy-neutral within a short time-frame (15
minutes), so that units always return to their initial set point (Monitoring Analytics, 2018).
    To participate in the market, a power plant must have the technical capability to follow
the operator's regulation signal. It must also be dispatched at a non-zero level of generation,
with headroom and footroom to follow the signal. That is, it cannot be operating at its
minimum or maximum constraints because it must be able to move up and down in response
to the operator's signal (Kirby, 2004). The resource mix contributing to frequency regulation
varies across regions. In PJM, it is a mix of coal, natural gas, hydro, and battery storage
(Monitoring Analytics, 2018).
    Generators take several cost considerations into account when deciding whether and how
to bid in a regulation market. Small fluctuations around the generator's set point impact
   9
     An independent system operator is non-profit entity that operates the wholesale electricity market.
  10
     Specifically, FERC Order 755 defines frequency regulation as "the capability to inject or withdraw real
power by resources capable of responding appropriately to a system operator's automatic generation control
signal in order to correct for actual or expected Area Control Error needs" ((Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission, 2011), p 67266).



                                                     6
the plant's heat rate, thus changing fuel costs. Providing regulation also imposes wear and
tear on the plant (Hirst and Kirby, 1997; Hummon et al., 2013) and can change SO2 and
NOx emissions, which in some markets are priced.11
    Over time, system operators have moved towards rewarding regulation providers for
both the capacity committed to regulation and the quality of regulation services provided.12
Specifically, some units, such as coal-fired boilers, have significant physical inertia that pre-
vents them from responding quickly to regulation signals. In contrast, units such as bat-
teries, hydro generators, and some natural gas generators are able to respond very quickly
to the signal, which gives the system operator greater flexibility and speed in restoring the
system-wide frequency to its desired level. To incorporate this difference across suppliers,
PJM uses a more complicated set of payments.13 First, PJM sends out two separate regula-
tion signals, one termed "RegA" (for slower-responding units) and one termed "RegD" (for
faster-responding units). Moreoever, units receive payments both for their capability (i.e.,
the quantity of MWs offered) and for their performance (the accuracy with which the unit
responds to the operator's signal). In Section 5, we discuss how the compensation of both
capability and performance might impact our results. We explore the entry of utility-scale
batteries for frequency regulation in Section 7.


2.2     Related Literature
One strand of the economics and engineering literature explores ancillary services markets
with optimization models and simulations (Hirst and Kirby, 1998; Just and Weber, 2008;
Yu and Foggo, 2017). In particular, Hirst and Kirby (1997) notes that the minimum and
maximum constraints of individual generators, when combined with the need to provide
headroom and footroom for regulation provision, can lead to a dispatch of units across
the system that would not appear least-cost if one only considered the marginal cost of
energy provision, and it can also lead to significant complexity in which units are dispatched.
Simulations showing changes in dispatch to meet regulation requirements are also given in
Hummon et al. (2013). This informs our stylized model in Section 5.
    A small number of ex-post empirical papers examine how additional operational con-
straints can lead to out of merit dispatch (Mansur, 2008; Reguant, 2014); these papers focus
   11
       The exact cost associated with additional wear and tear is not generally known for individual generators;
simulations typically assume a cost that varies across fuel types (see, e.g., Hummon et al. (2013)).
    12
       This has been spurred by FERC Order 755 (FERC 2011), which requires that independent system
operators change their frequency regulation compensation mechanisms to "pay for performance" systems
that recognize the differential speed and accuracy with which different resources respond to the regulation
signal. Each independent system operator has designed its pay for performance compensation mechanisms
differently (Department of Energy, 2013; Tabari and Shaffer, 2020).
    13
       This payment mechanism in PJM was established in October 2012, following FERC Order 755.


                                                       7
on dynamic constraints related to startup costs and ramping. However, empirical analysis of
ancillary services markets, particularly in terms of how they interact with energy markets,
is limited, despite there being a large literature on wholesale electricity markets (Reguant
(2014); Borensten and Bushnell (2015); Hortacsu et al. (2019) to name a few prominent
recent papers).
     Several papers use optimization models and/or small-scale simulations to show how fre-
quency regulation markets and other ancillary services markets interact with energy markets.
Notably, one report (Atanacio et al., 2012) simulates the impact of storage providing regula-
tion in the PJM system.14 Specifically, it looks at the emissions changes expected to result
across the PJM system when fast-acting storage devices provide 10 percent, 25 percent, or 50
percent of frequency regulation services. It is not clear if the study's proprietary simulation
model includes the unit commitment and/or economic dispatch algorithms used by PJM. So,
it is not clear if storage providing frequency regulation can impact commitment in the model,
nor how exactly it impacts dispatch. The simulation results show small emissions reductions
from storage entry, because conventional plants operate less efficiently when providing reg-
ulation services. However, the report noted that the interaction between the energy market
and the frequency regulation market are complicated and could limit the emissions benefits
of storage, and the study's analysis of California's system showed the potential for increased
CO2 emissions (Atanacio et al., 2012).
     Two additional papers that examine emissions impacts of using storage for frequency
regulation are (Lin, Johnson and Mathieu, 2019; Ryan et al., 2018). Ryan et al. (2018) uses
a small test system to show that changes in the frequency regulation market can lead to
fuel switching and therefore emissions changes. Indeed, the authors find that "[c]hanges in
generator commitment and dispatch caused by the addition of energy storage were the most
significant contributors to the energy storage system's environmental impact" (p 10172).
Hummon et al. (2013) also explores the interaction between reserve markets and energy
markets using a simulation approach, although the paper does not examine emissions out-
comes. Cho and Kleit (2015) explores the optimal bidding strategy for a storage device that
can provide ancillary services. And finally, in Yu and Foggo (2017), "[s]imulation results with
a realistic battery storage system reveal that the majority of the market revenues comes from
frequency regulation services" (p 177).
     While several of these papers examine ancillary service markets, and even consider
spillovers into the energy provision market, this paper is the first to our knowledge to
show quasi-experimental evidence of these spillover effects, which lead to fuel switching
  14
   Papers from the empirical economics literature exploring other aspects of the PJM market include
Mansur (2008); Mansur and White (2012); Abito et al. (2018).



                                                8
and changes in emissions.


3        Data
We collect data from the Environmental Protection Agency's Continuous Emissions Moni-
toring System (CEMS) on hourly generation (MWh) and CO2 emissions (metric tons)15 at
the generator level, for fossil-fuel-fired units.16 From CEMS, we also observe the primary
fuel source used by a generator (coal, natural gas, or oil) and the technological type of the
generator (boiler, combined cycle, or combustion turbine). From EIA-860 data, we observe
whether units are located in PJM. We also observe in EIA-860 whether units are operated
by electric utilities, independent power producers, or as part of a commercial or industrial
operation. We drop all commercial and industrial units, as they are unlikely to sell into the
electricity market. We report our primary results for four categories of PJM units: coal-fired
boilers, natural gas combined cycle (CC) units, natural gas combustion turbine (CT) units,
and all other PJM CEMS units aggregated.17
    The CEMS data do not provide information on non-fossil units (e.g., nuclear, hydro, wind,
municipal solid waste), nor does CEMS cover fossil-fuel fired units with capacity less than 25
MW. (For context, units smaller than 25 MW are quite small; the average capacity in EIA-
860 data is over 350 MW for steam units in PJM.) To observe the behavior of these units, we
calculate a residual category of generation (in MWh), equal to the difference between total
demand reported by PJM and total generation reported in CEMS. This residual variable
thus covers PJM units not in CEMS as well as net imports into PJM from other regions.
    We collect hourly data, from PJM, on regulation market activity. Our primary explana-
tory variable is the hourly regulation requirement, in MW. The regulation requirement refers
    15
      The CEMS-reported CO2 emissions are missing for approximately 4% of observations with non-zero heat
input data, representing 1% of generation. As such, our primary emissions variable constructs emissions in
metric tons by assuming an emissions rate of 0.0931 metric tons per mmBtu for coal-fired units and 0.0539
per mmBtu for natural gas fired units. We also use 0.0931 per mmBtu for other units (oil units, units that
switched primary fuels during our sample, etc.), which is the sample median reported CO2 emissions rate
for non-missing observations at these units. In the Appendix, we show results using CEMS-reported CO2
emissions.
   16
      CEMS reports gross generation rather than net, i.e. not accounting for the generation used by the plant
itself (or instance, to run pollution control equipment). Net generation is the variable of interest, since that
is what is sold in the electricity market. Following Cicala (2017), we scale each unit's generation down from
gross to net using monthly generation data from the Energy Information Administration's (EIA) form 923
dataset. This approach also solves a problem we see with some combined cycle units: they do not report the
full value of their electrical output in the CEMS data. Finally, some units report only steam load in CEMS,
but report non-zero net generation in EIA-923. We similarly scale from steam load to net generation for
these units; they account for 2% of our final net generation variable. Details are in the Appendix.
   17
      The first three represent the three categories with the most generation; the fourth aggregates across
less common and smaller types, such as oil-fired boilers. Details are in the Appendix.


                                                       9
to a pre-determined quantity of regulation capacity that the independent system operator
announces it will purchase. As we describe below, this amount varies over time because of
several policy changes. We also observe the quantity of frequency regulation provided by
slow-responding resources (RegA) versus fast-responding resources (RegD), two variables to
which we return later in our analysis.
    We collect several additional variables that serve as controls. We observe the hourly re-
quirement (in MW) for other types of ancillary services: synchronized and non-synchronized
reserves. We observe total hourly electricity demand across PJM, in MWh. We observe
the forecasted peak and valley demand for each day, also from PJM. We collect hourly data
on wind generation (MWh, from PJM). Also, we observe daily average temperature at the
Philadelphia airport (degrees Fahrenheit, from NOAA), a relatively central location within
PJM.
    For placebo tests, we collect hourly generation and CO2 emissions data at the generator
level for two other types of units: fossil-fuel-fired units not in PJM but in surrounding states;
and units in CEMS data that that are not categorized by CEMS as electrical generating units
(e.g., refineries).
    Finally, we note that the last decade has seen a secular decline in coal generation and rise
in natural gas, a product primarily of the fracking revolution (Linn and McCormack, 2019).
As such, we collect coal plant retirement dates and capacities from the EIA-860 dataset.
We also collect retirement dates for other plant types (for instance, natural gas and oil),
although they are smaller in magnitude.
    Summary statistics are provided in Appendix Tables A1, A2, and A3. A time-series
of generation by fuel types and technology types is provided in Appendix Figure A1. The
sample is characterized by a reliance on coal generation and on natural gas (combined cycle)
generation. Other fuel types and technologies are present (natural gas combustion turbine;
oil-fired generations; etc.), but are a very small portion of the energy market.
    As expected, Appendix Figure A1 shows that the period 2012-2018 is characterized by
a decline in coal generation and a rise in natural gas. By the end of the sample, the two
are responsible for roughly equal quantities of generation. However, within the main sub-
period which we will focus on (2012-2014), coal-fired generation holds roughly constant, so
we anticipate that secular trends in gas to coal switching will not be a major problem for
identification.




                                               10
4        Empirical Evidence on Generation and Emissions
4.1      Identifying Variation
We are interested in how exogenous changes in the frequency regulation market spill over
into the behavior of generators in the energy market. As such, we leverage policy changes
in PJM's regulation market. Recall that PJM changed its regulation market on October 1,
2012 to incorporate separate compensation schemes for slow-responding and fast-responding
resources, a change spurred by FERC Order 755.
    We begin by focusing on a short time window with limited battery capacity: October
1, 2012 to December 31, 2014. Over this period, we leverage quasi-experimental variation
in the total regulation requirement set by the independent system operator, which changes
several times. The benefit of focusing on this period is twofold: battery capacity is limited
and conventional generator entry and exit is small. This allows us to focus on the total
regulation requirement and its impact on conventional generators. In Section 7, we explore
variation in battery capacity.
    As of October 1, 2012, the regulation requirement was set at 0.78% of forecasted peak
load. On November 22, 2012, the requirement was reduced to 0.74% of forecasted peak
load, then to 0.70% on December 18, 2012. More important than these minor changes is the
change on December 1, 2013: the regulation requirement was changed from a percentage of
the forecasted peak load to a requirement of 700 MW of effective regulation during peak hours
and 525 effective MW during off-peak hours.18 This variation in the regulation requirement
can be seen in Figure 2. A PJM report from 2011 describes the motivation behind these
changes: "[d]ecreasing regulation requirements reduces regulation payments" and "[f]ewer
resources providing regulation means more resources available for the energy market."19
    In Section 2, we discuss how the regulation signal at any point in time is a function
of mismatch between supply and demand, and how the signal varies at a very fine scale
(e.g., two seconds). Thus the signal itself is endogenous to market activity. However, the
regulation requirement is a pre-determined capacity procurement ­ set in advance by policy
­ and thus is not endogenous to day-to-day or hour-to-hour market activity, once we control
for the variables used in the pre-determined requirement-setting process (e.g., forecasted
peak load).
    18
      Source:      http://www.monitoringanalytics.com/reports/pjm_state_of_the_market/2013/
2013-som-pjm-volume2.pdf. "Effective" regulation is a measurement that takes into account the
performance of the units providing regulation and the substitutability across RegA and RegD units; see
https://pjm.com/~/media/documents/manuals/m11.ashx.
   19
      https://www.pjm.com/-/media/committees-groups/committees/mrc/20110915/
20110915-item-13-rpstf-update-presentation.ashx



                                                 11
                         Figure 2: Regulation Requirement in PJM




             Note: The regulation requirement changes across hours within a day, hence
             the two different levels plotted on each day. Peak hours are defined 4 a.m.
             to midnight, and off-peak hours as midnight to 4 a.m. In the raw data, one
             hour (on 4/2/2013) is listed as having a regulation requirement of zero; this
             hour is dropped from the regressions. Data source is PJM.


    Unfortunately, we do not observe individual participation in the regulation market, as
this is considered sensitive market information and is not published by PJM. However, we
can use CEMS data to observe how generation behavior in the energy market changes over
this period as a function of the total regulation requirement.
    For expositional purposes, we focus on generation aggregated up to a fuel type by prime
mover type (e.g., coal-fired boiler), but the regression analysis could also be done at the
individual unit level. We treat the regulation requirement as random variation, but we
control for observables that may be correlated with the regulation requirement. For instance,
we control for forecasted peak load, as it directly determines the regulation requirement in
the first part of the sample. The policy change thus allows us to separately identify the
impact of forecasted peak load from the impact of the regulation requirement.
    The regression takes the form:

                                  Gi,t =  + Rt + Xt  + i,t ,                                 (1)

where Gi,t is generation at unit type i in hour t, R is the regulation requirement, and Xt is
a vector of controls. Standard errors i,t are clustered by sample week.


                                                  12
    Note this is estimated as a single time-series, but we index G with unit type i, since we
can separately estimate the regression for multiple unit types. While we do not have panel
variation in the variable of interest R, we do observe a policy change mid-way through our
sample, clearly depicted in Figure 2. Moreover, the policy change does not appear correlated
with a simple time trend; there are levels of the regulation requirement in the pre-period
that lie both above and below the post-period levels. We include a dummy for the policy
change in how the reserve requirement was set, which occurred on December 1, 2013 ­ but
again, this is not expected to be critical for identification, since the policy change was not
simply a level shift in the regulation requirement, and since we are not aware of any other
policy changes on that date. Essentially, the second half of our sample (when the regulation
requirement is fixed) helps identify the effects of control variables that may be correlated
with the regulation requirement in the first half of the sample. Finally, we note that also
apparent in Figure 2 is the substantial variation in the regulation requirement over this time
period, from less than 500 to around 1000 MW.
    We include a number of additional controls, both to minimize potential bias from corre-
lated observables and to improve precision. We control for daily forecasted peak and valley
levels.20 In the first part of the sample, these directly influence the regulation requirement.
It is possible that generators behave differently when the peak load is forecasted to be high
rather than low, so we include these controls to minimize potential bias. We are not relying as
strongly on these controls as we would be if there were not a policy change partway through
our sample, which breaks the tight correlation between these controls and our variable of
interest.
    We also control for the amount of reserves required in the two other reserve markets
in PJM: synchronized reserves and primary reserves. PJM sets requirements both for the
territory as a whole and for the Mid-Atlantic Dominion area; we control for both sets of
requirements. None of these variables were directly tied to policy changes on December 1,
2013, and they are not generally correlated with the frequency regulation requirement (the
correlation coefficient between each of these variables and the regulation requirement is less
than 0.1), so these controls are not expected to be important for identification.
    We also control for the total generation by PJM units appearing in the CEMS data.
This follows Davis and Hausman (2016) and helps to isolate fuel-switching effects within
conventional units. It is equivalent to controlling for total demand net of nuclear, solar,
wind, biomass, and other renewable or non-CEMS generation. We also control for total
  20
     Specifically, we use the day-ahead forecasted peak load in hours for which the peak regulation require-
ment applies (4 a.m. to midnight) and set the variable equal to zero in off-peak hours. Similarly, we use the
day-ahead forecasted valley load in hours for which the off-peak regulation requirement applies (midnight to
4 a.m.) and set the variable equal to zero in peak hours.


                                                     13
demand in PJM. In combination with the total CEMS generation variable, this is akin to
controlling for the aggregation of non-CEMS (nuclear, solar, wind, etc.) generation. Given
that we are controlling for total CEMS generation, this is less critical for bias ­ it essentially
treats nuclear and renewable generation as exogenous, and it may aid with precision.
    We control for a quadratic time trend. Again, this is not expected to be crucial for
identification since the identifying variation in Figure 2 is not following a simple trend. We
include a vector of time effects: day of week, hour, and month effects to reduce noise from,
e.g., seasonality.
    Finally, we include controls for the total capacity retired, by fuel type, over this time
period. As shown in Table A3, this period saw a substantial amount of generation capacity
retired; primarily from coal-fired and oil-fired generators. Again, given that the identifying
variation in the regulation requirement is policy-induced and not following any particular
trend, these controls are not expected to matter for bias.


4.2    Regression Results
Regression results are shown in Table 1 (coefficients on control variables are shown in the
Appendix, Table A4). We see that when more regulation is required, fuel switching occurs in
the energy market, with decreased coal generation and increased gas generation. Specifically,
for each 100 MW of additional regulation capacity required by the system operator, coal
units decrease their generation by 410 MWh, statistically significant at the ten percent
level. Natural gas combined cycle units increase their generation by 450 MWh, statistically
significant at the one percent level, and natural gas combustion turbine units increase their
generation by a (noisy) 100 MWh. Our catch-all category for the (smaller) categories of
oil-fired units, natural gas boilers, etc. sees a drop of 140 MWh. Thus overall, a 100 MW
change in the regulation requirement induces an approximately 550 MWh switch to natural
gas CC and CT generation from coal and other generation.
    To understand the implications of this fuel switching, we can estimate a similar regression
with CO2 emissions as the dependent variable. We now aggregate CO2 emissions across all
units in CEMS. We see in the right-most column of Table 1 that CO2 emissions fall when the
regulation requirement is raised: for every 100 MW increase in the regulation requirement,
we estimate 300 fewer tons of CO2 are emitted by units participating in the energy market.
This is in line with the fuel switching described above. Specifically, the PJM-wide emissions
rate for natural gas units (combining CC and CT units) in our sample is 0.41 tons CO2 per
MWh; the emissions rate for coal and other units combined is 0.98. This difference implies
that 550 MWh of fuel switching would lead to a decrease in CO2 emissions of around 310


                                               14
          Table 1: The Impact of the Regulation Requirement on the Energy Market


                                         Coal (MWh)      NG, CC (MWh)        NG, CT (MWh)       Other (MWh)       CO2 (tons)


 Regulation requirement, 100 MW             -410.26*         453.36***            101.55           -144.65*       -303.13***
                                            (230.10)          (151.37)           (189.25)           (81.94)         (85.45)
 Load controls                                Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes             Yes
 Other reserves controls                      Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes             Yes
 Retirement controls                          Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes             Yes
 Quadratic time trend                         Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes             Yes
 Month, day of week, and hour effects         Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes             Yes


 Observations                               19,680            19,680              19,680            19,680          19,680
 Within R2                                   0.88              0.71                0.48              0.66            0.98
 Mean of dep. var.                          37,482            14,054               819               2,682          45,115


Note: This table shows estimates from five separate time-series regressions. For the first four columns, the dependent variable
is total MWh of electricity generated per hour in the PJM market by units that appear in CEMS data (where each column ag-
gregates across all units of a particular type). For the right-most column, the dependent variable is CO2 emissions (tons) per
hour for all PJM units in CEMS (i.e. combining across the four unit types from the first four columns). Coefficients on control
variables are shown in the Appendix, Table A4. The unit of analysis is an hour. Standard errors are clustered by sample week.
***, **, * indicate significance at the 1% and 5% and 10% level, respectively.




tons, close to our estimate of 300 tons in Table 1.21


4.3      Robustness Checks
In the Appendix, we explore a suite of robustness checks and placebo regressions. First, we
show (Table A5) sensitivity of the fuel switching and CO2 emissions results to the removal
of our primary control variables (PJM load, CEMS unit generation, peak and valley fore-
casted load, retirements, and time trends). All regression specifications continue to show fuel
switching (from coal to natural gas) and a negative impact on CO2 emissions. In general,
the magnitude and statistical significance is comparable even as we remove these controls.
The two exceptions are a specification dropping the peak and valley forecasted variables and
a specification dropping retirements; these yield estimated fuel switching of around 290-380
MWh and carbon reductions of around 100-180 tons. It is not surprising that these control
variables matter; peak load forecasts are highly correlated with the regulation requirement
for part of the sample, and secular retirements may be a large driver of plant behavior during
this time period.
    Next we show (Table A6) that the CO2 results are similar across a suite of alternative
   21
     The difference between this back-of-the-envelope calculation and our estimate may be due to differential
heat rates of marginal versus average units, and/or to a heat rate effect of regulation provision that we
describe below.


                                                             15
variable definitions, additional control variables, etc. First, we add a weather control (the
mean daily temperature at the Philadelphia airport) and a control for the wholesale price of
natural gas. Second, we more flexibly control for PJM load and the natural gas price using
non-parametric controls. Third, we use the raw variables originally reported in Eastern Pre-
vailing Time rather than correcting to Eastern Standard Time. Fourth, we use a constructed
regulatory requirement variable, from PJM reports on policy changes, rather than the re-
ported regulatory requirement variable (these two variables are equivalent in most hours,
but occasionally the reported regulatory requirement variable deviates from policy). Fifth,
we use only CEMS units that do not retire during our sample period. Sixth, we use reported
gross generation rather than our re-scaled net generation. Seventh, we ignore steam load
when re-scaling to net generation. Finally, we use the raw data for plants that report in the
Central timezone, rather than correcting to Eastern time. Across all of these specifications,
we estimate statistically significant fuel switching (coal to natural gas) and a negative and
statistically significant impact of the regulation requirement on CO2 emissions. Across these
eight robustness checks, we estimate qualitatively similar fuel switching (400 to over 600
MWh) and statistically significant CO2 reductions (250 to 290 tons).
    We also show CO2 results using reported rather than constructed emissions (Table A7).
With this variable, we again estimate statistically significant emissions reductions.
    Additional regressions in the Appendix show estimated effects at a number of placebo
units (Table A8). We run our primary regression using generating units in nearby states that
do not participate in the PJM wholesale energy market.22 We also separately use CEMS-
reporting units that are classified as part of commercial or industrial operations; this includes
generation from facilities such as hospitals and petroleum refineries. We also estimate our
main specification with wind generation as the dependent variable. Finally, we consider a
"residual" category of generation as the dependent variable. Following Davis and Hausman
(2016), we estimate the effects of the regulation requirement on the amount of generation
that would be needed to satisfy total demand, after accounting for the generation quantity
reported in CEMS. This category accounts for nuclear generation, hydro generation, net
imports, and small units not reported in CEMS. Across all of these categories, we estimate
small (and not statistically significant effects) of the regulation requirement.
    Finally, we note that our results incorporate an additional effect on CO2 emissions. When
  22
     Specifically, our full dataset contains data on all CEMS units in Delaware, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky,
Maryland, Michigan, North Carolina, New Jersey, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Virginia, Washington DC,
and West Virginia. These states are covered in part by PJM. However, in states such as Indiana, only a
minority of the plants participate in the PJM market, with the rest primarily participating in the MISO
wholesale market. Our placebo sample consists therefore of, e.g., MISO-participating units in states such as
Indiana.



                                                     16
a power plant supplies frequency regulation, its heat rate is impacted ­ the amount of fuel
it must use per unit of electricity sold. This is for two reasons. First, the heat rate at an
individual generator depends on its generation level; it is non-linear (and frequently modeled
as quadratic). Thus because generators are operating at new set points (the point around
which they move in response to the regulation signal), their heat rate could change. Second,
the generator must move up and down around its operating set point, rather than holding
steady at a given level of output. This will worsen the heat rate, i.e. require greater heat
input (and therefore more CO2 emissions) per unit of electricity sold (Hirst and Kirby, 1997;
Hummon et al., 2013). Our regressions implicitly incorporate these two effects. Because our
CO2 emissions rate is time-varying, our left-hand side variable in Table 1, Column 5 will
vary as the heat rate changes. These two effects do not appear to drive our results, given the
magnitude of the fuel switching we observe and how closely our back-of-the-envelope CO2
calculations line up, above.
    Overall, our empirical estimates show that when more frequency regulation is needed,
substantial fuel switching occurs in the energy market. In particular, coal units sell less in
the energy market while natural gas units sell more. This leads to an overall decrease in
CO2 emissions, holding generation constant. This magnitude is quite large ­ why would a
100 MW change in the regulation market lead to a 550 MWh change in the energy market?
To understand the magnitude and the mechanism behind it, we turn to a simplified model.


5        Stylized Model of the Electricity Market
5.1      The System Operator's Optimization Problem
In this section, we develop a stylized model of the regulation and energy markets, informed
by Kirschen and Strbac (2004). The goal is not to fully represent all the complexities of the
an electrical grid, but to show some of the mechanisms by which an increase in the regulation
requirement will change generation decisions in the energy market. Specifically, we elucidate
how a system operator optimally procures energy and regulation services, especially in the
presence of constraints over minimum generation. We use a stylized version of the system
operator's problem, which is essentially a single-period unit commitment problem.23 While
    23
     Note we do not model the bidding behavior of individual plants. We are essentially assuming that
there is no market power, and so plants bid their marginal costs. This is realistic if there are many firms
and/or if regulators are able to observe marginal cost and thus punish anti-competitive bidding. The lat-
ter is especially likely to be true in our context. Annual market monitoring reports state that the ex-
ercise of market power has not generally been observed in PJM's frequency regulation and energy mar-
kets (for instance, https://www.monitoringanalytics.com/reports/PJM_State_of_the_Market/2014/
2014-som-pjm-volume2-sec1.pdf, and other years' reports).


                                                    17
we focus on regulation provision, the model has features that apply to reserves markets in
general.
   We assume that there are multiple heterogeneous thermoelectric generating units partic-
ipating in an energy market and a regulation market. We evaluate how the plants operate
before and after the regulation requirement increases. We use the following notation:

     xi - generation for energy market for unit i24

     yi - one-sided capacity committed to the regulation market for unit i25

     px - energy market price per MWh

     py - regulation market price per MW

     mi - marginal cost of generation for unit i, a function of fuel use and wear and tear

     ni - marginal cost of regulation for unit i, a function of wear and tear

     Mi - minimum generation for unit i, a physical constraint

     Ci - maximum generation for unit i, a physical constraint

     ri - maximum regulation for unit i, a physical constraint26

Additionally, we make the following assumptions:

     Firms are sufficiently small that their actions do not influence the market price in
         either the regulation or the energy market (i.e. no market power).

     Constant marginal costs of generation and of regulation for each unit, with no fixed
         costs. These are heterogeneous across plants, a function of the technology installed
         (fuel choice, prime mover type, etc).27

     ri < Ci - Mi for each unit i.28
   24
        This is the set point around which regulation will be provided, if the generator offers frequency regula-
tion.
   25
       By one-sided, we mean the capacity available in either direction. The generator must be available to
deviate up or down from its set point xi by the amount yi .
    26
       A typical conventional power plant can commit at most 10 to 20 percent of its capacity to regulation
(Makarov et al., 2008; Atanacio et al., 2012).
    27
       A fully realistic model of the electric grid would allow for non-linear costs within each unit, as in Hirst
and Kirby (1997). However, constant marginal costs are frequently assumed in the electricity economics
literature (Borenstein, Bushnell and Wolak, 2002; Mansur, 2008; Davis and Hausman, 2016) and are sufficient
to illustrate the mechanisms at play in our model.
    28
       This is reasonable to assume in our empirical setting. As noted above, a power plant can typically
commit 10 to 20 percent of capacity to regulation. Typical minimum constraints are around 30 to 50 percent
of maximum capacity. For further discussion of this constraint, see Kirschen and Strbac (2004).


                                                        18
                          Figure 3: Short-Run Marginal Cost Curves
               (a) Energy Market                                (b) Regulation Market




Note: These figures show stylized marginal cost curves for a hypothetical energy market and regulation
market, with four types of participating generating units.


    Focusing on the energy market and leaving aside (for now) minimum constraints, this
yields a short-run marginal cost curve that is a step function, as shown in the left-hand panel
of Figure 3. The height of each step is the marginal cost mi for each fuel and technology
combination, and the width is the maximum generation Ci for each fuel and technology
combination. Typically natural gas combined cycle units and coal-fired units are the cheapest
to operate, and natural gas combustion turbines operate at much higher cost and with smaller
capacities.
    Many papers in the economics literature focus on the energy market and elide minimum
constraints, yielding a supply curve much like the left-hand panel in Figure 3 (Borenstein,
Bushnell and Wolak, 2002; Davis and Hausman, 2016). Dispatch order would then follow a
least-cost framework, in which the lowest cost units are dispatched, up until demand (ex-
ogenously determined) has been fulfilled. In such a supply curve, when demand exogenously
changes, one can examine whether a different unit is on the margin to examine price impacts
as well as emissions impacts. This kind of framework is also used in the literature to examine
what happens when fuel price changes lead to a re-ordering of the dispatch, i.e. a change in
which units are least-cost.
    Focusing on the regulation market, our framework implies a similar short-run marginal
cost curve, again a step function (right-hand panel of Figure 3). Here the height of each
step is the marginal cost ni for each fuel and technology combination, and the width is the
maximum regulation ri for each fuel and technology combination.
    Solving for the competitive equilibrium in the energy market when there is no regulation
market and there are no minimum constraints is simple, as described above. However, when


                                                 19
the system operator is minimizing the cost across these two markets and when minimum
constraints are incorporated, we have a more complicated mixed integer linear programming
problem:
                                                    

             min                         mi xi + ni yi    s.t.      xi = demand;
              xi ,yi
                          i(1,2,...I )

                                                                    yi = regulation requirement;
                                                                 xi + yi  Ci i;
                                                                 xi - yi  Mi or xi = yi = 0 i;
                                                                 0  yi  ri i;

The operator minimizes the total cost of generation and regulation provision, subject to a
number of constraints. The total demand and regulation requirements must be satisfied.29
Units cannot commit more than their total capacity across the two different markets; they
must have sufficient headroom if they offer regulation. The system operator can choose not
to dispatch any particular unit, but if the unit operates, it must be at least at its minimum
constraint. As a result, if it commits non-zero capacity to the regulation market, it must be
at its minimum constraint plus its regulation provision in the energy market, i.e. xi - yi  Mi
(i.e. have footroom). These minimum constraints are frequently elided in empirical papers,
but they are nontrivial. The typical unit in our data has a minimum constraint of 30 to
50 percent of its maximum capacity.30 The constraint is related to technical restrictions ­
operating a plant below minimum load can damage plant equipment.31
    In this model, corner solutions are possible for many individual generating units. For
instance, a unit might operate at maximum capacity in the energy market (xi = Ci ) and not
participate in the regulation market (yi = 0). It might instead operate just below maximum
capacity to fully participate in the regulation market, i.e. with xi = Ci - ri and with
yi = ri . It might similarly operate just above minimum capacity to fully participate in the
regulation market, with xi = Mi + ri and with yi = ri . There may also be marginal units
with generation levels between minimum and maximum capacity, and/or with regulation
  29
      The magnitude of the regulation requirement refers to the one-directional capacity needed across all
units.
   30
      The median PJM combustion turbine in our data has a minimum constraint at 50 percent of its max-
imum; the median non-CT in our PJM data has a minimum constraint at 30 percent of its maximum
capacity.
   31
      Minimum load constraints are sometimes determined by environmental compliance, if emissions rates
are very high at low levels of generation. Cost considerations can also be a factor, if fuel efficiency is very
low at low levels of generation.



                                                             20
         Table 2: Some Potential Effects of an Increase in Regulation Requirement



     Pre-period xi   Post-period xi    Change in xi      Pre-period yi   Post-period yi   Change in yi


        xi = C i      xi = Ci - ri        -ri               yi = 0          yi = ri            ri
        xi = 0        xi = Mi + ri       Mi + ri            yi = 0          yi = ri            ri


    Note: This table shows two potential effects of an increase in the regulation requirement on a
    generating unit participating in the energy market. In the first row, the generating unit backs
    down from maximum capacity C to have enough headroom to provide regulation. In contrast, in
    the second row, the generating unit enters the energy market to have enough footroom to offer
    regulation. In both cases, the generating unit increases its regulation provision (from zero to r).
    However the cases show effects in opposite directions and of differing magnitudes in the energy
    market. Other outcomes are possible as well ­ for instance if the generating unit had previously
    been offering some quantity between zero and C in the energy market, or because of market-wide
    re-dispatch in the energy market.



commitments between 0 and ri .
    Now suppose that the regulation requirement is exogenously increased, and that the
change is large enough that the marginal unit cannot provide the additional regulation.
The system operator will procure regulation from an additional unit. Suppose this does
not require a change in which plants are dispatched in the energy market (an unrealistic
assumption to which we return momentarily). Then the system operator might change the
energy and regulation procurement from an individual generating unit in multiple ways, as
shown in Table 2.
    To be able to provide regulation services, it is possible that a unit that had previously
been operating at maximum capacity Ci would need to back down from maximum. This
could occur if the regulation price change is large enough to outweigh the lost revenues
from participating less in the energy market. This outcome is demonstrated in the first
row of Table 2. It is also possible, however, that a unit that had not been participating in
either market could be induced to enter both markets. In this scenario, a unit would move
from zero generation in the energy market to at least a bit above its minimum operational
constraint, operating at Mi + ri (or more) to be able to sell ri regulation services. This could
occur if its marginal energy cost mi is above the market clearing energy price px , but the
additional revenues in the regulation market make up for losses in the energy market. This
outcome is demonstrated in the second row of Table 2. In short, an increase in the regulation
requirement could lead an individual unit to either increase or decrease the energy it sells in


                                                    21
the energy market. Moreover, it is possible for the change in the energy market to be larger
than the change in the regulation market, if a unit is induced to move from not generating
at all to generating above its minimum constraint.
    We must also consider the follow-on changes for other units in the energy market. Since
energy demand is exogenous and inelastic, any changes induced by one unit, as described
in Table 2, must be offset by an equal amount across all other units (neglecting changes in
losses due to changes in power flows, which we have not modeled). That is, the change in
the regulation requirement could induce not only changes in py but also changes in px and
therefore a different set of plants committed, and different dispatch levels for those plants,
in both the regulation and energy markets. The system as a whole could move to a different
equilibrium with different inframarginal units, and with some units changing by more than
the regulation requirement change. How the system changes will depend on the ways short-
run operating profits in one market (e.g., px - mi ) compare to short-run operating profits in
the other market (e.g., py - ni ) across the entire set of generators.


5.2     Simulated Market
We construct a four-unit model, showing that a regulation requirement change can have a
wide range of impacts in the energy market. We then solve for the equilibrium, exogenously
changing the regulation requirement to show how changes occur along the extensive margin
for various plants. The four units represent three baseload units, with differing marginal costs
of energy and regulation, and one peaker unit with higher marginal cost for both services
(details in Appendix). All four units have minimum operational constraints.32 All four units
are capable of following the regulation signal, which is an energy-neutral signal (units return
to their initial set point within a specified time frame). The four units combined must
meet an exogenous perfectly inelastic demand requirement as well as a perfectly inelastic
regulation requirement.
    Figure 4 shows how each unit changes its generation (top row) and regulation provision
(bottom row) as the regulation requirement is scaled up (results are also shown in table form
in the Appendix, Table A9). In the top row, note the axes are scaled differently across units.
    If there were no minimum constraints and no regulation requirement, Units A and B
would provide energy at their maximum (25,000 MWh each) as they have the lowest marginal
costs of energy provision. However, the minimum constraints and the regulation requirements
change the equilibrium in qualitatively important ways.
  32
    The minimum is the same for the three low-cost plants. The high-cost unit has a smaller minimum
operational constraint, representing the fact that the peaking portion of the electricity market is made up
of many small peaker units that can each be dispatched at quite small levels of generation.


                                                    22
                                Figure 4: Simulated Four-Unit Model
       (a) Unit A                 (b) Unit B                 (c) Unit C                 (d) Unit D




Note: This figure displays the equilibrium results for a four-unit model with energy and regulation output.
The top row shows generation outcomes with a black line, surrounded by the regulation band in grey. Gen-
eration is in MWh provided (over one hour). The bottom row shows the capacity committed to regulation.
Units are ordered left to right from least to most expensive, with the ranking the same across the generation
and regulation markets (Unit A has the lowest marginal cost for both services; Unit D the highest). All
four units face minimum and maximum constraints. Energy demand is held constant, while the regulation
requirement varies exogenously across the x-axis. Discontinuities and kinks are shown with vertical grey
lines, at a regulation requirement of 600, 615, and 1000 MW. Quantities are given in table form, along with
cost and constraint details, in Appendix Table A9.


    Consider first the setting where the regulation requirement is set at 500 MW. Unit A
produces the maximum possible energy (25,000 MWh), but Unit B provides only 24,550. It
then uses its remaining capacity (450 MW) to provide regulation. Unit C is not dispatched
to fill in the remaining 450 MWh to satisfy energy demand. Instead, the most expensive
unit, Unit D, provides 450 MWh of energy and 50 MW of regulation services. This is
because Unit D, a peaker, has a lower minimum generation requirement than does Unit C
­ in fact, it operates just at its minimum generation requirement. This illustrates how the
minimum generation constraints can alter the dispatch order. (We caution that the results
are particularly "lumpy" in that the minimum generation has an especially pronounced
impact because there are only four generators; results would be less lumpy in a large market.)
    Next, consider what happens as the regulation requirement increases from 500 to 550
or 600 MW. Unit B decreases its energy a bit, to be able to provide additional regulation
­ it must decrease energy provision to do so, since it had been operating at its maximum
constraint when combining both energy and regulation. Unit D also provides a bit more
regulation, but to do so, it must increase its generation, to maintain status above its mini-
mum constraint. This illustrates how a unit wishing to provide additional regulation could
conceivably increase or decrease its energy provision, depending on which (if any) of its


                                                     23
constraints are binding.
    Once the regulation requirement is increased to 601 MW, Unit A begins to decrease
its energy, to be able to provide regulation. This is because Unit B is providing as much
regulation as possible (500 MW) and cannot provide additional regulation. As the regulation
requirement continues to increase, up to 615 MW, additional 1-unit changes in the regulation
requirement lead to Unit A decreasing its energy provision and increasing its regulation
provision.
    The most interesting change occurs when the regulation requirement increases to 616
MW. At this point, the least-cost solution involves dispatching Unit C at its minimum
generation. Thus Unit D exits both markets. Previously, this had not been least-cost
because of Unit C's minimum constraint. However, it is now least-cost for Unit C to operate
at its minimum constraint, rather than to be turned off. So a change in the regulation
requirement from 615 MW to 616 MW leads to a very different equilibrium across all units.
Unit A decreases its energy provision by around 100 MWh and increases its regulation
provision by around 100 MW. Unit B decreases its energy provision by around 300 MWh
and maintains the same amount of regulation provision. Unit C increases from 0 to 4000
MWh of energy, but does not provide any regulation. Unit D drops from over 500 MWh to 0
MWh of energy, and also exits the regulation market. This illustrates how a small change in
the regulation requirement can lead to oversized changes in the energy market if it changes
whether a unit switches between zero generation and operating at its minimum constraints.
    Finally, the last change to occur in this figure is when the regulation requirement goes
from 1000 to 1001 MW. Unit C provides the marginal regulation. To do so, it must increase
its energy provision since it had been operating at its minimum constraint. Recalling that
total generation is fixed, we see that Unit B decreases its energy provision as a result.
    We make several caveats regarding the generalizability of our model. We have deliberately
presented a stylized version of the energy and regulation markets, to show some of the
ways that minimum constraints combine with the multi-product nature of power plants. In
practice, there are two different regulation prices in the PJM market: units are rewarded
separately for the quantity of MWs offered and for the accuracy with which they respond to
the regulation signal. This will impact the mix of, for instance, natural gas combined cycle
units versus coal units in the regulation market, since they have differing levels of accuracy.
    Also, we have not modeled other features of the market that could interact with the
minimum constraints. For instance, our model is static, and dynamic constraints such as
minimum up and down times could matter. How exactly they would interact with frequency
regulation provision would depend on demand profiles across the day, among other things.
Moreover, in reality PJM runs multiple optimization algorithms because there are markets on


                                              24
different timescales: the system operator must make decisions at the day-ahead, hour-ahead,
and real-time levels. How regulation interacts with unit commitment will be determined by
what algorithms the system operator uses across these different timescales. Also, transmis-
sion congestion can matter; as Ryan et al. (2018) write, "we cannot make generalizations
about the effects of congestion because, in practice, results would be strongly dependent on
grid topology and parameters, generator sizing and location, and so on" (p 10172). Finally,
our model consists of only four units; in practice PJM is of course much larger. More gener-
ating units will mean that supply is less "lumpy" and so one might expect less discontinuous
changes than what is observed in Figure 4; however in a real-world market, transmission
congestion could shrink the number of units that are able to respond.
    Overall, there are four primary takeaways from this stylized model: (1) there are potential
nonlinearities in the impacts of a regulation requirement change; (2) high marginal cost units
can be dispatched over cheaper units because of minimum constraints; (3) an increase in the
regulation requirement can either increase or decrease generation at a given unit; and (4)
changes in generation at an individual unit can be bigger than the change in the regulation
requirement. Thus we see that minimum constraints can be quite important here in that they
create lumpiness in how the market responds to exogenous changes, although the economics
literature tends to elide them for simplicity. Moreoever, the two output markets can interact
in surprising ways, with outsized impacts of the regulation market on the energy market.
Finally, the specific changes that will be observed following a regulation market change will
depend on a suite of parameters. As such the effects empirically observed in a real-world
scenario will be sensitive to the particular time period and electricity market studied.


6    Evidence of Changes Along Extensive Versus Inten-
     sive Margins
To connect our modeling results to our empirical results, we next estimate various intensive
versus extensive margin changes. We separate hourly generation into five bins for each unit:
Off, Below Minimum Constraint, At Minimum Constraint, Between Minimum Constraint
and Maximum Capacity, and At Maximum Capacity. Then we count the number of units of
each fuel type in each bin in each hour, giving us a time series of bin-level counts for each
fuel type. Details of the data and variable construction are in the Appendix.
    We regress the count of generators falling into each bin on the regulation requirement
and a vector of controls separately for each fuel/mover type. The regressions take the form:




                                              25
                                Ni,t =  + Rt + Xt  + i,t                                  (2)

where Ni,t is a count of units of fuel type i in hour t that have generation levels falling in
a particular bin (e.g., the number of coal boiler units at 5 a.m. on November 1, 2012 with
capacity factors below their minimum constraint). Again Rt is the regulation requirement
and Xt is a vector of controls (the same controls as in the generation regressions above).
Standard errors are clustered by sample week.
    Table 3 shows the results of these regressions for each of the three primary fuel/mover
types of interest: coal boilers, natural gas combined cycle, and natural gas combustion
turbine (results for "other" units are shown in the Appendix, Table A10). These effects
are in line with both the generation changes shown in Table 1 and with the stylized model.
Panel A shows that coal boilers are less likely to be at their maximum (Column 5) and
more likely to operate within their main operational range (Column 4) when the regulation
requirement is higher. Specifically, a 100 MW increase in the regulation requirement causes
2.1 more coal-fired units to be in their main operational range and 2.7 fewer units to be at
their maximum capacity (also, 0.6 units are more likely to be below their main operational
range). This is consistent with these units providing additional regulation, and needing
their set point to be below their maximum to have the flexibility for upward movements in
response to a regulation signal. It is also consistent with decreasing their energy provision
to accommodate additional energy provision by natural gas plants.
    Panel B shows that natural gas combined cycle units are more likely to be dispatched
when the regulation requirement is higher. For every 100 MW additional regulation re-
quirement, around two natural gas combined cycle units are more likely to be dispatched,
primarily in their main operational range (Column 4). This could be consistent either with
dispatching with positive generation to be able to themselves provide frequency regulation,
or with needing to fill the gap left by reduced coal generation, shown in Panel A.
    Panel C shows that natural gas combustion turbines are also more likely to be operating
within their main operational range, some combination of units being less likely to be off
(Column 1) and less likely to be at their maximum capacity (Column 5). This could be
because they move to the middle of their range to provide frequency regulation, because
they are newly dispatched to fill in for lost coal generation, or some combination of both.
    As shown in the Appendix, results are robust to an alternative construction of the mini-
mum constraint variable. Results are also robust to using ten bins, identically spaced across
the capacity of each unit (0 to 10 percent of capacity, 11 to 20 percent of capacity, etc.),
rather than a minimum constraint definition.
    Overall, the primary effect we see when the regulation requirement is higher is that

                                             26
      Table 3: The Regulation Requirement and Extensive Versus Intensive Margins


     Panel A. Coal Boilers
                                                             Off     Below min     At min     Above min     At max


     Regulation requirement, 100 MW                          0.03       0.29**       0.25      2.07***      -2.65***
                                                            (0.91)      (0.13)      (0.25)      (0.71)       (0.51)


     Observations                                          19,680       19,680      19,680      19,680       19,680
     Within R2                                              0.70         0.11        0.39        0.40         0.73


     Panel B. Natural Gas Combined Cycle
                                                             Off     Below min     At min     Above min     At max


     Regulation requirement, 100 MW                        -1.93**     -0.53**       0.46      2.13***        -0.12
                                                            (0.78)      (0.24)      (0.33)      (0.72)       (0.15)


     Observations                                          19,680       19,680      19,680      19,680       19,680
     Within R2                                              0.64         0.17        0.14        0.64         0.17


     Panel C. Natural Gas Combustion Turbines
                                                             Off     Below min     At min     Above min     At max


     Regulation requirement, 100 MW                          -3.07       0.26        0.33       3.75*       -1.26***
                                                            (2.93)      (0.43)      (0.26)      (2.24)       (0.41)


     Observations                                          19,680       19,680      19,680      19,680       19,680
     Within R2                                              0.47         0.31        0.22        0.43         0.16



    Note: This table shows estimates from 15 separate regressions. The dependent variable is a variable representing
    the count of units of each fuel type generating at each level in PJM. The unit of analysis is an hour. Effects for
    other unit types are shown in the Appendix, Table A10. Standard errors are clustered by sample week. ***, **, *
    indicate significance at the 1% and 5% and 10% level, respectively.




more units operate within their main operational range, rather than being off or at the
maximum constraint. This is consistent with the stylized model in the previous section. The
magnitudes are also consistent with the a back-of-the-envelope calculation of the number of
units that would be needed to provide 100 MW of regulation. Recall that the typical unit
can commit 10-20 percent of its capacity to regulation. In our sample, the average coal or
combined cycle unit has a capacity of around 250-300 MW, implying that two to four units
would be needed to provide 100 MW of regulation. Natural gas CT units in our sample have
a capacity of around 100 MW, so more of these plants would be needed to provide the same
amount of regulation.
   Moreover, the magnitudes observed in Table 3 are consistent with the magnitudes in

                                                           27
Table 1. The average coal-fired boiler in our sample has a capacity of 310 MW. So, 2.1 units
moving from maximum capacity to 70 percent, and 0.6 units moving from maximum capacity
to at or below the minimum constraint, would imply a decrease in coal-fired generation of
300 MWh in an hour. That is somewhat smaller than what we estimate in Table 1, but the
discrepancy could easily be explained by heterogeneous coal plants sizes (for instance, the
70th percentile has a capacity of 410 MW, which would close the gap).
    Average natural gas combined cycle maximum capacity in our sample is 240 MW. So,
1.9 natural gas combined cycle units moving from off to 70 percent, and 0.5 moving from
30 to 70 percent, would imply an increase of 370 MWh in an hour. Again, this is somewhat
smaller than what we estimate in Table 1, but using capacity at the 55th percentile would
close the gap.
    Finally, combustion turbines have an average capacity of 90 MW in our sample. So, three
combustion turbines moving from off to 70 percent and 1.3 combustion turbines moving from
maximum capacity to 70 percent would imply a change of 160 MWh. Thus across all three
unit types, the magnitudes are qualitatively similar to those in Table 1.
    We see empirically that generators behave in intuitive ways along both the intensive and
extensive margins when the regulation requirement is exogenously changed. Because they
are multi-product firms, they adjust their outputs in multiple markets. Indeed, recall that
one of the motivations behind the policy changes to the regulation requirement was to allow
more resources to move their availability from the regulation market to the energy market
(Section 4). Moreover, minimum and maximum constraints can lead to changes in the energy
market that are outsized in comparison with the change in the regulation requirement.


7        Implications for Battery Deployment
Our results on frequency regulation markets have important implications for utility-scale
battery storage. There is a growing interest in using energy storage, including batteries,
flywheels, and loads coordinated to behave like storage, to help operate the electrical grid.
While the energy economics literature has focused on the use of batteries for arbitrage, bat-
teries can also be used to provide ancillary services such as frequency regulation (Department
of Energy, 2013; International Renewable Energy Agency, 2017; Deloitte, 2018; Ryan et al.,
2018). Utility-scale batteries, typically sized at 1 to 10 MW,33 can charge and discharge
according to an operator's command. This can be used for intertemporal arbitrage, for in-
stance to charge when demand is low (at night) and discharge when demand is high (the
    33
     EIA-860 data for 2018 give the 25th and 75th percentiles nationwide as 1 and 10 MW. For PJM, the
25th and 75th percentiles are 2 and 20 MW. The largest battery listed is 40 MW.


                                                 28
late afternoon). It can also be used at a faster timescale, to provide grid reliability services.
Batteries are often better-suited to provide frequency regulation than are conventional gen-
erators, since they are able to very quickly and accurately respond to the system operator's
regulation signal.
    PJM has been at the forefront of incorporating storage into ancillary service markets;
storage providers found the RegD system particularly lucrative when it was first introduced.34
Indeed, 80% of all storage capacity in PJM is built for the provision of frequency regula-
tion. While the academic literature in economics has focused on storage for energy market
arbitrage, 21 of PJM's 27 facilities list "frequency regulation" as a service; only five facili-
ties list "load management" and just one lists "arbitrage" as a service, according to Energy
Information Administration data.35
    Storage for frequency regulation or other ancillary services has been investigated in
the academic literature through an engineering lens;36 via a techno-economic model;37 and
through a theoretical economics lens.38 These papers have generally focused on the private
incentives of operators using storage for frequency regulation, and have not documented
the emissions impacts of storage used for frequency regulation. Lin, Johnson and Mathieu
(2019); Ryan et al. (2018) examine emissions impacts of using storage for frequency reg-
ulation using simple test systems, not calibrated to the PJM market, rather than ex-post
empirical evidence. Thus our results may be informative for providing novel empirical evi-
dence on the interaction between frequency regulation and energy markets, with implications
for battery deployment.
    For instance, with respect to the operations of conventional generators, changes to the
regulation requirement over this period are analogous to the entry and exit of batteries used
for frequency regulation, where a decrease in the regulation requirement can be thought of as
the entry of a battery. Consider a battery entering the market in order to participate in the
regulation market. Suppose this battery is inframarginal ­ batteries generally have high fixed
costs but low marginal costs ­ and suppose that the battery does not participate in the energy
market (recall from above that batteries in PJM generally do not provide arbitrage in the
energy market). If this battery participates in each period, its entry represents a reduction in
   34
      See Maloney (2017), "Is the bloom off the RegD rose for battery storage in PJM?" in Utility Dive, https:
//www.utilitydive.com/news/is-the-bloom-off-the-regd-rose-for-battery-storage-in-pjm/
503793/.
   35
      Source: EIA-860 data for 2018.
   36
      See Castillo and Gayme (2013); M´egel, Mathieu and Andersson (2013); Xi, Sioshansi and Marano (2014);
Cho and Kleit (2015); M´   egel, Mathieu and Andersson (2015a,b); Moreno, Moreira and Strbac (2015); Wu
et al. (2015); De Sisternes, Jenkins and Botterud (2016); He et al. (2016); Busic, Hashmi and Meyn (2017);
Namor et al. (2018); Shi et al. (2018); Watson et al. (2018); Kern, Johnson and Mathieu (2019).
   37
      See Stephan et al. (2016).
   38
      See Cho and Kleit (2015).


                                                     29
the residual regulation requirement faced by conventional generators, by a magnitude equal
to the capacity of the battery. Hence, examining changes to the regulation requirement will
provide insights into how conventional generators are likely to respond to changes to their
residual regulation requirement, whether those changes are the result of policy or the entry
and exit of batteries.
    Thus we expect, based on our analysis of the PJM regulation market, that the entry of
batteries in PJM would lead to fuel switching and emissions changes in the energy market.
For the time period we study (2012-2014), we could infer that battery entry (akin to a
reduction in the regulation requirement) would lead to increased CO2 emissions, with gas
to coal switching. However, caveats are in order. Recall that in the stylized model, we
see that the changes in regulation can have many potential impacts on the energy market.
Thus our regression results are not necessarily externally valid: the results cannot be simply
extrapolated to alternative time periods in PJM nor to other system operators. Different
fuel costs or the secular retirements of power plants could mean very different impacts of
changes to the regulation market.39 In particular, the retirement of coal plants may imply
less fuel switching in recent years than what we estimate for the 2012-2014 period in Table 1.
    Ideally, we would next empirically estimate the impact of battery entry into the frequency
regulation market in PJM. Empirical analysis is, unfortunately, limited in several ways. First
and most importantly, battery capacity over this time period essentially follows an upward
trend. Moreover, coal plants are retiring and there is a secular trend nationwide in coal-
to-gas switching in the electricity market. The simple correlation of the battery capacity
variable with a linear time trend is 0.9, as is the correlation between battery capacity and
coal retirements in PJM. Without additional variation, this will make it difficult to identify
the causal effect of changes in battery capacity.
    One could instead leverage discontinuities in battery entry, similar to the approach taken
in Davis and Hausman (2016). However, the entry dates for new battery capacity differs
somewhat across the two government sources we observe, making us less confident in the
exact entry dates. Moreover, some of the entry dates coincide with coal plant retirement
dates. To address this uncertainty, we explore using a variable available from PJM: the
amount of self-scheduled RegD participating in the frequency regulation market. If one is
willing to assume that batteries self-schedule (and hydro may as well), but that combustion
   39
      Note we also expect two additional impacts of battery entry. Battery entry can impact the heat rates
of conventional generators, similar to how frequency regulation impacts the heat rate, a point we discuss in
Section 2. Furthermore, we note that batteries are net users of electricity (they do not have 100% round-
trip efficiency), and so their entry impacts the amount of conventional power plant generation required
(Department of Energy, 2016). This mechanism will not be captured with the regression approach we have
taken, which conditions on total quantity demanded across the system.



                                                    30
turbines bid a non-zero marginal cost; and if one is willing to assume that batteries (and
hydro) participate in RegD whereas boilers and combined cycle units participate in RegA,
then the amount of self-scheduled RegD participating may serve as a useful proxy for battery
and hydro participation that crowds out fossil fuel generator participation.
    A final identification challenge is that we have reason to suspect that the impact of battery
entry over the 2012-2018 time period is time-varying, based on documentation from the PJM
market monitor. The 2017 State of the Market describes that RegA was being used to offset
RegD movements.40 That is, for the latter part of our sample, it is possible that increased
battery capacity could lead to more regulation provided by conventional units, with batteries
and conventional plants moving in opposite directions to follow their respective regulation
signals.
    All of these together make identification extremely challenging. With that caveat in
mind, in the Appendix we provide a series of empirical results. We regress generation by fuel
type (as we did in the previous sections) on battery capacity. We show results using both
indicators of battery capacity entry, which have slightly different dates, and the self-scheduled
RegD measure. Not surprisingly, the results are unstable in sign, magnitude, and statistical
significance across specifications. Moreover, in placebo regressions using generators in nearby
states, we see specifications with similar magnitudes. This is not surprising, given the
identification challenges described above.
    In sum, our results have qualitatively important implications for battery deployment.
The fuel switching that could result will have impacts on CO2 emissions. Future empirical
work in this area will be important as more batteries are deployed.


8        Discussion and Conclusion
Overall, we see that changes in the structure and makeup of the frequency regulation market
impact conventional generators that participate in the energy market. Specifically, we find
that for every additional 100 MW reduction in frequency regulation required of plants in
PJM, there is 550 MWh of fuel switching from natural gas to coal in the energy market. This
leads to an increase in carbon emissions of 300 tons per hour, implying climate damages on
the order of $120 million per year. The results are directionally robust to considering alter-
native controls and various alternative specifications. Results also pass a series of placebo
    40
     Specifically, the report states: "PJM's current regulation market design is severely flawed and does not
follow the appropriate basic design logic. . . RegA is now explicitly used to support the conditional energy
neutrality of RegD. The RegD signal is now the difference between ACE and RegA. RegA is required to
offset RegD when RegD moves in the opposite direction of that required by ACE control in order to permit
RegD to recharge" (pp 472-473).


                                                     31
tests using generators outside of the PJM market.
    We use a simple model to demonstrate the mechanisms behind the observed fuel switch-
ing. The model considers generators as multi-product suppliers, and makes the realistic
assumption that units are constrained by non-zero minimum and maximum constraints.
With these assumptions, we show that policy and market changes can cause conventional
power plants to move from fully off to operating at non-negligible minimum load, and vice-
versa. These changes along the generators' extensive margins can explain the magnitude of
our results.
    Furthermore, we consider how changes in the frequency regulation market are related to
the entry and exit of batteries. While the academic economic literature has focused on energy
storage as an energy market arbitrage opportunity, the vast majority of batteries within PJM
(and the country) are used for frequency regulation and not for arbitrage. Changes to the
regulation requirement within PJM can be thought of as analogous to changes in battery
capacity available for frequency regulation. While identification challenges prevent us from
directly measuring the impacts of battery entry and exit on conventional generators, the fuel
switching that occurs due to changes in the regulation requirement suggests that battery
entry might lead to increased CO2 emissions.
    The direction of these results matches evidence in the engineering literature about the
entry of batteries in frequency regulation (Ryan et al., 2018). That research uses a unit
commitment and dispatch model of a small power system to show the life-cycle impacts
of batteries, and finds similar fuel switching. The magnitude of our results is larger than
that in Ryan et al. (2018). The magnitudes in this paper makes sense given what we find
for extensive margin changes in the number of plants participating in each market. Future
engineering work could build test systems that more closely match PJM parameters to
explore the difference between our magnitudes and those in Ryan et al. (2018). Effects of
the sort described above are expected to be sensitive to the size of the system and the number
of generators modeled in a unit commitment model. Such a test system could also allow for
simulations under alternative grid conditions, such as increased coal retirements, increased
deployment of renewables, etc.
    Note that the magnitude and potentially the direction of these effects is context-specific,
as described in depth in Ryan et al. (2018). In different regions of the country, different fuel
types might be inframarginal and changes to the regulation requirement might have very
different impacts. In addition, the long-term impact of batteries could be different from
the short-term impacts we measure. As batteries crowd conventional generators out of the
regulation market, the profitability of fossil-fuel fired plants could decline and some of these
conventional plants could be more likely to retire (and/or new conventional plants could be


                                              32
less likely to enter). Whether this increases or decreases CO2 emissions in the long run of
course depends on whether profitability is impacted at coal or natural gas units. Future
work could investigate plant retirements in this context using modeling of the sort used in
Linn and McCormack (2019).
    However, this paper does demonstrate that ancillary markets and energy markets are far
more intertwined than economics researchers might have previously thought. The structure
and policy details of ancillary service markets have important impacts for generators and
for the energy market, and more careful research across the country is necessary to better
understand these complexities in different settings. Future economics research could use
structural methods to estimate power plant costs in both markets and evaluate market
power after accounting for the existence of both minimum constraints and multiple markets.
    Finally, while our results point to the possibility that batteries lead to increased CO2
emissions, the results are not to say that batteries are in general harmful for climate change.
First, as described above, the results are specific to a particular set of costs across fossil fuel
fired plants. Moreover, they are specific to a second-best world in which CO2 emissions are
not priced. Finally, batteries may be desirable for supporting renewables integration and
thus decreasing emissions. However the results do point towards the complexities inherent
in designing second-best greenhouse gas abatement policy. As policy-makers continue to
grapple with whether and how to support batteries and other new technologies, the realities
of the electrical grid and its markets cannot be ignored.




                                                33
References
Abito, Jose-Miguel, Christopher R. Knittel, Konstantinos Metaxoglou, and An-
 dre Trindade. 2018. "Coordinating Separate Markets for Externalities." NBER Working
 Paper 24481.
Antweiler, Werner. 2018. "The Economics of Grid-Scale Electricity Storage: Location
 Heterogeneity and Business Models." Working paper.
Atanacio, Manuel, Richard Fioravanti, Warren Katzenstein, and Khoi Vu. 2012.
 "Emission II Study of Advanced Storage used for Frequency Regulation." Department of
 Energy ­ Sandia National Labs, Project Number: Sandia Negotiation 96362.
Bastien-Olvera, Bernardo A., and Frances C. Moore. 2020. "Use and non-use value
 of nature and the social cost of carbon." Nature Sustainability.
Borenstein, Severin, James B. Bushnell, and Frank A. Wolak. 2002. "Measuring
 Market Inefficiencies in California's Restructured Wholesale Electricity Market." American
 Economic Review, 92(5): 1376­1405.
Borensten, Severin, and James Bushnell. 2015. "The US Electricity Industry After 20
 Years of Restructuring." Annual Review of Economics, 7: 437­464.
Busic, Ana, Md Umar Hashmi, and Sean Meyn. 2017. "Distributed Control
 of a Fleet of Batteries." 2017 American Control Conference (ACC), 3406­3411. doi:
 10.23919/ACC.2017.7963473.
Carson, Richard, and Kevin Novan. 2013. "The Private and Social Economics of Bulk
 Electricity Storage." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 66: 404­423.
Castillo, Anya, and Dennice F. Gayme. 2013. "Profit Maximizing Storage Alloca-
 tion in Power Grids." 52nd IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, 429­435. doi:
 10.1109/CDC.2013.6759919.
Castro, Miguel. 2020. "Intermittent Renewable Energy, Hydropower Dynamics and the
 Profitability of Storage Arbitrage." IDB Working Paper 1107.
Chatterjee, Arpita, Rafael Dix-Carneiro, and Jade Vichyanond. 2013. "Multi-
 Product Firms and Exchange Rate Fluctuations." American Economic Journal: Economic
 Policy, 5(2): 77­110.
Cho, Joohyun, and Andrew N. Kleit. 2015. "Energy Storage Systems in Energy and
 Ancillary Markets: A Backwards Induction Approach." Applied Energy, 147: 176­183. doi:
 110.1016/j.apenergy.2015.01.114.
Cicala, Steve. 2015. "When Does Regulation Distort Costs? Lessons from Fuel Procure-
  ment in US Electricity Generation." American Economic Review, 105(1): 411­444.
Cicala, Steve. 2017. "Imperfect Markets versus Imperfect Regulation in U.S. Electricity
  Generation." NBER Working Paper 23053.

                                            34
Cullen, Joseph A., and Erin T. Mansur. 2017. "Inferring Carbon Abatement Costs
 in Electricity Markets: A Revealed Preference Approach Using the Shale Revolution."
 American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 9(3): 106­133.
Davis, Lucas, and Catherine Hausman. 2016. "Market Impacts of a Nuclear Power
 Plant Closure." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 8(2): 92­122.
De Loecker, Jan. 2011. "Product Differentiation, Multiproduct Firms, and Estimating the
 Impact of Trade Liberalization on Productivity." Econometrica, 79(5): 1407­1451.
Deloitte. 2018. "Supercharged: Challenges and opportunities in global battery storage mar-
 kets."
Department        of        Energy.        2013.     "Grid     Energy      Storage."
 https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2014/09/f18/Grid%20Energy%20Storage%20
 December%202013.pdf.
Department of Energy. 2016. "Demand Response and Energy Storage Integration Study."
De Sisternes, Fernando J., Jesse D. Jenkins, and Audun Botterud. 2016. "The
 Value of Energy Storage in Decarbonizing the Electricity Sector." Applied Energy,
 175: 368­379. doi: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.05.014.
Eckel, Carsten, and J. Peter Neary. 2010. "Multi-Product Firms and Flexible Manu-
  facturing in the Global Economy." The Review of Economic Studies, 77: 188­217.
Fabrizio, Kira R., Nancy L. Rose, and Catherine D. Wolfram. 2007. "Do Mar-
  kets Reduce Costs? Assessing the Impact of Regulatory Restructuring on US Electric
  Generation Efficiency." American Economic Review, 97(4): 1250­1277.
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. 2011. "Order No. 755, Frequency Regulation
  Competition in Organized Wholesale Power Markets." Federal Register, Vol. 76, No. 210.
He, Guannan, Qixin Chen, Chongqing Kang, Pierre Pinson, and Qing Xia. 2016.
 "Optimal Bidding Strategy of Battery Storage in Power Markets Considering Performance-
 Based Regulation and Battery Cycle Life." IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, 7(5): 2359­
 2367. doi: 10.1109/TSG.2015.2424314.
Hirst, Eric, and Brendan Kirby. 1997. "Creating Competitive Markets for Ancillary
 Services." Oak Ridge National Laboratory ORNL/CON-448.
Hirst, Eric, and Brendan Kirby. 1998. "Simulating the Operation of Markets for Bulk-
 Power Ancillary Services." The Energy Journal, 19(3): 49­68.
Hledik, Ryan, Roger Lueken, Colin McIntyre, and Heidi Bishop. 2017. "Stacked
 Benefits: Comprehensively Valuing Battery Storage in California." Brattle Group.
Holladay, J. Scott, and Jacob LaRiviere. 2018. "How Does Welfare from Load Shifting
 Electricity Policy Vary with Market Prices? Evidence from Bulk Storage and Electricity
 Generation." The Energy Journal, 39(6).

                                           35
Holland, Stephen P., Erin T. Mansur, Nicholas Z. Muller, and Andrew J. Yates.
 2016. "Are There Environmental Benefits from Driving Electric Vehicles? The Importance
 of Local Factors." American Economic Review, 106(12): 3700­3729.

Hortacsu, Ali, Fernando Luco, Steven L. Puller, and Dongni Zhu. 2019. "Does
 Strategic Ability Affect Efficiency? Evidence from Electricity Markets." American Eco-
 nomic Review, 109(12): 4302­4342.

Hummon, Marissa, Paul Denholm, Jennie Jorenson, David Palchak, Brendan
 Kirby, and Ookie Ma. 2013. "Fundamental Drivers of the Cost and Price of Operat-
 ing Reserves." National Renewable Energy Laboratory Technical Report NREL/TP-6A20-
 58491.

Interagency Working Group on Social Cost of Greenhouse Gases, United
  States Government. 2016. "Technical Support Document: Technical Update of the
  Social Cost of Carbon for Regulatory Impact Analysis Under Executive Order 12866."

International Renewable Energy Agency. 2017. "Electricity Storage and Renewables."

Jha, Akshaya, and Frank Wolak. 2020. "Can Forward Commodity Markets Improve
  Spot Market Performance? Evidence from Wholesale Electricity." Working Paper.

Johnson, Justin P, and David P Myatt. 2006. "Multiproduct Cournot Oligopoly."
  RAND Journal of Economics, 37(3).

Just, Sebastian, and Christoph Weber. 2008. "Pricing of reserves: Valuing system
  reserve capacity against spot prices in electricity markets." Energy Economics, 30: 3198­
  3221.

Kern, Abigail, Jeremiah X. Johnson, and Johanna L. Mathieu. 2019. "Environ-
 mental Impacts of Using Energy Storage Aggregations to Provide Multiple Services."
 Proceedings of the Hawaii International Conference on Systems Science.

Kirby, Brendan J. 2004. "Frequency Regulation Basics and Trends." Oak Ridge National
 Laboratory ORNL/TM-2004/291.

Kirkpatrick, Justin. 2018. "Estimating Congestion Benefits of Batteries for Unobserved
 Networks: A Machine Learning Approach." Working paper.

Kirschen, Daniel, and Goran Strbac. 2004. Fundamentals of Power System Economics.
 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Knittel, Christopher R., and Konstantinos Metaxoglou. 2008. "Diagnosing Unilat-
 eral Market Power in Electricity Reserves Market." The Journal of Energy Markets.

Linn, Joshua, and Jhih-Shyang Shih. 2019. "Do lower electricity storage costs re-
  duce greenhouse gas emissions?" Journal of Environmental Economics and Management,
  96: 130­158.


                                            36
Linn, Joshua, and Kristen McCormack. 2019. "The Roles of Energy Markets and
  Environmental Regulation in Reducing Coal-Fired Plant Profits and Electricity Sector
  Emissions." RAND Journal of Economics, 50: 733­767.
Lin, Yashen, Jeremiah X. Johnson, and Johanna L. Mathieu. 2019. "Emissions
  Impacts of Using Energy Storage for Power System Reserves." Applied Energy, 168: 444­
  456.
Makarov, Y. V., S. Lu, J. Ma, and T. B. Nguyen. 2008. "Assessing the Value of
 Regulation Resources Based on Their Time Response Characteristics." Pacific Northwest
 National Laboratory, Prepared for California Energy Commission.
Mansur, Erin T. 2008. "Measuring Welfare in Restructured Electricity Markets." The
 Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(2): 369­386.
Mansur, Erin T, and Matthew W White. 2012. "Market Organization and Efficiency
 in Electricity Markets." Working paper.
Mayo, John W. 1984. "Multiproduct Monopoly, Regulation, and Firm Costs." Southern
 Economic Journal, 51(1): 208­218.
M´
 egel, Olivier, Johanna L Mathieu, and Goran Andersson. 2013. "Maximizing the
 Potential of Energy Storage to Provide Fast Frequency Control." IEEE PES ISGT Europe
 2013, 1­5. doi: 10.1109/ISGTEurope.2013.6695380.
M´
 egel, Olivier, Johanna L Mathieu, and Goran Andersson. 2015a. "Schedul-
 ing Distributed Energy Storage Units to Provide Multiple Services Under Forecast
 Error." International Journal of Electrical Power & Energy Systems, 72: 48­57. doi:
 10.1016/j.ijepes.2015.02.010.
M´
 egel, Olivier, Johanna L Mathieu, and Goran Andersson. 2015b. "Stochastic Dual
 Dynamic Programming to Schedule Energy Storage Units Providing Multiple Services."
 2015 IEEE Eindhoven PowerTech, 1­6. doi: 10.1109/PTC.2015.7232775.
MIT Energy Initiative. 2011. "Managing Large-Scale Penetration of Intermittent Renew-
 ables."
Monitoring Analytics. 2018. "State of the Market Report for PJM."
Moore, Frances C., Uris Baldos, Thomas Hertel, and Delavane Diaz. 2017. "New
 Science of Climate Change Impacts on Agriculture Implies Higher Social Cost of Carbon."
 Nature Communications, 8(1): 1607.
Moreno, Rodrigo, Roberto Moreira, and Goran Strbac. 2015. "A MILP Model
 for Optimising Multi-service Portfolios of Distributed Energy Storage." Applied Energy,
 137: 554­566. doi: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2014.08.080.
Namor, Emil, Fabrizio Sossan, Rachid Cherkaoui, and Mario Paolone. 2018. "Con-
 trol of Battery Storage Systems for the Simultaneous Provision of Multiple Services." IEEE
 Transactions on Smart Grid, 10(3): 2799­2808. doi: 10.1109/TSG.2018.2810781.

                                            37
Ovaere, Marten, and Kenneth Gillingham. 2019. "The Heterogeneous Value of Solar
 and Wind Energy: Empirical Evidence from the United States and Europe." Working
 paper.

Pindyck, Robert S. 2017. "Coase Lecture­Taxes, Targets and the Social Cost of Carbon."
  Economics, 84(335): 345­364.

Reguant, Mar. 2014. "Complementary Bidding Mechanisms and Startup Costs in Elec-
 tricity Markets." Review of Economic Studies, 81: 1708­1742.

Ricke, Katharine, Laurent Drouet, Ken Caldeira, and Massimo Tavoni. 2018.
 "Country-Level Social Cost of Carbon." Nature Climate Change.

Ryan, Nicole A., Yashen Lin, Noah Mitchell-Ward, Johanna L. Mathieu, and
 Jeremiah X. Johnson. 2018. "Use-Phase Drives Lithium-Ion Battery Life Cycle En-
 vironmental Impacts When Used for Frequency Regulation." Environ. Sci. Technol.,
 52: 10163­10174.

Schwenen, Sebastian. 2015. "Strategic bidding in multi-unit auctions with capacity
  constrained bidders: the New York capacity market." RAND Journal of Economics,
  46(4): 730­750.

Shi, Yuanyuan, Bolun Xu, Di Wang, and Baosen Zhang. 2018. "Using Battery
  Storage for Peak Shaving and Frequency Regulation: Joint Optimization for Superlin-
  ear Gains." IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, 33(3): 2882­2894. doi: 10.1109/TP-
  WRS.2017.2749512.

Stephan, A., B. Battke, M. D. Beuse, J. H. Clausdeinken, and T. S. Schmidt.
  2016. "Limiting the Public Cost of Stationary Battery Deployment by Combining Appli-
  cations." Nature Energy, 1. doi: 10.1038/nenergy.2016.79.

Tabari, Mokhtar, and Blake Shaffer. 2020. "Paying for performance: The role of policy
  in energy storage deployment." Energy Economics, 92.

Tacka, Natalie. 2016. "RTO/ISO Regulation Market Comparison." Regulation Market Is-
  sues Senior Task Force, April 13.

Watson, David, Cameron Hastie, Brady Gaudette, and Marianne Rodgers. 2018.
 "Demonstrating Stacked Services of a Battery in a Wind R&D Park." IEEE Transactions
 on Power Systems, 33(2): 1411­1419. doi: 10.1109/TPWRS.2017.2718512.

Wu, Di, Chunlian Jin, Patrick Balducci, and Michael Kintner-Meyer. 2015.
 "An Energy Storage Assessment: Using Optimal Control Strategies to Capture
 Multiple Service." 2015 IEEE Power & Energy Society General Meeting, 1­5. doi:
 10.1109/PESGM.2015.7285820.

Xi, Xiaomin, Ramteen Sioshansi, and Vincenzo Marano. 2014. "A Stochastic Dy-
 namic Programming Model for Co-optimization of Distributed Energy Storage." Energy
 Systems, 5: 475­505. doi: 10.1007/s12667-013-0100-6.

                                         38
Yu, Nanpeng, and Brandon Foggo. 2017. "Stochastic valuation of energy storage in
 wholesale power markets." Energy Economics, 64: 177­185.

Zhou, Zhi, Todd Levin, and Guenter Conzelmann. 2016. "Survey of U.S. Ancillary
 Services Markets." Argonne National Laboratory ANL/ESD-16/1.




                                      39
A1       Appendix
A1.1      Data Appendix
A1.1.1    Gross to Net Conversion

As described in the main text, we must re-scale the CEMS-reported hourly generation to
account for both in-house load and incomplete reporting of combined cycle units. Specifically,
we do as follows.
    In the EIA-923 dataset, we observe annual generation by plant. While EIA-923 reports
monthly generation, it is imputed for some units. Thus we focus on the annual generation
variable, which is not imputed. EIA-923 reports generation at a somewhat finer scale: prime
mover by fuel type within a plant (e.g., aggregating across all coal boilers within a plant).
However, we are most confident in the matching at the plant level as opposed to the prime
mover by fuel type level, since there may be some differences in the reporting of technology
between EIA and CEMS.
    We merge annual CEMS data with annual EIA data at the plant level. For each plant-
year, we calculate the ratio of net to gross generation. At plant-year combinations with small
generation quantities, this may lead to outliers, so we take the median across years for each
plant. We also winsorize the upper and lower 2% to deal with outliers ­ the 2nd percentile is
0.2 and the 98th percentile is 2.0. Across all electrical generating units in PJM, the median
is 0.96, fairly consistent with (Cicala, 2017). The median for boilers is 0.92. The median
for combustion turbines is 0.98. The distribution for combined cycles is bimodal, with one
mass at around 0.98 (consistent with reporting both cycles) and one mass at around 1.5
(consistent with reporting only one cycle).

A1.1.2    Minimum Constraints

First, we estimate the minimum constraint for each generator, using EIA-860 data on mini-
mum operational constraints. We observe reported minimum operational constraints for the
years 2013-2018; they are not reported in the 2012 EIA-860. Unfortunately, a comprehensive
merge between EIA-860 and CEMS at the unit level does not exist. However, merging at the
plant level, or even at the plant by prime mover by fuel type level, is straightforward. Accord-
ingly, we bring in minimum operational data as follows. For around 40% of generator-year
combinations at electrical generating units in PJM, the minimum operational constraint
is the same across all units within a plant (when expressed as a percentage of maximum
capacity), so merging at the plant level is appropriate. For the remaining generator-year
combinations, we use the median operational constraint within the plant at the prime mover


                                              A-1
by fuel type level. Some units (3%) do not appear in the minimum constraints data in
EIA-860, so we use the median constraint by prime mover and fuel type across all PJM
plants.
    Example plots of hourly capacity factors show that these minimum constraints are visible
in hourly data (Figure A2). Here we show nine histograms ­ one unit at three large plants
for each of our three main technology types. A vertical black line depicts the minimum
operational load in EIA-860 data. For most of these units, the vertical line is close to a
discontinuity in the hourly histogram.
    However, in a robustness check, we construct an alternative minimum operational load
using the unit-level observed behavior, as follows. We calculate the portion of hours a plant
is generating at a capacity factor of 0, a capacity factor between 0 and 10 percent, between
10 and 20 percent, etc. We then use as the minimum operational load whatever is the
smallest bin in which at least 5 percent of non-zero generating hours fall. This is a proxy
for the discontinuities observed visually in the histograms. We generally calculate minimum
operational loads of around 40 to 60 percent for the boilers and CC plants, although we also
observe units with a very small minimum constraint (0-10% of capacity), especially for the
CT units. (Regression results using this alternative minimum constraint measure are shown
in Table A11.)
    Once we have a measure of minimum constraints for each unit, we proceed as follows.
We calculate the capacity factor of each unit in each hour, defined as net generation divided
by maximum observed generation. We then place each unit-hour observation into one of five
bins: Off (capacity factor of zero), Below Minimum Constraint (capacity factor between 0%
and less than 5% of the minimum constraint to maximum capacity ratio), At Minimum Con-
straint (capacity factor within 5% of the minimum to maximum ratio), Between Minimum
Constraint and Maximum Capacity, and At Maximum Capacity (capacity factor between
95% and 100%).

A1.1.3    RegD Data for Battery Regressions

While our data do not allow us to directly identify battery participation in the regula-
tion market, we can draw some inferences based on the technical capabilities of batteries.
First, PJM documentation implies that batteries participate exclusively in RegD rather than
RegA.41
   41
      See, e.g.,  the 2015 presentation "Performance,    Mileage and the Mileage Ratio"
at               https://www.pjm.com/-/media/committees-groups/task-forces/rmistf/20151111/
20151111-item-05-performance-based-regulation-concepts.ashx, or Figure 10-19 in the 2015
State of the Market report, at http://www.monitoringanalytics.com/reports/PJM_State_of_the_
Market/2015/2015-som-pjm-volume2-sec10.pdf.


                                            A-2
    Second, because batteries typically have very low marginal costs and because there is no
evidence of market power exertion in regulation markets,42 we infer that batteries typically
use self-scheduling, rather than pool procurement. It is possible that units will switch in
and out of self-scheduling and pool procurement, as a function of activity in the energy
market. To address this, we use the daily maximum of self-scheduled RegD provision as our
independent variable. As Figure A3 shows, this measure experiences a number of discrete
large jumps over this time period, consistent with the entry of new batteries. However, we
note that the results in Table A13 should be taken as only suggestive because of the data
limitations in this setting.

A1.1.4    Fuel Types and Unit Types

From CEMS, we observe fuel types and unit types. The raw CEMS data lists 36 unique
primary fuel types. The most common are coal, pipeline natural gas, and diesel oil. Less
common categories include, e.g., "residual oil" "process gas," "wood," etc., as well as com-
binations of these fuels, e.g., "coal, natural gas." We generate three categories: "coal,"
"pipeline gas" + "natural gas," and "other," where "other" aggregates across, e.g., oil,
wood, units listing combinations of fuels, and units for which we do not have a fuel type.
   The raw CEMS data similarly lists 22 different technology types, with the most common
being "combustion turbine", "dry bottom wall-fired boiler," and "combined cycle." We
generate four categories: "boiler" (an aggregation of all boilers, process heaters, stokers, and
tangentially-fired units), "combined cycle," "combustion turbine," and "other."
   We report regression results individually for coal-fired boilers, natural gas combined cycle
units, and natural gas combustion turbines. We then aggregate the remaining unit types into
an "other" category. This includes, e.g., natural gas fired boilers, oil-fired combined cycle
units, etc. It also includes units that changed technology or fuel type over this 2012-2018
sample. For our 2012-2018 sample, total gross generation by category is shown in Table A1.

A1.1.5    CEMS Versus EIA Generation Data

In addition to the net-versus-gross distinction described above, the CEMS and EIA data
differ in their coverage across plants. EIA data include hydro, nuclear, solar, wind units,
etc. EIA data also include small coal, gas, and oil units not in CEMS. Total generation
by fuel type can be compared in Tables A1 and A2. The difference between CEMS and
EIA data is accounted for by the "residual" generation variable we construct, equal to the
  42
    See, e.g., the 2019 State of the Market report, at http://www.monitoringanalytics.com/reports/
PJM_State_of_the_Market/2019/2019-som-pjm-sec10.pdf.



                                               A-3
            Table A1: Total Generation by Unit Type, CEMS Data, 2012-2018


                              Unit Type          Total Generation, TWh

                              Coal, Boiler                          1945
                              NG, CC                                1169
                              NG, CT                                  80
                              Other                                  149
                                Other, Boiler                         67
                                Switch                                62
                                Oil, CC                               14
                                NG, Boiler                             3
                                Oil, CT                                2
                                Oil, Boiler                          <1
                             Note: This table shows the total generation
                             over 2012-2018 for the aggregations of fuel by
                             technology type that we have used. Data cov-
                             erage is all CEMS-reporting electrical gener-
                             ating units in PJM. Data source is CEMS for
                             generation, fuel type, technology type; and
                             EIA for electrical generating unit designation
                             and PJM designation.




difference between total demand reported by PJM and total generation reported in CEMS.
This residual variable thus captures the behavior of nuclear, etc. units; as well as in-house
load and imports and exports between PJM and other ISO/RTOs.

A1.1.6    Hour Naming Conventions

PJM data are reported in both Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) and Eastern Prevailing
Time (EPT). CEMS data, in contrast, are reported in local, standard time (Central or
Eastern, depending on the plant's location). We convert all PJM data to Eastern Standard
Time (EST). For CEMS units in Illinois and parts of Indiana, Kentucky, Michigan, and
Tennesse, we convert from Central Standard Time (CST) to Eastern Standard Time. Thus all
regressions use variables in Eastern Standard Time. Regression results (Table A6, Columns
3 and 8) are similar if one uses the raw data, mixing EPT, CST, and EST across variables
and plants.

A1.1.7    Other

We drop one hour (5 a.m. on April 2, 2013) when the regulation requirement is listed as
zero. This represents less than 0.01 percent of our sample (19,689 hours).




                                                 A-4
             Table A2: Total Generation by Fuel Type, EIA Data, 2012-2018


                Unit Type                                            Total PJM Generation, TWh
                Coal                                                                       1962
                Distillate Petroleum                                                         11
                Hydroelectric Pumped Storage                                                -14
                Hydroelectric Conventional                                                   59
                Biogenic Municipal Solid Waste and Landfill Gas                              33
                Natural Gas                                                                1315
                Nuclear                                                                    1957
                Other Gases                                                                   5
                Other (including nonbiogenic MSW)                                            12
                Petroleum Coke                                                                7
                Residual Petroleum                                                            2
                Solar PV and thermal                                                         11
                Wind                                                                        127
                Waste Coal                                                                   59
                Waste Oil                                                                     1
                Wood and Wood Waste                                                           8
               Note: This table shows the total generation over 2012-2018. Data coverage is all PJM
               units in EIA-923 data operating as independent power producers or electric utilities.
               Data source is EIA for generation, fuel type, sector, and PJM designation.




A1.2     Additional Tables and Figures
This section contains additional tables and figures referenced in the text, including summary
statistics, robustness checks, etc.

                                   Figure A1: Monthly Generation




                         Note: This figure shows monthly generation by unit type for
                         PJM units that appear in CEMS data. Vertical lines display
                         our primary sample window (October 2012 through December
                         2014).




                                                       A-5
                                        Figure A2: Minimum Constraints




            Note: These are nine units at large plants, three for each technology type. The top row shows three
            coal-fired boilers, with the plant id and unit id given at the top of each histogram. The second row
            shows natural gas combined cycle plants, and the bottom row shows natural gas combustion turbines.
            In the bottom row, zeros are not displayed ­ because CTs operate infrequently, displaying zeros makes
            it difficult to visualize the non-zero portion of the histogram. Vertical lines are placed at the minimum
            operating constraint constructed from EIA data (which in some cases is a plant-level proxy, rather
            than measured at the individual unit level - that may be why some panels appear to show measurement
            error). See Appendix text for details.




                                                    Figure A3: RegD




Note: The left-hand panel show the total amount of self-scheduled and pool-procured RegD at the hourly level. While discrete
jumps (perhaps from policy changes or from battery entry) and a general trend upwards (consistent with increasing battery
deployment) are observed, it is clear that total RegD is not driven solely by the contribution of new batteries. The right-hand
panel plots the daily maximum MW of self-scheduled RegD, for which the discrete jumps are clearer. Data source is PJM.




                                                             A-6
                Table A3: Summary Statistics


                                               Mean     Std. Dev.        N

 Regulation requirement, 100 MW                 6.78         1.06    19693
 Coal boiler generation, MWh                 37479.2       7434.9    19728
 Natural gas CC generation, MWh              14050.9       3577.9    19728
 Natural gas CT generation, MWh                818.2       1852.4    19728
 Other CEMS generation, MWh                   2681.3       1208.7    19728
 CEMS CO2 emissions, tons                    45109.4       9523.9    19728
 Wind generation, MWh                         1721.4       1118.9    19723
 Generation not in CEMS, MWh                 34890.0       4650.8    19728
 PJM load, MWh                               89919.5      15730.8    19728
 Peak forecast, in peak hours, MWh          104021.8      15040.0    15618
 Valley forecast, in off-peak hours, MWh     74386.2      10460.2     4106
 Coal steam retirements, MW                   2536.5       2027.1    19728
 Natural gas CT retirements, MW                 38.6         65.2    19728
 Other retirements, MW                         412.7        305.0    19728


Note: Data cover the period October 1, 2012 through December 31, 2014.
Unit of observation is one hour. Data sources: PJM, EPA, and EIA. Peak and
valley forecasts apply only in the peak (4 a.m. to midnight) and valley (mid-
night to 4 am) hours, respectively. A small number of observations (<1%)
are missing for the regulation requirement, wind generation, and peak/valley
forecast variables.




                                   A-7
Table A4: Displaying Control Coefficients: The Impact of the Regulation Requirement on
the Energy Market


                                                        Coal (MWh)      NG, CC (MWh)        NG, CT (MWh)        Other (MWh)   CO2 (tons)
 Regulation requirement, 100 MW                           -410.26*        453.36***              101.55           -144.65*    -303.13***
                                                          (230.10)         (151.37)            (189.25)            (81.94)       (85.45)
 PJM load, MWh                                            -0.20***            0.02              0.14***           0.05***       -0.05***
                                                            (0.02)           (0.02)              (0.02)             (0.01)        (0.01)
 CEMS units generation, MWh                                0.75***         0.22***                 0.01             0.02**       0.80***
                                                            (0.03)           (0.02)              (0.01)             (0.01)        (0.01)
 Peak forecast, in peak hours, MWh                            0.02            -0.01            -0.03***            0.02***      0.04***
                                                            (0.01)           (0.01)              (0.01)             (0.00)        (0.00)
 Valley forecast, in off-peak hours, MWh                   0.02**             -0.01            -0.04***           0.02***        0.05***
                                                            (0.01)           (0.01)              (0.01)             (0.00)        (0.01)
 Coal steam retirements, MW                                  -0.26             0.06                0.04               0.16          0.13
                                                            (0.50)           (0.41)              (0.18)             (0.17)        (0.27)
 Natural gas CT retirements, MW                             39.53          -53.46**               10.13               3.79      38.89***
                                                           (26.21)          (21.86)             (10.36)             (8.58)       (13.63)
 Other retirements, MW                                    -15.16**         18.39***               -2.13              -1.09     -12.74***
                                                            (7.62)           (6.15)              (3.19)             (2.41)        (3.96)
 Time trend                                                  -6.03            6.24                -0.12              -0.09         -1.96
                                                            (6.97)           (5.64)              (2.89)             (1.94)        (3.77)
 Time trend, quadratic (centered)                         -0.01***          0.01***               -0.00              0.00        -0.01**
                                                            (0.00)           (0.00)              (0.00)             (0.00)        (0.00)
 Primary reserve req., RTO-wide, MW                        1.79**             -1.02            -1.17***               0.41       1.49***
                                                            (0.88)           (0.95)              (0.45)             (0.38)        (0.55)
 Synchronized reserve req., RTO-wide, MW                     -0.13            0.07                 0.20              -0.14        -0.60*
                                                            (0.59)           (0.62)              (0.22)             (0.19)        (0.34)
 Primary reserve req., MAD sub-zone, MW                      -2.52            -1.67            2.92***                1.28         -0.19
                                                            (1.55)           (1.90)              (0.89)             (0.80)        (1.01)
 Synchronized reserve req., MAD sub-zone, MW                  0.78             1.72             -1.50**             -0.99*         -0.19
                                                            (1.02)           (1.39)              (0.58)             (0.56)        (0.72)
 Dummy, equal to one beginning December 1, 2013            -856.25          958.32              -334.36            232.28        -806.73
                                                         (1549.86)        (1275.29)            (677.57)           (510.15)      (836.02)
 Observations                                              19,680            19,680              19,680            19,680         19,680
 Within R2                                                    0.88             0.71                0.48               0.66          0.98


Note: This table shows coefficients on the control variables for the regression results shown in the main text in Table 1.




                                                              A-8
Table A5: Robustness to Fewer Controls: The Impact of the Regulation Requirement on the
Energy Market


    Panel A. Coal Boilers
                (1)       (2)          (3)       (4)      (5)       (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)       (10)
    Reg. req.  -447*    -548*        -364**     -137    -501**     -435*      -394*      -398*      -394*      -413
               (244)    (284)         (153)    (211)     (215)     (231)      (231)      (228)      (234)     (305)

    Panel B. Natural Gas Combined Cycle
                (1)      (2)    (3)    (4)                (5)        (6)       (7)        (8)        (9)       (10)
    Reg. req. 457***   412*** 329***   217              545***     472***    435***     456***     457***    453***
               (152)    (152)  (103)  (152)              (158)      (154)     (153)      (163)      (151)     (163)

    Panel C. Natural Gas Combustion Turbines
                (1)     (2)    (3)     (4)                (5)       (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)       (10)
    Reg. req.   126     100    48      71                 98        117        108         87         86        69
               (196)   (189)  (123)   (178)              (176)     (188)      (191)      (196)      (194)     (227)

    Panel D. Other Units
                (1)      (2)           (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)      (10)
    Reg. req.  -136    -149*           -13     -151*     -143*     -154*      -149*      -144*      -149*      -109
               (85)     (81)          (59)      (77)      (75)      (82)       (82)       (84)       (83)     (101)

    Panel E. CO2 Emissions
                 (1)    (2)            (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)        (7)        (8)       (9)       (10)
    Reg. req. -313*** -451**           -98     -177*    -336***   -332***    -288***    -303***   -304***    -226**
                (87)   (172)          (61)      (91)      (91)      (87)       (88)       (91)      (85)      (104)

   Note: This table shows alternative specifications for the regressions displayed in the main text in Table 1, remov-
   ing various control variables. Column 1 drops the PJM-wide load variable. Column 2 drops the CEMS generation
   variable. Column 3 drops the peak and valley forecasted load variables. Column 4 drops the retirement variables.
   Column 5 drops the quadratic time trend. Column 6 drops the four reserve requirement control variables. Column 7
   drops the dummy for the policy change that occured on December 1, 2013. Column 8 drops the day of week effects.
   Column 9 drops the hour of day effects. Column 10 drops the month of year effects.




                                                          A-9
Table A6: Robustness to Alternative Specifications: The Impact of the Regulation Require-
ment on the Energy Market


          Panel A. Coal Boilers
                       (1)      (2)            (3)       (4)        (5)         (6)       (7)       (8)
          Reg. req.   -221    -318*          -478**     -415*     -488**       -348      -396*     -408*
                     (224)     (190)          (228)     (230)      (227)      (242)      (231)     (230)

          Panel B. Natural Gas Combined Cycle
                      (1)      (2)     (3)      (4)                 (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)
          Reg. req. 371**    420***  461***   463***              453***     390***     436***     456***
                     (150)    (138)   (155)    (150)               (151)      (148)      (151)      (152)

          Panel C. Natural Gas Combustion Turbines
                      (1)      (2)    (3)      (4)                  (5)        (6)        (7)       (8)
          Reg. req.    29       66    151       99                  105        105        102       101
                     (171)    (105)  (185)    (189)                (186)      (194)      (189)     (189)

          Panel D. Other Units
                      (1)       (2)            (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)         (7)       (8)
          Reg. req. -179**   -168**           -134      -147*      -147*      -147       -141*     -150*
                     (76)      (69)           (81)       (82)       (79)      (90)        (82)      (82)

          Panel E. CO2 Emissions
                       (1)     (2)             (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)       (7)        (8)
          Reg. req. -249*** -275***         -310***    -309***    -385***    -287***   -371***    -305***
                      (85)    (82)            (87)       (85)       (84)       (87)      (95)       (85)

         Note: This table shows alternative specifications for the regressions displayed in the main text in
         Table 1, using various alternative controls, variable definitions, and sub-samples. Column 1 adds
         controls for the Henry Hub natural gas price and the average daily temperature in Philadelphia.
         Column 2 adds flexible (binned) controls for PJM-wide load, CEMS generation, and the Henry Hub
         temperature. Column 3 uses PJM variables in their raw form, i.e., in Eastern Prevailing Time rather
         than Eastern Standard Time. Column 4 uses a constructed regulation requirement variable as an
         instrument for the reported regulation requirement. Column 5 restricts the sample to units that do
         not retire. Column 6 uses CEMS-reported gross generation rather than re-scaled net generation.
         Column 7 uses only CEMS-reported electrical generation, rather than also incorporating steam load
         in the net generation scaling. Column 8 leaves Illinois units in the CEMS-reported Central Standard
         Time, rather than converting to Eastern Standard Time.




                                                       A-10
Table A7: Alternative CO2 Measurement: The Impact of the Regulation Requirement on
the Energy Market


         Panel A. CO2 as Constructed from Heat Input, Metric Tons
                                        Coal    NG, CC    NG, CT                     Other         Total


         Regulation requirement, 100 MW        -363.06*    172.32***     70.39      -182.78*    -303.13***
                                               (199.54)     (59.75)     (119.67)     (92.91)      (85.45)


         Observations                           19,680      19,680       19,680      19,680       19,680
         Within R2                               0.89        0.73         0.47        0.65         0.98

         Panel B. CO2 as Reported, Metric Tons
                                        Coal               NG, CC       NG, CT       Other         Total


         Regulation requirement, 100 MW        -381.94*    129.87**      48.28     -172.04**    -375.83***
                                               (203.22)     (59.02)     (120.79)    (66.65)       (88.20)


         Observations                           19,680      19,680       19,680      19,680       19,680
         Within R2                               0.89        0.73         0.47        0.67         0.98

        Note: Panel A shows the CO2 emissions results by fuel type (Columns 1 through 4) and aggregated
        (Column 5), matching the specifications used in the main text, Table 1. Panel B shows analogous
        specifications, but using CEMS-reported CO2 emissions (which are occasionally missing) rather than
        emissions constructed from the heat input variable. Both panels are reported in metric tons (i.e., in
        Panel B we convert CEMS-reported short tons into metric tons).




                                                         A-11
Table A8: Placebo and Residual Units: The Impact of the Regulation Requirement on the
Energy Market


                                          Non-PJM      Non-PJM      Non-PJM      Non-PJM         PJM           PJM       PJM
                                            Coal       NG, CC       NG, CT         Other      Comm+Ind        Wind     Residual
 Regulation requirement, 100 MW            -116.39       -24.73       32.76        -7.43         3.69         -39.69    184.69
                                          (222.79)      (89.92)      (94.49)      (22.81)       (3.49)       (70.53)   (179.02)
 Load controls                               Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes       Yes
 Other reserves controls                     Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes       Yes
 Retirement controls                         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes       Yes
 Quadratic time trend                        Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes       Yes
 Month, day of week, and hour effects        Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes       Yes
 Observations                              19,680       19,680       19,680       19,680        19,680       19,679     19,680
 Within R2                                   0.68         0.58        0.48          0.26         0.60          0.16      0.51
Note: This table shows estimates from seven separate regressions, analogous to those presented in the main text, Table 1. The
dependent variable in the first four columns is MWh of electricity generated per hour for the electrical generating units that are
located in PJM states but are not part of PJM. The dependent variable in the fifth column is MWh of electricity generated by
commercial and industrial units in PJM. The dependent variable in the sixth column is MWh of wind generation in PJM. The
dependent variable in the seventh column is the difference between PJM-wide demand and the generation reported by electrical
generating units in CEMS; this accounts for fuel types not in CEMS (nuclear, wind, solar, etc.), small units not in CEMS, and
net imports. The unit of analysis is an hour. ***, **, * indicate significance at the 1% and 5% and 10% level, respectively.




                                                            A-12
                                        Table A9: Four-Unit Model


                               Generation in Equilibrium                             Regulation in Equilibrium

  Regulation       Unit A,       Unit B,        Unit C,       Unit D,      Unit A,      Unit B,   Unit C,     Unit D,
 Requirement      $35/MWh       $37/MWh       $40/MWh       $60/MWh        $5/MW       $6/MW      $7/MW      $10/MW

     500            25000          24550           0            450           0           450        0             50
     550            25000          24525           0            475           0           475        0             75
     599            25000         24500.5          0           499.5          0          499.5       0            99.5
     600            25000          24500           0            500           0           500        0            100
     601           24999.5         24500           0           500.5         0.5          500        0           100.5
     602            24999          24500           0            501           1           500        0            101
     610            24995          24500           0            505           5           500        0            105
     615           24992.5         24500           0           507.5         7.5          500        0           107.5
     616            24884          21116         4000            0           116          500        0              0
     620            24880          21120         4000            0           120          500        0              0
     624            24876          21124         4000            0           124          500        0              0
     625            24875          21125         4000            0           125          500        0              0
     650            24850          21150         4000            0           150          500        0              0
     675            24825          21175         4000            0           175          500        0              0
     700            24800          21200         4000            0           200          500        0              0
     750            24750          21250         4000            0           250          500        0              0
     800            24700          21300         4000            0           300          500        0              0
     850            24650          21350         4000            0           350          500        0              0
     900            24600          21400         4000            0           400          500        0              0
     950            24550          21450         4000            0           450          500        0              0
     999            24501          21499         4000            0           499          500        0              0
     1000           24500          21500         4000            0           500          500         0             0
     1001           24500          21499         4001            0           500          500         1             0
     1050           24500          21450         4050            0           500          500        50             0
     1100           24500          21400         4100            0           500          500       100             0
     1150           24500          21350         4150            0           500          500       150             0
     1200           24500          21300         4200            0           500          500       200             0


Note: Table A9 lists the equilibrium results for a four-unit model with energy and regulation output. Units A, B,
and C face a maximum capacity of 25,000 MW each. They also face a minimum constraint, when generating, of
4,000 MW. Unit D faces a maximum capacity of 25,000 MW and a minimum when generating of 400 MW. (This
lower minimum operational constraint is meant to represent the fact that the peaking portion of the electricity mar-
ket is made up of many small peaker units that can each be dispatched at quite small levels of generation.) Marginal
costs of energy and regulation provision are listed in the table. For both services, Unit A is cheapest, Unit B next
cheapest, etc. Energy demand is held constant at 50,000 MWh, while the regulation requirement varies exogenously
across rows. The equilibrium is found using the online tool https://online-optimizer.appspot.com/. We check
whether results are global, not just local, solutions by forcing individual units on or off, finding that alternative so-
lutions do not achieve a lower system-wide cost. We further explore whether the solutions are unique (as opposed
to, e.g., having a flat objective function) by imposing additional constraints forcing an individual unit's generation
or regulation to be  = 0.001 higher than the optimal solution in an effort to find other equal-cost solutions ­ how-
ever, for all cases we explored, doing so yields a higher total system cost (or no feasible solution) indicating that the
reported solutions are likely unique.




                                                          A-13
Table A10: Showing Other CEMS Units:                          The Regulation Requirement and Inten-
sive/Extensive Margins


    Panel A. Coal Boilers
                                                           Off     Below min   At min   Above min   At max


    Regulation requirement, 100 MW                         0.03      0.29**     0.25     2.07***    -2.65***
                                                          (0.91)     (0.13)    (0.25)     (0.71)     (0.51)


    Observations                                          19,680     19,680    19,680    19,680     19,680
    Within R2                                              0.70       0.11      0.39      0.40       0.73


    Panel B. Natural Gas Combined Cycle
                                                           Off     Below min   At min   Above min   At max


    Regulation requirement, 100 MW                       -1.93**     -0.53**    0.46     2.13***      -0.12
                                                          (0.78)      (0.24)   (0.33)     (0.72)     (0.15)


    Observations                                          19,680     19,680    19,680    19,680     19,680
    Within R2                                              0.64       0.17      0.14      0.64       0.17


    Panel C. Natural Gas Combustion Turbines
                                                           Off     Below min   At min   Above min   At max


    Regulation requirement, 100 MW                         -3.07       0.26     0.33      3.75*     -1.26***
                                                          (2.93)      (0.43)   (0.26)     (2.24)     (0.41)


    Observations                                          19,680     19,680    19,680    19,680     19,680
    Within R2                                              0.47       0.31      0.22      0.43       0.16


    Panel D. Other Units
                                                           Off     Below min   At min   Above min   At max


    Regulation requirement, 100 MW                         0.74        -0.14    0.11       -0.51      -0.20
                                                          (0.83)      (0.14)   (0.14)     (0.54)     (0.15)


    Observations                                          19,680     19,680    19,680    19,680     19,680
    Within R2                                              0.55       0.26      0.12      0.54       0.27



   Note: This table expands on Table 3 by showing results at other units.




                                                       A-14
Table A11: Alternative Minimum Constraints Data: The Regulation Requirement and In-
tensive/Extensive Margins


     Panel A. Coal Boilers
                                                             Off     Below min    At min     Above min     At max


     Regulation requirement, 100 MW                         0.03        0.28        -0.03     2.37***      -2.65***
                                                           (0.91)      (0.28)      (0.42)      (0.68)       (0.51)


     Observations                                          19,680      19,680      19,680      19,680       19,680
     Within R2                                              0.70        0.40        0.44        0.60         0.73


     Panel B. Natural Gas Combined Cycle
                                                             Off     Below min    At min     Above min     At max


     Regulation requirement, 100 MW                        -1.93**      -0.39      0.76*       1.68**        -0.12
                                                            (0.78)     (0.34)      (0.45)      (0.74)       (0.15)


     Observations                                          19,680      19,680      19,680      19,680       19,680
     Within R2                                              0.64        0.20        0.17        0.63         0.17


     Panel C. Natural Gas Combustion Turbines
                                                             Off     Below min    At min     Above min     At max


     Regulation requirement, 100 MW                         -3.07       0.03        0.34        3.96       -1.26***
                                                           (2.93)      (0.17)      (0.37)      (2.45)       (0.41)


     Observations                                          19,680      19,680      19,680      19,680       19,680
     Within R2                                              0.47        0.20        0.40        0.41         0.16


     Panel D. Other Units
                                                             Off     Below min    At min     Above min     At max


     Regulation requirement, 100 MW                         0.74        -0.05       -0.10       -0.39        -0.20
                                                           (0.83)      (0.10)      (0.18)      (0.56)       (0.15)


     Observations                                          19,680      19,680      19,680      19,680       19,680
     Within R2                                              0.55        0.08        0.18        0.62         0.27



    Note: This table is analogous to Table 3, but uses an alternative variable to construct the minimum constraint.
    Rather than EIA-reported minimum constraints, it uses the smallest bin with at least 5 percent of non-zero gener-
    ating hours. Note this alternative definition does not impact the "off" or "at max" counts.




                                                         A-15
       Table A12: Bins: The Regulation Requirement and Intensive/Extensive Margins


 Panel A. Coal Boilers
                          0         10         20         30        40        50       60        70         80        90         100
 Reg. req., 100 MW      -0.22      0.08       -0.00      0.14     0.41*     0.58**    0.39     0.58**     0.39*      0.13     -2.72***
                       (0.93)     (0.08)     (0.15)     (0.12)    (0.24)    (0.29)   (0.31)    (0.22)    (0.21)     (0.34)     (0.76)
 Observations          19,680     19,680     19,680     19,680    19,680    19,680   19,680    19,680    19,680     19,680     19,680
 Within R2              0.72       0.03       0.07       0.23      0.39      0.35     0.21      0.12      0.08       0.41       0.81




 Panel B. NG, CC
                           0        10         20         30        40         50      60         70        80        90         100
 Reg. req., 100 MW     -1.91**   -0.17***   -0.07***     0.05    -0.39***    -0.14    0.57*    0.87***    -0.03    1.70***      -0.47
                        (0.78)    (0.03)     (0.02)     (0.04)    (0.09)    (0.21)   (0.30)     (0.31)   (0.42)     (0.49)     (0.40)
 Observations          19,680     19,680     19,680     19,680    19,680    19,680   19,680     19,680   19,680    19,680      19,680
 Within R2               0.63      0.06       0.05       0.06      0.12       0.11    0.17       0.12      0.24      0.56        0.32




 Panel C. NG, CT
                          0         10         20         30        40        50       60        70        80         90         100
 Reg. req., 100 MW      -3.07      -0.05      0.05       0.10      0.13     0.38*     0.48*     0.63     2.26**      0.95     -1.85***
                       (2.92)     (0.11)     (0.08)     (0.07)    (0.10)    (0.22)   (0.27)    (0.38)    (0.93)     (0.77)     (0.62)
 Observations          19,680     19,680     19,680     19,680    19,680    19,680   19,680    19,680    19,680     19,680     19,680
 Within R2              0.47       0.14       0.13       0.13      0.14      0.22     0.26      0.28      0.37       0.38       0.23




 Panel D. Other
                          0         10         20         30        40        50        60       70        80         90         100
 Reg. req., 100 MW      0.72       -0.04      -0.00      -0.05     -0.15     0.10     -0.04     0.15      0.08     -0.50***     -0.28
                       (0.83)     (0.06)     (0.06)     (0.08)    (0.14)    (0.09)   (0.08)    (0.10)    (0.14)     (0.11)     (0.32)
 Observations          19,680     19,680     19,680     19,680    19,680    19,680   19,680    19,680    19,680     19,680     19,680
 Within R2              0.61       0.10       0.12       0.11      0.21      0.07      0.08     0.08      0.16       0.41       0.44




Note: This table is analogous to Table 3, but rather than using data on minimum constraints, it simply counts the number of units gener-
ating at 0 percent of capacity, 0 to 10 percent of capacity, etc.




                                                          A-16
Table A13: Regressing Generation on Alternative Battery Capacity Variables, by Fuel Type


                      RegD Self-Scheduled        EIA Battery Capacity        DOE Battery Capacity
                       PJM       Placebo          PJM         Placebo         PJM       Placebo


              Coal     206.01      1063.41    -2074.64***    -3035.44***      -686.47    -2435.48**
                      (837.96)    (1096.66)     (758.99)       (922.26)      (810.40)     (935.60)

              ngCC      55.42      139.03        781.11       1668.16***      227.52    1277.16***
                      (560.43)    (340.41)      (779.10)       (262.36)      (689.39)    (277.51)

              ngCT     -26.39      -327.04     1050.78***      686.19**      558.30*       143.94
                      (309.53)    (216.71)      (297.23)       (290.44)      (291.40)     (255.39)

              Other    -235.04      38.48        242.76          80.99        -99.36       29.66
                      (188.72)     (70.73)      (247.79)        (91.43)      (256.22)     (66.64)


            Note: This table shows estimates from 24 separate regressions. The dependent variable
            is CEMS generation. In Columns 1 and 2, the independent variable of interest is Self-
            Scheduled RegD, in 100 MWs. In Columns 3 and 4, the independent variable of interest is
            EIA-reported battery capacity, in 100 MWs. In Columns 5 and 6, the independent variable
            of interest is battery capacity, in 100 MWs, from a DOE storage database. Columns 1, 3,
            and 5 use our PJM sample of interest. Columns 2, 4, and 6 use a placebo sample: non-
            PJM electrical generating units in PJM states (e.g., MISO units in Indiana). The sample
            is limited to the years 2014-2016. The unit of analysis is an hour. Control variables are
            the same as for Table 1. Standard errors are clustered at the monthly level, which is the
            level of variation for the EIA and DOE battery variables. ***, **, * indicate significance
            at the 1% and 5% and 10% level, respectively.




                                                     A-17
