                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      MANDATORY RETIREMENT FOR JUDGES IMPROVED PERFORMANCE ON
                     U.S. STATE SUPREME COURTS

                                          Elliott Ash
                                      W. Bentley MacLeod

                                      Working Paper 28025
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28025


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2020




We thank Yisehak Abraham, Ankeet Ball, Josh Brown, Josh Burton, Matthew Buck, Eammonn
Campbell, Zoey Chopra, Daniel Deibler, Seth Fromer, Gohar Harutyunyan, Archan Hazra,
Montague Hung, Dong Hyeun, Mithun Kamath, James Kim, Michael Kurish, Jennifer Kutsunai,
Steven Lau, Sharon Liao, Claudia Marangon, Sarah MacDougall, Justin McNamee, Sourabh
Mishra, Brendan Moore, Arielle Napoli, Karen Orchansky, Bryn Paslawski, Olga Peshko, Matteo
Pinna, Quinton Robbins, Ricardo Rogriguez, Jerry Shi, Xiaofeng Shi, Carol Shou, Alex Swift,
Holly Toczko, Tom Verderame, Sam Waters, Sophie Wilkowske, John Yang, Geoffrey Zee, Fred
Zhu, and Jon Zytnick for their help in assembling data and other research assistance. We thank
David Card who suggested that we look at the effect of aging on judges. We also thank Decio
Coviello, Janet Currie, John J. Donohue III, Hanming Fang, Lewis Kornhauser, Michael
Livermore, Jonathan Petkun, Jonathan Skinner, Megan Stevenson, and numerous workshop
participants for helpful feedback. Columbia University's Program for Economic Research,
Columbia Law School, Princeton University's Center for Health and Wellbeing, and the National
Science Foundation Grant SES-1260875 provided financial support for this research. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Elliott Ash and W. Bentley MacLeod. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Mandatory Retirement for Judges Improved Performance on U.S. State Supreme Courts
Elliott Ash and W. Bentley MacLeod
NBER Working Paper No. 28025
October 2020
JEL No. D02,J26,J41,J44,K0,K4

                                         ABSTRACT

Anecdotal evidence often points to aging as a cause for reduced work performance. This paper
provides empirical evidence on this issue in a context where performance is measurable and there
is variation in mandatory retirement policies: U.S. state supreme courts. We find that introducing
mandatory retirement reduces the average age of working judges and improves court
performance, as measured by output (number of published opinions) and legal impact (number of
forward citations to those opinions). Consistent with aging effects as a contributing factor, we
find that older judges do about the same amount of work as younger judges, but that work is
lower-quality as measured by citations. However, the effect of mandatory retirement on
performance is much larger than what would be expected from the change in the age distribution,
suggesting that the presence of older judges reduces the performance of younger judges.


Elliott Ash
ETH Zurich
IFW E47.1
Zurich 8044
Switzerland
ashe@ethz.ch

W. Bentley MacLeod
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, MC 3308
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
wbmacleod@wbmacleod.net




An appendix is available at: http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28018
1     Introduction
The goal of this paper is to provide empirical evidence on how mandatory retirement
rules influence work performance in high-skill occupations. The empirical setting is
state supreme courts, the state-level equivalent to the federal-level U.S. Supreme Court.
State supreme court judges are tasked with reviewing lower-court decisions and setting
new legal rules in a common-law milieu. Researching, deciding, and justifying the law is
a high-skilled constellation of tasks requiring expertise and professionalism (see Posner,
2008), comparable in technicality to physicians and scientists. Moreover, judges work
alongside peer judges and supervise teams of clerks and other staff, meaning the job
also entails significant social and managerial skills.
    We measure judge performance over the lifespan using a database of all decisions
published by state supreme courts for the years 1947-1994, combined with citation mea-
sures from 1947-2012. Because these opinions comprise the near-entirety of a judge's
work product, they can be used to produce cleaner measures of performance than is
possible in other high-skill domains. More specifically, we measure work performance
as the number of times a judge is cited (positively) by future judges in a given year
(Choi et al., 2008). While forward citations do not identify a "correct" decision, they
do index the degree to which a new interpretation or clarification of the law is helpful
to future judges. Hence, citations provide a measure of performance that does not
require a normative evaluation of the rule applied.
    Beyond the performance measurements, state supreme courts have a number of
desirable features for our research objectives. First, the job of a judge has not changed
substantially over time, nor does it change over the course of the career. Relative to
other high-skill professions, such as medicine or management (Choudhry et al., 2005;
Bloom and Reenen, 2007; Bloom et al., 2012), the skills relevant for good judging are
relatively constant. Second, the workload for judges is held constant; it cannot be influ-
enced by judges themselves, and does not vary according to age or experience. Third,
compensation does not vary between judges, nor is it contingent on work performance
(see Landes and Posner, 2009). Fourth, state supreme court judges have relatively
strong tenure protections with little chance of termination (Kritzer, 2011). Fifth and
finally, they are at the top of their profession without further opportunities for promo-
tion. Therefore, with these judges we can track long-run changes in work performance
over full careers in a high-skill setting. The resulting within-judge comparisons over


                                             2
time are different from those in most previous studies (e.g. Tanaka and Higuchi, 1998;
Ballesteros et al., 2009), which use physical and cognitive metrics taken at single points
in time and compare across individuals.
      Appellate judging is a technically and professionally demanding career, at least on
par with physicians, scientists, and managers. Our results will therefore be informative
about how retirement policies would influence work productivity in these other high-
skill professions. Beyond that, state supreme court judges are themselves an elite and
powerful group. They have the authority to review not just the decisions of lower
courts, but also legislation passed by state assemblies. Important common-law rules ­
such as contracts, real property, and torts ­ are made, applied, and distinguished in
state supreme court decisions. These decisions have the force of binding precedent for
all courts in a state and can even influence law in other states through a shared legal
discourse and persuasive precedent.
      Given the legal and social impacts, the quality of judge decisions is an important
policy objective. In particular, the potential decline in performance due to aging
could warrant a policy response. According to Posner (1995), "it is well-known within
professional circles that some federal judges, including Supreme Court Justices, have
continued to sit long after their judicial performance has become severely compromised
by age-related disabilities" (p. 3). Recent news stories have highlighted anecdotal
evidence of old age interfering with work performance in U.S. federal courts, where
judges have life tenure and can stay on as long as they like. These accounts include
some examples of older judges with dementia symptoms continuing with their work.1
In addition, as the set of working judges gets older, the risk increases of a death on
the court, a disruptive event exemplified by the 2020 death of Justice Ruth Bader
Ginsburg.
      In response to these concerns, many states have introduced maximum age con-
straints for full-time judges. Table 1 reports these rules and their reforms for the
1947-1994 period. In 1947 (the first year of our judge performance panel), 17 states
had a mandatory retirement rule. By 1994 (the last year in the panel), an additional
14 states had adopted mandatory retirement. Besides the extensive-margin variation
  1
     See the 2011 ProPublica article, "Life Tenure for Federal Judges Raises Is-
sues    of  Senility,   Dementia,"   available  at    https://www.propublica.org/article/
life-tenure-for-federal-judges-raises-issues-of-senility-dementia.           There is also
the issue of uncertainty around health: e.g., "Justice Ginsurg in the Hospital Again", New
York Times, 29 July 2020, available at https://www.nytimes.com/2020/07/29/us/politics/
justice-ginsburg-hospital.html.


                                             3
                     Table 1: Judge Retirement Rules and Reforms by State

                   A. Status Quo Rules at Period Start (1947)
   Retirement Rule          List of States

   No Mandatory Retirement               AR, CA, DE, GA, ID, KY, ME, MS, MT, ND, NE, NM,
                                         NV, OK, RI, TN, WI, WV, VT*

   Retirement at Age 70                  AK, HI, LA, MD, MA, MI,MO, NH, NJ, NY, OH

   Retirement at Age 72                  NC, SC

   Retirement at Age 75                  IL, IN, TX, UT

                    B. Retirement Rule Changes, 1948-1993
 Mandatory Retirement Age    List of States (with Year Enacted)

 Before      After

 None        70                            AL (1973), AZ (1992), CT (1974), FL (1972), MN (1973),
                                           PA (1968), VA (1970), WI (1955), WY (1972)

 None        72                            CO (1962), IA (1965), WA (1952)

 None        75                            KS (1993), OR (1960)

 70          None                          WI (1984)

Notes. Initial retirement rules (in 1947, Panel A) and their reforms (Panel B), by state. * Vermont (VT) has mandatory
retirement at age 90; we classify it as no mandatory retirement since there are just 2 judges in our entire sample (not
in Vermont) who live that long.




                                                          4
of having a rule or not, there is additional intensive-margin variation in the maximum
age: 70, 72, or 75.
   Our empirical strategy uses the introduction of mandatory retirement rules for
judges as a natural experiment. We ask how introducing mandatory retirement affects
court performance in a differences-in-differences regression framework. Court fixed
effects adjust for time-invariant characteristics by court, while year fixed effects adjust
for nationwide trends affecting all courts. Our identification assumption is parallel
trends, for which we provide evidence using event-study regressions.
   We first look for a first stage effect. Do mandatory retirement rules affect the
judge age distribution? We find that introducing a retirement age decreases the age of
working judges by 2-4 years. The effect is observed across the age distribution, with
the oldest incumbent judges being replaced by new younger judges.
   Next, we estimate the treatment effect of retirement rules on court performance
(as measured by citations to the court). We find a positive and statistically significant
effect of mandatory retirement on court performance. The effect is quantitatively large,
at about a 25% proportional increase in positive citations to the court. The effect is
robust to a number of alternative specifications, and we find similar effects using a less
restrictive citation measure (all citations, not just positive ones) and a more restrictive
one (just citations from other states, where a ruling is persuasive rather than binding
precedent). We find that the effect is mostly driven by quantity (an increase in opinions
produced), with smaller positive effects on quality (citations per opinion).
   Why does mandatory retirement improve court performance? A salient possibility
is that older judges do lower-quality work, so replacing them with younger judges would
mechanically increase quality. In the second part of the analysis, we measure changes
in judge performance over the lifespan in order to see if the mechanism at work is the
removal of lower-performing judges. Our empirical strategy exploits the panel variation
in our data across courts and across time. We first compare colleague judges by age
within the same court, and second, looking at changes in performance within judge
across the lifespan. We also compare judges based on starting age and ending age.
   These regressions produce systematic evidence that performance falls with age.
Judges improve in performance only at the youngest ages, below 50. The effect of
age is quadratic, consistent with an accelerating decline in work quality. The effect
is robust to an array of specifications for performance, including in rank percentiles
within court-year. There are only minimal effects on the workload of older judges


                                            5
(number of cases decided), but quality (cites per case) decreases substantially.
   The effects of aging are not driven by the types of cases that judges review. We
can rule out experience as an important factor. Selective attrition (exit timing) is
important, but works against our effect because the judges who end up working longer
tend to perform better at earlier ages. In an auxiliary dataset, we show that clerk
quality (ax proxied by law school ranking) is uncorrelated with judge age.
   Using these life-cycle estimates, we can show that the aging effect does not explain
the mandatory retirement effect. That is, the retirement reform's effect on performance
is greater than that expected from the shift in the age distribution. In particular, while
the reform effect is driven mostly by quantity, the aging effect is driven mostly by
quality. Moreover, a significant component of the retirement reform effect comes from
a within-judge shift, where the younger judges on the court increase their output after
the reform. These results point to a quantitatively important team effect of aging, in
which the presence of older judges slows down the pace of work on the court.
   To summarize, we find that the introduction of mandatory retirement reduces
judges' age and increases court-level work quality -- total citations per year. We docu-
ment a connection between these effects in that judge-level work quality is decreasing
with age. Overall, these results support the view that the effects of mandatory retire-
ment on quality are due to the replacement of older judges with younger ones, who
tend to provide higher-quality work on average.
   These results add to the significant and active literature on the economics of ag-
ing and retirement (e.g. Lumsdaine and Mitchell, 1999). First and in particular, we
add to the empirical literature on mandatory retirement. One of the closest papers
is Ashenfelter and Card (2002), who find that banning a mandatory retirement age
for university faculty significantly increased the share of older academics. Frederik-
sen and Flaherty Manchester (2019) look at the private sector and find that banning
mandatory retirement reduced the share of long-term employment contracts and in-
creased the prevalence of performance pay. Our setting is different in that we observe
the implementation (rather than removal) of mandatory retirement. Unlike Ashenfel-
ter and Card, we directly observe changes in productivity in addition to changes in
worker age. Moreover, our judicial context holds fixed other aspects of the contract
(e.g. performance pay), allowing us to isolate a productivity effect.
   A second related literature is the structural work on retirement choice, which has
analyzed worker responses to pensions and other retirement incentives (Gustman and


                                            6
Steinmeier, 1986; Stock and Wise, 1990; Gustman and Steinmeier, 1991, 2005). In po-
litical economy, Diermeier et al. (2005) and Keane and Merlo (2010) derive structural
estimates of the parameters underlying retirement choices of U.S. Congressmen. The
structural approach allows rich counterfactual exercises but relies on strong assump-
tions of the underlying choice model. Our approach is different in that we focus on
producing causal estimates using natural experiments changing the retirement rule.
       A third strand of this literature has focused on diminishing productivity in the later
years of life. Although cognitive abilities begin to fall early in the career (Desjardins
and Warnke, 2012), workers also learn and enhance their skills.2 Thus, wages and
employment continue to rise after the start of physical and cognitive decline and only
begin to fall for individuals older than fifty years (Medoff and Abraham, 1980; Abraham
and Farber, 1987). These stylized facts underlie the standard economic model, where
younger individuals invest in human capital that depreciates over the lifespan (e.g.,
Blundell and Macurdy, 1999). Empirically, a concave relationship between age and
productivity has been found for scientists (Levin and Stephan, 1991), economists (Oster
and Hamermesh, 1998), and physicians (Choudhry et al., 2005).3 Like these previous
papers, we measure work product (opinions) and quality (citations) directly. However,
our estimates of the age-performance trend are somewhat easier to interpret due to the
empirically desirable features of state supreme courts. Unlike scientists or physicians,
the workload, compensation, and other contract features are held relatively constant
over the lifespan. State supreme court judges have relatively strong tenure protections
with little chance of termination nor of promotion. Moreover, the team performance
of judges on the court is also directly and jointly observed ­ that, combined with our
mandatory-retirement natural experiments, can be leveraged to disentangle individual
   2
      In the words of cognitive psychology: While pattern recognition and logic skills (fluid intelligence)
begin diminishing at a young age, verbal skills (i.e. writing skills) and knowledge (crystallized intelli-
gence) improve into relatively advanced ages (Desjardins and Warnke, 2012). Another way of saying
this, from Ramscar et al. (2014), is that as people age they have a larger data set in their mind. This
in turn leads to slower processing speeds as they search larger data sets.
    3
      Choudhry et al. (2005) conclude that "older physicians possess less factual knowledge, are less
likely to adhere to appropriate standards of care, and may also have poorer patient outcomes." In
the case of assembly-line workers, Borsch-Supan and Weiss (2016) find no evidence of a performance
decline before the age of 60. Using a database of personal credit choices, Agarwal et al. (2009)
find a U-shape pattern in the frequency of financial errors (such as suboptimal balance transfers)
with optimal choicemaking at age 53. Small et al. (2011) report a within-person lab study where
episodic/semantic memory demonstrated no decline before the age of 75. Galenson (2011) explores
the different life cycles in productivity across professions, focusing on "young geniuses" who peak early
and"old masters" with sustained increases in performance over the lifespan.



                                                    7
from team effects of aging. We find that both are significant.
    The previous evidence on judge productivity over the lifespan is mixed. In an early
and detailed study of U.S. federal judges, Posner (1995, ch. 8) finds that opinion
quality (citations per opinion) is maintained into advanced age (into the 80s) before
decreasing. In a sample of twenty judges on the Australia High Court, Smyth and
Bhattacharya (2003) find that quality (as measured by citations) peaks at age 64,
which is somewhat later than in our setting. Teitelbaum (2006) provides descriptive
time-series evidence that the U.S. Supreme Court produces about the same number
of cases regardless of the average age of the justices. Dimitrova-Grajzl et al. (2012)
compared performance by age in three Slovenian trial courts; in one court, there was a
concave relationship between productivity (number of cases resolved) and age, and in
the other two courts, there was no relationship. Our study contributes to this literature
by using a larger sample size of judges across many courts, measuring a broader array of
performance measures, and analyzing panel variation in mandatory retirement rules.
These features allow us to look across courts for team effects, which have not been
found in the previous literature.
    More generally, these results adds to the emerging literature on how organizational
practices influence performance of public-sector professionals. This literature includes
Prendergast (2001) and Shi (2009) on police performance, Bloom et al. (2015) on
education, and Coviello et al. (2015, 2014) on work organization in the Italian judiciary.
We add to this literature by showing that retirement rules work not just at the level
of individuals, but also at the level of organizations.
    The rest of the paper is organized into the following parts. Section 2 provides
some background and describes the data. Section 3 provides the empirical analysis of
how mandatory retirement reforms affect judge performance. In Section 4, we analyze
variation in performance over the judge life cycle. Section 5 reviews these patterns of
evidence and explores team effects of aging. Section 6 concludes.


2     Background and Data
2.1    Overview
At some point all good things must come to an end, including our careers. A key factor
in this decision to stop working is the inevitable depreciation in skills with age. Take


                                            8
              Figure 1: Performance vs. Age for Physical and Cognitive Tasks

           (A) 10-K Running Time                                    (B) Cognitive Performance




Notes. Panel A from Tanaka and Higuchi (1998), showing 10-km race running times for men (white squares) and women
(black squares) by age. Panel B from Ballesteros et al. (2009) showing how measures of different factors of intelligence
or cognitive performance from psychological tests vary by age. The green lines measure processing speed, the gray lines
working memory, blue lines long-term memory, and red lines world knowledge. All are decreasing into old age except
knowledge.




the case of professional runners: As shown in Figure 1 Panel (A), the ability to run
10 kilometers falls continuously from about age 40, and there is a very steep decrease
around age 85.4 For any given professional runner, the decision to end his/her career
is simple because running speed can be easily measured. The same goes for any job
that depends on skills that can be cheaply and accurately measured.
       Most jobs in a knowledge economy are not based on physical speed or other singular
performance dimension. But aging still takes its toll: As illustrated in Figure 1 Panel
(B), cognitive ability declines continuously starting at age 20. The long-run decline in
processing power is partly compensated by improvements in memory and knowledge.
The presence of multiple countervailing factors reflects that the decision on when to
end a cognitive career is more complicated than one based on running speed.
       More generally, one cannot usually measure the productivity of skilled professionals.
Age-related performance decline takes several years, and hence it may not be clear when
to step down. Moreover, if a professional is permanently employed, then dismissal must
be with cause. In such a context, the employer must provide documentary evidence
that performance is not sufficient, and naturally the employee might disagree, or may
even bring an age discrimination claim.
   4
    This decline is in spite of a great deal of positive selection: individuals who are still able to run a
10-K at age 85 are a very selected group!


                                                           9
       The process of ending careers is further complicated by nominal rigidity in wages.
For many reasons, wage cuts are not usually an option for older workers. Part of
this is personal: Few managers would relish telling a valued employee that his/her
performance has declined to the point that the wage must go down or else regular em-
ployment must cease. Given the aforementioned difficulty in measuring performance,
employers will find it difficult to produce decisive evidence that a wage cut is war-
ranted. Meanwhile, a predetermined age-based wage cut ­ even if it would be accepted
by workers ­ would require an accurate estimation of age-related productivity decline
(perhaps many years in the future), and would require (inefficiently) identical treat-
ment of workers with highly heterogeneous performance trajectories. For these reasons,
firms cannot bring the compensation of older workers in line with performance when
performance declines.5 As health choices and technologies improve, one could expect
even more dramatic variation across workers in longevity and late-life productivity.6
       A potential solution to these end-of-career conflicts is the use of mandatory retire-
ment provisions (Lazear, 1979). When parties have agreed in advance to a specified
retirement date, then the employee's performance is not being called into question dur-
ing the termination process. Hence, the employer does not need to provide evidence
that an individual's performance is no longer acceptable. Beyond avoiding such con-
flicts, another benefit of such a rule is that it helps employees plan in advance their
savings, so that they may best enjoy the fruits of a long working life. A potential cost
is that many individuals are still productive into advanced age and would prefer to
continue working in some capacity. Yet under mandatory retirement the employer can,
at her discretion, continue to employ the retiree in a similar job, or in a job for which
she is better suited.
       Regardless of the net benefits, mandatory retirement is prohibited (with some ex-
ceptions) in the United States under the Age Discrimination Act of 1967.7 The jus-
tification for this prohibition is that mandatory retirement by age is facially discrim-
   5
     Frederiksen and Flaherty Manchester (2019) provide evidence that firms have historically ad-
dressed the problem of varying performance trajectories by keeping base wages low and using more
performance pay. This is also consistent with the evidence in Lemieux et al. (2009) that find an
increased use of performance pay over time for highly skilled professionals.
   6
     In the United States in 2010, one could expect about 19 more years of life conditional upon
reaching 65; this number was up from about 14 years in 1960. Appendix Figure A.2 Panel (a) shows
the average retirement age by year, which has been stable for men but increasing significantly for
women.
   7
     The Age Discrimination Act of 1967 is designed "to promote employment of older persons based
on their ability rather than age". The text of the law is excerpted in Appendix E.


                                               10
inatory toward workers above that age. Instead, employers are required to evaluate
the performance of the worker so that potentially high-productivity workers are re-
tained. Economic theory provides little guidance on whether mandatory retirement
dates should be allowed: with costless renegotiation mandatory retirement would have
no effect or, if it does have an effect, that private parties would themselves choose the
optimal rule (see Lazear, 1979; Frederiksen and Flaherty Manchester, 2019).
   Separate from the question of legality, it is an open empirical question whether
mandatory retirement improves work productivity. If performance declines with age,
then reducing the average age of workers to some degree would improve productivity.
On the other hand, if high-productivity older workers are removed during their prime
due to the mandate, that could reduce productivity. In addition, with a looming
mandatory retirement date workers might reduce investment in job-specific skills. To
see which effects dominate, empirical evidence is needed.
   The profession of judging has some special features which should be mentioned.
Posner (1995, ch.8) discusses some reasons that judges, relative to professionals in other
domains, might be able to maintain a high level of work quality into advanced age. In
Posner's words, judging is a "late peak, sustained" career, where productivity increases
into advanced age and then sustained until near death. In particular, many of the
tasks facing judges draw on crystallized intelligence, which is maintained into advanced
age. Similarly, Grossmann et al. (2010) show that reasoning about social conflicts
­ the raison d'être of judges - improves into old age, as indicated by higher-order
reasoning emphasizing the need for multiple perspectives and compromise. Meanwhile,
Lindenberger (2014) suggests that frequent participation in intellectual challenges and
social engagement ­ both salient features of appellate judging ­ may mitigate cognitive
decline.
   These factors of job performance as well as professional engagement are both im-
portant determinants of the judge retirement decision, which tends to come later than
that for the average U.S. worker (see Appendix Figure A.2). The lengthy career re-
flects in part a high intrinsic professional motivation on the part of the judges (Ash
and MacLeod, 2015), indicated for example by the fact that a small minority of federal
judges take senior status (a reduced caseload a full salary) as soon as it becomes avail-
able (Posner 1995, pg. 186; see also Choi et al. 2013). Meanwhile, a related literature
in political science has shown evidence of strategic retirement ­ judges timing their
retirement based on the party of the appointing governor or president to influence the


                                           11
political ideology of the successor judge (e.g. Nixon and Haskin, 2000).8


2.2       Institutional Context
Our empirical setting is state supreme courts. While judicial systems do vary from state
to state, they share major characteristics and structures. The fundamental role of a
state supreme court judge is to rule on questions of state law (rather than federal law).
These questions arise in cases appealed from lower state courts. A case begins when a
plaintiff files a lawsuit or a prosecutor indicts a criminal. At trial, facts are litigated
and a judge/jury gives a verdict, which the losing party can appeal. If the state has an
intermediate appeals court (as most do), that court will then take the case and may
affirm, reverse, or modify the trial verdict. After this intermediate court's decision (or
after the trial decision when the state does not have an intermediate appellate court),
the ruling can be appealed to the state supreme court, which is the last appeal on
matters of state law.9
       If the state supreme court accepts a case for review, the judges will rehear the case
at oral argument and then review the submitted briefs for legal error. Each judge
votes whether to affirm or reverse the lower decision. One of the majority judges then
researches and writes an opinion explaining the decision (with the help of clerk staff).
In our data we cannot directly disentangle a judge's work from that of their clerks. We
return to this issue further below.


2.3       Judge Age and Retirement Decisions
The starting point for data collection is the existing data on state supreme courts
from Ash and MacLeod (2015). A team of research assistants collected these data
from a range of sources and built biographies for each judge in the sample. The
key sources include state court web sites, judge obituaries, and Marquis Who's Who.
Items that were unavailable from these sources were obtained through records requests
or interviews of state court administration staff.
   8
     Retirement choices have also been used for identification of electoral-retention effects. For juris-
dictions with competitive reappointment processes, judges planning to retire do not face the same
retention-related incentives as judges who intend to stay in office (Shepherd, 2009a; Gordon and
Huber, 2007; Shepherd, 2009b).
   9
     In rare cases when federal law (rather than state law) is pivotal, state supreme court decisions
can be appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court. In two states (Texas and Oklahoma), there are separate
high courts for criminal and civil matters.


                                                   12
                                                                Figure 2: Summary Histograms on Judge Age

                                       (A) Age Distribution of Working Judges                                                       (B) Starting-Age Distribution
                                       800                                                                               80
 Frequency (Judge-Year Observations)




                                                                                        Frequency (Judge Observations)
                                       600                                                                               60




                                       400                                                                               40




                                       200                                                                               20




                                        0                                                                                 0
                                             40            60                80   100                                          40             60                   80   100
                                                                   Age                                                                             Starting Age


                                                  (C) Ending-Age Distribution                                                       (D) Career-Length Distribution
                                                                                                                         100
                                       150
 Frequency (Judge Observations)




                                                                                        Frequency (Judge Observations)




                                                                                                                         80



                                       100
                                                                                                                         60



                                                                                                                         40

                                       50

                                                                                                                         20



                                        0                                                                                 0
                                             40            60                80   100                                                         20                   40   60
                                                                Ending Age                                                                         Career Length

Notes. Distributions of judge age, starting age, ending age, and career length, as indicated. Vertical dashed line at
median.




                                        The dataset includes 1,558 state supreme court judges, for which we were able to
obtain birth date information for all but 3 individuals. Beyond birth, we collected date
information on judgeship starts, judgeship terminations, and judge deaths. We also
collected information on how judgeships ended and previous and subsequent career
information.
                                        Figure 2 provides some visual descriptives on the age and retirement decisions
of state supreme court judges. These graphs only include states that do not have
a mandatory retirement age. First, Panel A shows the age distribution for all state
supreme court judges working between 1947 and 1994. We can see a wide range of ages
of active working state supreme court judges. The other panels show the distributions


                                                                                    13
of the starting age (Panel B), ending age (Panel C), and career length (Panel D).
Judges tend to start in their position late in life (in their 50s) and work late as well
(into their 70s). Appendix Figure A.1 shows the wide distribution over birth cohort
decades in the dataset (from the 1860s to the 1950s).
       The average retirement age of judges has not changed much over the time period
1947-1994 (Appendix Figure A.2, Panel B). This is somewhat different from the long-
run changes in the broader economy which include an aging work force (Appendix
Figure A.2, Panel A). The retirement age for judges has been consistently 4-5 years
higher than the average worker over this time period. Meanwhile, the proportion of
judges working in the private sector after leaving the court has increased over this time
period (Appendix Figure A.3).


2.4       Mandatory Retirement Rules
The second data collection performed is on the rules on mandatory retirement. Table 1
reports these rules and records on their reforms in the 1947-1994 period. As discussed
already in the introduction, we have 14 reforms to analyze in the empirical part. These
include maximum ages of 70, 72, or 75.
       In some states, the chief justice has the right to keep on a retired judge in what
the federal courts call "senior status" or "active retirement status". Appendix Table
A.2 presents some information on how these rules work by state. When senior status
is available under mandatory retirement, the control rights on the retirement decision
switch to the court, which can decide to keep a high-performing judge.
       One practical implication of senior status is that we do see some judges in our data
working past the official retirement age. This can be seen in Figure 3, showing the
probability of retirement at any given age, separately by the mandatory retirement
rule. The blue line, with no mandatory retirement, is relatively smooth, peaking in
the early 70s. The red line, with mandatory retirement at age 70, shows big increases
for ages 69 and 70. We see corresponding jumps for retirement at 72 (green line) and
75 (purple line). We do see, however, that the rules are not perfectly enforced. Some
judges stay on past the mandatory retirement age due to senior judge status. Since the
maximum age rule is not 100% binding, our estimates from the rule changes should be
interpreted as intention-to-treat effects.10
  10
    Results using variation in senior status rules are reported in Appendix Table B.3. We did not
find differential impacts of reforms in states with formal senior-status policies.


                                               14
                              Figure 3: Retirement Rates by Age, by Mandatory Retirement Age

           Probability of Termination   1


                                        .8


                                        .6


                                        .4


                                        .2


                                        0
                                             50   55               60               65                70              75
                                                                              Age

                                                       No Mandatory Retirement           Mandatory Retirement at 70
                                                       Mandatory Retirement at 72        Mandatory Retirement at 75



Notes. Probability that a judge retires at a particular age, conditional on working at that age. Plotted separately by
mandatory retirement rule.




       To round out the evidence on the judge life cycle, Figure 4 provides some statistics
on the timing of judge deaths. Panel A shows that the judges have relatively long
lifespans, with most living into the eighties. Panel B looks at how judge retirement
is related to judge longevity, separately for mandatory retirement (left panel) and
voluntary retirement (right panel). The figure shows that with voluntary retirement,
judges are much more likely to die within a year of leaving office. This difference
supports the idea that mandatory retirement is an impactful policy: judges are more
likely to stay in their jobs until death under voluntary retirement. On the other hand,
there is still a relatively high chance of death in the first year out of office under
mandatory retirement (left panel), which may hint at a causal impact of retirement on
mortality (as found in Sullivan and von Wachter, 2009). This is a promising area for
future work.11
  11
    Meng et al. (2017) review the mixed evidence about the cognitive impacts of retirement, noting
that there is a "major knowledge gap in regards to the impact of retirement on cognitive decline."




                                                                           15
                                                Figure 4: Mandatory Retirement and Deaths on the Job

                                                          (A) Judge Age-at-Death Distribution
                                               100
              Frequency (Judge Observations)




                                                80



                                                60



                                                40



                                                20



                                                 0
                                                     40             60                80                100
                                                                          Age of Death


       (B) Distribution of Years Between Termination and Death, With/Without
                                 Mandatory Retirement
                                               400
              Frequency (Judge Observations)




                                               300




                                               200




                                               100




                                                0
                                                                                  20                          40
                                                               Year of Death - Year Judgeship ended

                                                           No Mandatory Retirement          Mandatory Retirement

Notes. Distributions of judge age at death (panel A, vertical dashed line at median) and death year minus year judgeship
ended (panel B).



                                                                            16
2.5       Measuring Judge Performance
Our performance measures are constructed from published state supreme court opinions
for the years 1947 through 1994, obtained (along with some annotated meta-data) from
Bloomberg Law. The metadata include records on forward citations up until 2012. The
full sample includes 1,024,261 cases. We drop opinions that do not have a named author
(per curiam decisions), resulting in a sample of 404,928 majority opinions.12 In the final
sample we have an average 25.7 cases per judge per year.
       As mentioned in the introduction, a special feature of appellate judging is that
one can obtain useful measures of individual work performance. While there is a
collaborative element of judging, almost all significant decisions have a single authoring
judge who is individually responsible. This is different from many other occupations,
such as science/innovation, which are inextricably collaborative and it is technically
challenging to disentangle the contributions of individual team members.
       Another nice feature of judging is that the quantity of assigned work is constant.
When scientists or inventors get more papers or patents, that is the result of a joint
choice on the number of projects and work quality on those projects. So one cannot
disentangle the work quality choice from the extensive margin. In the courts, judges
have to do the same number of cases as every other judge, so it is possible to extract
the work quality factor.
       Our preferred measure of judge performance is work impact. This is the total
number of positive forward citations to a judge in a year. Judges in a common-law
system cite previous cases that are useful to their decision, and therefore citations can
be seen as an expert evaluation of peer decision quality (Posner, 2008; Choi et al., 2010;
Epstein et al., 2013; Ash and MacLeod, 2015).13 Note that this is not a measure of
whether the decision is correct or not, which we do not observe. But on average, more
citations means that a case was useful to a future judge and thereby makes a stronger
influence on the path of the law.14
       Ash and MacLeod (2015) measure the effect of exogenous reductions in workload
for judges. Judges could consume this extra time in leisure, but we find that judges
  12
     Appendix Figure B.3 shows our retirement reform results with the full dataset of cases, collapsed
by court-year rather than judge-year. The results are similar.
  13
     This expert peer evaluation is quite different from Carrell and West (2010), for example, who use
a quality evaluation by non-peers (college students evaluating lecture instructors).
  14
     In U.S. states, judges are hired by the governor or legislature, not by the judges themselves. This
means that, unlike scientists, citation choices are not used to strategically influence future hiring or
promotion decisions.


                                                  17
use the time to produce more highly cited decisions. This result is consistent with
the hypothesis that judges themselves value citations as a measure of performance. In
addition, relative citation counts across judges within court persist over time, consistent
with a judge-specific ability component. If citations were due to other factors, then
under random assignment of cases there should be no persistent variation in citations
due to a judge fixed effect. Meanwhile, it remains a challenging open question whether
or not more highly cited decisions have a positive effect upon measures of social well-
being, such as economic growth or inequality.
       Appendix Figure A.4 shows the distribution of the number of positive citations at
the case level. We can see a steadily decreasing power-law distribution with a median
of about 7 cites per case. While there is a large minority of cases with zero cites,
overall the distribution is smoothly and slowly decreasing. Citations are relatively
widely distributed, rather than showing up only in a few blockbuster cases.15
       Citations are annotated as positive, negative, or distinguishing by the data provider.
For the baseline, we look only at positive citations. As a more inclusive measure of
performance that does not rely on subjective annotations about "positive", we use
all cites (including negative and distinguishing).16 As more restrictive measures of
performance, we use discussion cites (where the case was discussed at length by the
citing court) and out-of-state cites (only citations in other jurisdictions). Because state
supreme court precedents are not binding in other states, out-of-state citations serve
as an especially strong signal of legal usefulness or influence (Choi et al., 2010). In
addition, while older judges might have time to network and influence colleagues in
their own court to earn cites, this concern is less pronounced for out-of-state cites.
       The citations data were collected in 2012, so all citations through 2012 are included.
Since the most recent cases are in 1994, we are able to measure the impact of work with
at least 18 years of performance data. The median delay between a case and a forward
citation is about ten years. Appendix Figure A.4 shows that the distribution of citation
counts per case is close to log normal, with some extra mass at zero. About half (49
percent) of cases have at least one citation, and the average case receives 5.52 cites.
Given that our window is at least 18 years after a decision is published, that ensures
  15
      We show robustness of our results to dropping these blockbuster cases (formally, the top five
percent of cases in each court-year by citations).
   16
      The citation measure available from the data provider includes citations to concurring and dis-
senting opinions. From annotating a sample of cases, we found that (unlike the U.S. Supreme Court)
citations to discretionary opinions are extremely rare in state supreme courts (well under 1% of cites).



                                                  18
                             Table 2: Summary Statistics on Outcomes

                                                      Levels                      Logs
                                                   Mean     S.D.               Mean S.D.

                  Positive Cites                   297.7        273.5          5.360      0.954

                  All Cites                        355.9        322.5          5.521      0.982
                  Out-State Cites                  44.60        81.27          3.297      0.998
                  Discussion Cites                 66.77        53.54          3.912      0.878

                  # of Opinions                    25.73        15.86          3.131      0.565
                  Cites per Opinion                13.05        12.52          2.419      0.668

                  # of Words Written             56352.7       32538.4         10.77      0.622
                  Addendum Opinions               6.400         9.253          1.492      0.995
Notes. Summary statistics (mean and standard deviation) on judicial opinion outcomes, at the judge-year level.




that we capture most of the variation in case citations. Moreover, we are comparing
judges conditional upon year of the opinion (year fixed effects), ensuring that sample
selection of citations does not affect the relative ranking of cases. In the empirical
distribution one does observe a drop off in citation counts around year 18, though it is
also clear that the bulk of citations occur before then.
    Our measure of work impact is a combination of quantity (number of opinions) and
quality (number of citations per opinion). For analyzing the impacts of reforms, such
as mandatory retirement, we feel that the impact measure is the most policy-relevant.
To the extent that the number of opinions is invariant, work impact is a measure of
work quality. Still, to decompose the importance of quantity and quality, we report
as additional outcomes the number of opinions written (quantity), and the number of
positive citations per opinion (work quality). In addition, as a measure of work output
we report effects on the total number of words written in opinions during a year. The
appendix includes analysis for a range of other outcomes, including measures of caselaw
research and number of discretionary opinions written.
    For all these variables, the baseline measure is the log of the average value for
the judge in a year. Summary statistics for all of our outcome measures are reported
in Table 2. The main outcome is the log of positive citations, with additional mea-
sures meant to provide additional dimensions of performance, quantity, and quality.

                                                        19
Appendix Figure A.5 shows the distributions for the main outcome variables.
       We report a range of alternative specifications for the outcomes in the appendix.
When comparing judges to their colleagues, we also highlight the use of a rank per-
centile specification. These transformations are discussed further below.


2.6        Case Assignment and Case Characteristics
The citation count for a decision is a joint product of both the type of case and the
judge's efforts. For example, cases that review the constitutionality of statutes will
generally get more citations than summary habeas denials. When looking at the effects
of reforms or aging on quality, we have to check whether that is driven by changes in
the composition of the caseload, rather than changes in judge work quality.
       A relevant institutional rule is how cases are assigned to judges, especially when
comparing judges to their colleagues. There are three systems for case assignment,
collected by the State Supreme Court Project (http://www.ruf.rice.edu/~pbrace/
statecourt/) and updated by Christensen et al. (2012).17 Appendix Table A.4 lists
the state supreme courts by rule. Discretionary assignment by the chief justice (the
rule at the U.S. Supreme Court) is the minority rule followed in just 15 states. In 13
states, cases are randomly assigned by lottery to authoring judges. In the remaining
22 states, cases are assigned on a rotating system, with cases arbitrarily assigned to
judges based on their order on the docket.18 Christensen et al. (2012) found that in
state supreme courts, case characteristics and judge characteristics are correlated even
under random/rotation assignment. This is important for interpreting any effects,
which could be due to changes in case types.
       At the decision level, we have data on the area of law of a case, as well as the related
industries of a case. These are coded for each case by the data provider, and there
may be up to three legal areas and three related industrial sectors for any particular
case. Appendix Table A.3 reports summary tabulations of these characteristics. In
the data, we include a vector of dummy variables for each area and sector, equaling
one if the case is annotated as that area or sector. Because there are so many of these
  17
     These rules were confirmed by Brace and Hall in the early 1990s and late 2000s. We tried to check
the rules for earlier years. We could not get comprehensive information, but for those states where
we could find information, it comported with the Christensen et al. (2012) information.
  18
     There are complex rules across states that affect the rotation. Senior judges have fewer cases.
Judges can occasionally recuse themselves. On appeal after remand, the same panel normally reviews
a case. There can be exceptions for specialized cases such as those involving the death penalty.


                                                 20
categories, including separate covariates for every category would almost saturate the
dataset. Instead, we construct the first five principal components of this matrix of
categorical variables, which explains 65% of the variance.19 We will uses these factors
as controls, but also look at how they respond to the treatments.


3        Mandatory Retirement and Court Performance
3.1       Empirical Approach
The main estimating equation is

                                                   0
                     yist = s + t + Mst + s · t + Xs · t +Xst  +           ist                (1)

where yist is an annual performance metric (e.g. log citations, described in Subsection
2.5 above) for judge i working in court s during year t. Coefficients are estimated by
ordinary least squares regression with standard errors clustered by state. The right-
hand side items in the equation are described as follows.
       The empirical approach is generalized differences-in-differences. To control for time-
invariant court characteristics that may be correlated with the retirement system and
with performance, we include court fixed effects s . To control for national trends in
performance, we include year fixed effects t . Standard errors are clustered by state to
allow correlation in the residuals over time across judges and within time in the same
state.
       The treatment indicator Mst equals one for years after introducing mandatory re-
tirement. Fourteen states introduced a mandatory retirement age during the time
period of our data (see Table 1). The coefficient  measures the corresponding causal
effect of interest. Due to the length of the panel, in the baseline specification we
estimate effects in a ten-year window before and after the reforms.20 Formally, Xst
includes an indicator equaling one for the baseline time window of ten years before
and ten years after a change to the retention system. In turn, Mst is a dummy for
the ten years after the change. Thus, as yst is specified in logs, the estimates can be
interpreted as the average proportional difference in within-court performance for the
  19
   Using more or fewer components does not change anything.
  20
   In Appendix Table B.2 we use a six-year window, fourteen-year window, or no window (all years).
The main effects are robust across these specifications.



                                               21
ten years after the policy change relative to the ten years before the policy change. For
additional flexibility, we also allow for state-specific treatment windows.
       The question we address in this section is the effect of mandatory retirement on
court performance. In our sample the number of judges varies by court, and so the effect
of mandatory retirement is correlated to court size. We address this issue by running
the regression at the judge level, so that the coefficient on Mst , , is interpreted as how
mandatory retirement affects the per-judge performance of the court. By clustering at
the court level, the standard errors are adjusted for variation in the size of the court.
       A number of factors can motivate the introduction of a mandatory retirement age.
Having older judges on the court could be problematic if they are ill and have to recuse
themselves from more cases. With older judges, there is a higher risk of a judge having
to step down unexpectedly due to illness, or even to die on the court. The courts
have an odd number of judges to avoid deadlocks; having a missing judge increases the
likelihood of a deadlock. Under voluntary retirement, there could be issues of inefficient
strategic timing in order to influence the political affiliation of the successor. For our
purposes, the most important potential driver is (the perception) that older judges are
not delivering sufficiently high decision quality.21 On the other hand, there have been
some recent moves to repeal mandatory retirement rules, so the pressure to change
operates in both directions.22
       In any case, these reforms are not exogenously assigned. But that is not needed for
identification. Consistent estimation of  requires parallel trends between treated states
and comparison states (Bertrand et al., 2004). Put differently, the comparison states
should provide a counterfactual for the trend in the treated states in the absence of the
rule change. Still, the standard assumption of parallel trends is strong in this setting
if the reforms are implemented in response to pre-existing trends in performance. In
our regressions, we allow for pre-existing state trends in performance that may be
confounded with the reforms by including state-specific linear trends s · t. Further,
          0
the term Xs · t includes initial-period court characteristics ­ institutional rules, case
types, and judge age distribution ­ interacted with year fixed effects. These covariates
allow for different trends along these different dimensions of state court characteristics.
       To formally test for parallel trends and assess the dynamics of the effect, we use a
  21
     See (Posner, 1995, ch.8) and Goldstein (2011) for discussions of the issue with respect to federal
judges.
  22
     See http://ncsc.contentdm.oclc.org/cdm/ref/collection/judicial/id/440 for an update
on the state situation.


                                                  22
panel event-study specification. Formally, we estimate

                                 12
                                            k             0
            yist = s + t +               k Mst + s · t + Xs · t +Xst  +    ist        (2)
                             k=-6,k=-1


where all of the items are as above, except the singular treatment indicator Mst is
                                                         k
replaced with a sequence of event-study year indicators Mst . We let k index the years
before and after treatment, with the year before treatment being left out as the com-
parison year. Then ^k give the dynamic effects on performance k years before/after
the reform. Parallel trends are consistent with ^k = 0 for k < -1. For k >= 0, ^k
will elucidate the dynamics of the difference-in-differences effect measured by ^ from
Equation (1).


3.2    Effect on Judge Age Distribution
An initial question is whether mandatory retirement reforms have an effect on the age
distribution in the courts. To add to the descriptive statistics presented earlier, we
report the causal treatment effect using the reforms. This can be seen as a "first stage"
to see if the "instrument" (mandatory retirement) is affecting the relevant "treatment
variable" (judge age).
   Regression estimates for Equation (1) with age statistics as the outcome are re-
ported in Table 3. Relative to the pre-reform trend, judges after the reform are about
3 years younger (Columns 1 and 2). Columns 3 through 7 look at the effect on distribu-
tional statistics using court-year-level aggregates. We see that the age effect is present
across the age distribution. Both the youngest and oldest ends of the distribution are
shifting down. This is consistent with the replacement of the oldest judges with overall
younger judges. Presumably, this result is what the reforms were meant to achieve.


3.3    Effect on Court Performance
Figure 5 shows event-study estimates (Equation 2) with log citations per judge per
year as the outcome. We use six years before the reform, up until twelve years after, as
the event window. In the top panel, the outcome includes all positive citations. In the
bottom panel, the citation count is limited to citations from other states. Out-of-state
citations may better reflect quality because they proxy for the persuasive influence of an
opinion as rulings are not binding in other states (Choi et al., 2010). For both outcomes,

                                            23
                                          Figure 5: Event-Study Effect of Retirement Reform on Court Performance

                                                                           Effect on Positive Citations
                                                    Pr ( [ k  -2 ] = 0) =.98                                       Pr ( [ k  0 ] = 0) =0
                                         .6
  Effect on Log Positive Citations




                                         .4



                                         .2



                                          0



                                         -.2



                                         -.4
                                               -6     -5   -4   -3     -2 -1     0   1    2   3   4    5    6  7    8   9   10   11   12
                                                                     Years Before and After Mandatory Retirement Reform


                                                                         Effect on Out-of-State Citations
                                          1
                                                    Pr ( [ k  -2 ] = 0) =.830                                      Pr ( [ k  0 ] = 0) =.006
  Effect on Log Out-of-State Citations




                                         .5




                                          0




                                         -.5
                                               -6     -5   -4   -3     -2 -1     0   1    2   3   4    5    6  7    8   9   10   11   12
                                                                     Years Before and After Mandatory Retirement Reform

Notes. Court performance before and after reforms implementing retirement ages of 70, 72 or 75. Top panel outcome
is log positive citations for a judge in a year; bottom panel is only citations from courts in other states. Time series is
a coefficient plot from the event study regression (2), with coefficents estimated relative to the year before the reform.
Regression includes court and year fixed effects and court-specific event windows. 95% confidence intervals constructed
with standard errors clustered by state.


                                                                                         24
       Table 3: First Stage Effect of Mandatory Retirement Reform on Judge Age

                           (1)        (2)             (3)           (4)             (5)            (6)           (7)
                                                                   Court-Level Distributional Statistics
                             Judge Age             Age (Min)     Age (Q25)    Age (Median)      Age (Q75)    Age (Max)


 Ret. Reform            -3.279**    -3.072**        -2.881+       -3.323*        -4.601**        -4.970**      -4.734**
                         (0.717)    (0.848)         (1.461)       (1.615)         (1.145)        (1.410)       (1.753)


 Year FE, Court FE         X           X               X             X              X               X             X
 Windows/Trends                        X               X             X              X               X             X
 N                       14989       14989            2357         2357            2357            2357          2357
  R-sq                    0.078      0.121           0.597        0.577          0.624           0.644           0.643
Notes. DD effect of mandatory retirement reform on judge age statistics in ten years after reform, relative to ten years
before reform. Observation is a judge working in a year. "Ret. Reform" is a treatment indicator for the ten years after
the introduction of mandatory retirement. In Columns 3 through 7, dependent variables are computed at the court-year
level. In particular, "Age (Min)" the minimum age, "Age (Q25)" the age at the 25th percentile, "Age (Median)" the
median age, "Age (Q75)" the age at the 75th percentile and "Age (Max)" the maximum age. Court Treat Windows
means court-specific treatment windows (ten years before and after reform). Standard errors clustered by state in
parentheses. + p<.0.1, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01.




we can see a clear break and increase after treatment. The effect increases over a
number of years, peaking at about a 40 percent increase (relative to counterfactual)
ten years after the reform. Meanwhile, the precise zeros before the reform support
our identification assumption of parallel trends. According to a joint significance test,
the pre-period coefficients are jointly not significant (p > .8), while the post-period
coefficients are jointly significant (p < .001).
     The results for the differences-in-differences regressions for Equation (1) are re-
ported in Table 4. Across a range of specifications, there is a positive and significant
effect of introducing a mandatory retirement age on a court's influence, as measured
by citations. The result is consistently significant when adding controls for initial court
rules, case types, and the age distribution, interacted with year. Appendix Figure B.1
shows the event study when adding these interacted covariates. Appendix Table B.11
shows identical results using an inverse hyperbolic sine rather than log transformation.
     We undertook an array of checks to assess the robustness of the effect of the re-
tirement reform on court performance. First, Table 5 shows that the effect holds for a
number of alternative quality measures besides positive citations. The result is robust
to using levels rather than logs (Columns 1 and 2), and note that the estimated effect
in levels (60 positive forward citations) is about 24% of the mean in the ten years


                                                            25
               Table 4: Effect of Mandatory Retirement Reform on Log Citations

                                                     (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)
                                                      Effect on Log Positive Cites per Judge-Year

           Retirement Reform                       0.228**     0.253**               0.237**           0.322**       0.302**
                                                   (0.0756)    (0.0836)              (0.0818)          (0.0899)      (0.0928)

           Court FE, Year FE                          X                X                  X               X             X
           Court Trends/Windows                                        X                  X               X             X
           Init Court Rules × Year FE                                                     X               X             X
           Init Case Types × Year FE                                                                      X             X
           Init Age × Year FE                                                                                           X
           N                                        15010          15010                 15010           15010        15010
           R-sq                                     0.460          0.526                 0.538           0.555        0.564
Notes. DD effect of mandatory retirement reform on log positive citations to a judge's opinions in ten years after
reform, relative to ten years before reform. Observation is a judge working in a year. "Ret. Reform" is a treatment
indicator for the ten years after the introduction of mandatory retirement. Court Treat Windows means court-specific
treatment windows (ten years before and after reform). "Init X" × year FE means initial values are interacted with
year. "Init Court Rules" includes a state's 1947 rules for judge selection/retention system, admin office, intermediate
appellate court, number of judges, and term length. "Init Case Types" includes a court's 1947 average values for case
characteristics (legal area and related industries). "Init Age" includes the initial mean and standard deviation for judge
age on the court. Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. + p<.0.1, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01.




        Table 5: Effect of Mandatory Retirement Reform, Other Quality Measures

                      (1)       (2)       (3)         (4)       (5)                (6)           (7)          (8)       (9)       (10)

                     Cites in Levels     Within 10 years               All Cites                 Discuss Cites        Out-of-State Cites



 Ret. Reform        57.51*    60.50*    0.333**     0.338**   0.224**        0.249**          0.183**      0.175*      0.154     0.208*

                    (23.27)   (25.41)   (0.0921)    (0.102)   (0.0715)       (0.0806)         (0.0569)    (0.0654)    (0.0920)   (0.0846)



 Year / Court FE      X          X         X          X            X               X             X            X          X          X

 Trends/Windows                  X                    X                            X                          X                     X

 N                   15010     15010     15010      15010      15010          15010            15010       15010       15010      15010

 R-sq                0.351     0.415     0.537       0.613     0.470          0.530            0.463       0.523       0.471      0.520
Notes. Observation is a judge working in a year. "Retirement Reform" is an indicator for the ten years after the
introduction of mandatory retirement. "Cites in Levels" means the outcome is not logged. "Within 10 years" is the
log positive cites within ten years of an opinion. "All Cites" is the log number of all citations (positive, negative, and
distinguishing) to a judge in a year. "Discuss Cites" is only the positive cites where the latter judge discussed the cited
opinion. "Out-of-State Cites" is the count of number of positive citations from courts in other states. "Positive Cites"
is the number of positive cites (in levels). Court Treat Windows means court-specific treatment windows (ten years
before and after reform). Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. + p<.0.1, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01.




                                                              26
before the reforms (245 positive forward citations), similar to the effect in log points
from above. The effect is robust when holding the number of years of forward citing
cases constant to ten years of an opinion (Columns 3 and 4). We report effects on a
more inclusive measure of quality (all cites, not just positive) in Columns 5 and 6. We
use a more restrictive measure (discussion cites, where the previous case was specif-
ically discussed and applied) in Columns 7 and 8. Finally, we report DD estimates
for out-of-state citations (Columns 9 and 10). We see positive effects for all of these
alternative measures. The respective event study estimates are reported in Appendix
Figure B.2.23
       The appendix reports robustness checks along a number of additional margins.
Appendix Figure B.4 shows robustness to only using treated states in the sample.
Appendix Figure B.5 adds more pre-periods and shows there is no sign of a pre-trend
even ten years before the reform. Appendix Figure B.6 shows robustness to dropping
each treated state individually.24 Appendix Figure B.3 shows identical results when
collapsing to the court-year level, rather than using judge-year-level data. Appendix
Table B.8 shows that a qualitatively similar effect on judge performance is observed
when each of the specified maximum judge ages (70, 72, or 75) are analyzed separately.
       Our setting features a staggered treatment, where different treated states adopt
the reforms at different times. As noted in Goodman-Bacon (2018), in this setting the
standard two-way fixed-effects estimator can be biased due to the presence of previously
treated states in the comparison group. To address this issue, we follow the method in
Callaway and Sant'Anna (2019) and implement the following alternative specification.
For each treated state, we estimate the event study (2) dropping all other treated
states, and including in the comparison group only the set of 18 states who had not
adopted mandatory retirement before the end of our time period. We then take the
average of these estimates and plot as a normal event study. Appendix Figure B.8
reports these adjusted event study estimates, which again show a poitive effect that is
  23
      Appendix Table B.1 reports effects on even more measures. Columns 1 and 2 show that there
is still an effect for forward citations more than ten years after an opinion is published; presumably,
judges have less professional influence on these long-term citations. In Columns 3 and 4, we there
that there is no effect on the proportion of cases by a judge that has at least one positive citation;
this is perhaps unsurprising since an average of 87% of authored cases have at least one cite. Third,
Columns 5 and 6 show that the effect is robust and similar when dropping the top 5% of cases by
number of cites in each court-year; this means that our effects are not driven by the production of
more "blockbuster" cases.
   24
      Results are also robust if dropping all states that have an electoral reform within five years of the
retirement reform.


                                                    27
similar to the results of the baseline model.
   Next, in Appendix Table B.7 we add additional time-varying controls to Xist , which
are probably "bad controls" or "colliders" in the sense that they could be affected by
the retirement reforms. We include controls for the case characteristics, time-varying
court rules (election system, number of judges, and government expenditures on the
judiciary), and fixed effects for the number of years a judge has been on the court.
Finally, we include the lagged dependent variable, which can perform better in panel
data models with persistent shocks (Gentzkow et al., 2011; Caughey and Warshaw,
2018).


3.4      Is it Quality or Quantity?
As discussed, the main outcome, total citations to a judge or court per year, is a
combined measure of quantity and quality. Posner (1995) suggests that older judges
often maintain high quality levels by reducing quantity in terms of the number of
opinions they write. Ash and MacLeod (2015) provide evidence that these are separate
choices in a judge's work and that judges tend to care more about quality at the margin.
A clearly important question, then, is whether the effect on total citations is driven by
total number of opinions, or citations per opinion.
   We provide some evidence in this direction by running our analysis with these
separated quantity and quality measures. Figure 6 shows the event study estimates.
We can see a clear positive effect of the reform on both outcomes.
   Table 6 provides the differences-in-differences estimates. We see that there is an
increase in the number of opinions (Columns 1-3), reflecting an increase in quantity. In
addition, the point estimates on the effect of cites per opinion are positive (Columns
4-6), even when limiting to out-of-state cites (Columns 7-9). Though, the effect on
citations per case is less precisely estimated than the effect on quantity. Thus, given
that the effect on mandatory retirement on citations per case likely is positive, while
the effect on quantity is a precisely estimated positive effect, we can conclude that
mandatory retirement has a positive effect on state supreme court performance in the
United States.




                                           28
                                                                     Figure 6: Reform Effect on Quantity and Quality

                                                                   Effect on Quantity: Log Number of Authored Opinions
                                                            Pr ( [ k  -2 ] = 0) =.489                                       Pr ( [ k  0 ] = 0) =0
                                                 .4
  Effect on Log Number of Opinions




                                                 .3


                                                 .2


                                                 .1


                                                  0


                                                 -.1


                                                 -.2
                                                       -6     -5    -4   -3     -2 -1     0   1    2   3   4    5    6  7    8   9   10   11   12
                                                                              Years Before and After Mandatory Retirement Reform


                                                              Effect on Quality: Positive Citations per Authored Opinion
                                                            Pr ( [ k  -2 ] = 0) =.907                                       Pr ( [ k  0 ] = 0) =.161
                                                 .4
  Effect on Log Positive Citations per Opinion




                                                 .3


                                                 .2


                                                 .1


                                                  0


                                                 -.1


                                                 -.2
                                                       -6     -5    -4   -3     -2 -1     0   1    2   3   4    5    6  7    8   9   10   11   12
                                                                              Years Before and After Mandatory Retirement Reform

Notes. Court performance effects before and after reforms implementing retirement ages of 70, 72 or 75. Top panel
outcome is log number of opinions by a judge in a year; bottom panel is average log positive citations per opinon. Time
series is a coefficient plot from the event study regression (2), with coefficents estimated relative to the year before the
reform. Regression includes court and year fixed effects and court-specific event windows. 95% confidence intervals
constructed with standard errors clustered by state.


                                                                                                  29
                              Table 6: Reform Effect on Quantity and Quality

                               (1)             (2)            (3)               (4)           (5)              (6)        (7)        (8)          (9)

                                          # of Opinions                                  Cites per Case                    Out-State Cites / Case



 Retirement Reform        0.169**            0.142**        0.184**         0.0368          0.0751        0.0856+      -0.00514    0.0348        0.0500

                          (0.0415)          (0.0467)       (0.0580)         (0.0456)        (0.0497)      (0.0461)     (0.0468)    (0.0404)     (0.0463)



 Year FE, Court FE             X               X               X                 X             X               X          X           X            X

 Court Trends/Windows                          X               X                               X               X                      X            X

 Init Covars × Year FE                                         X                                               X                                   X

 N                            15010          15010           15010           15010           15010            15010     15010       15010        15010

 R-sq                         0.326           0.510          0.555           0.649           0.710            0.736     0.629       0.668        0.691
Observation is a judge working in a year. "Retirement Reform" is an indicator for the ten years after the introduction
of mandatory retirement. "# of Opinions" is the number of majority opinions written by a judge in a year. "Cites per
Case" is number of citations per published opinion. "Out-of-State Cites / Case" is number of out-of-state citations per
published opinion. Court Treat Windows means court-specific treatment windows (ten years before and after reform).
Init Covars × Year FE includes initial rule, case type, and age statistics of a court interacted with year. Standard errors
clustered by state in parentheses. + p<.0.1, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01.




                 Table 7: Effect of Retirement Reform on Case Characteristics

                                     (1)             (2)            (3)           (4)                   (5)              (6)              (7)

                                                           Effect on Log Positive Cites                                 Share          Case

                                Random Assigment               Discretionary Assigment          Case Controls         Crim.Cases    Importance



     Retirement Reform          0.239+          0.300*         0.263**          0.216**              0.148*            0.0301*        0.0350

                                (0.125)         (0.134)        (0.0845)         (0.0608)             (0.0703)          (0.0133)      (0.0300)



     Year FE, Court FE                X              X               X               X                  X                 X                X

     Court Trends / Windows                          X                               X                  X                 X                X

     N                           10861          10861              4149          4149                  15010            15010         15010

     R-sq                          0.466         0.532             0.419         0.476                 0.652            0.649          0.472
Observation is a judge working in a year. "Retirement Reform" is an indicator for the ten years after the introduction
of mandatory retirement. Court Treat Windows means court-specific treatment windows (ten years before and after
reform). "Share Criinal Cases" is the share on criminal law. "Case Importance" is the predicted citations to a case
based on case characteristics (legal area and related industries). Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. +
p<.0.1, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01.




                                                                           30
3.5    Relevance of Case Characteristics
As mentioned above, judicial citations are a combined result of judge input and the
importance of a case. We are therefore concerned with whether these effects are driven
in part by the types of cases. Table 7 reports some regression results along these
lines. First, in Columns 1 through 4 we show that the effect of the reform on quality
is seen both in states with random case assignment and in states with discretionary
case assignment. Appendix Figure B.9 shows the event study effects separately by
case assignment rule, which are similar. Column 5 shows the main results is robust to
including controls for case type.
   To further unpack this dimension of the effect, we look at how the types of cases that
the judges review changed after the reform. In Table 7 Column 6, we see that the share
of criminal cases increased after the reform, reflecting a change in the composition of the
caseload that judges review. However, in Column 7 we do not see a significant change
in the importance of opinions, as indicated from the case characteristics . Therefore
it appears that the portfolio of cases that the court accepts for appeal is not a major
factor in the increase in court citations.


3.6    Additional Results
We look at additional outcomes in Appendix Table B.12, and report effects on work
output (log number of words written), case-law research, and the rate of being overruled
by the U.S. Supreme Court. There are no effects on these additional dimensions. There
is an increase in the number of addendum opinions (log of the count of dissents and
concurrences), but that is proportional to the total number of opinions produced by
the court.
   Appendix Table B.10 provides some estimates of the effects on related institutional
factors. Judge experience (years on the court) decreases (mechanically) after the re-
forms, but not quite as much as by judge age. We see no immediate effect (comparing
the ten years before and after a reform) on how a judge's tenure ended (whether by
retirement, death in office, etc).




                                             31
4     Aging and Judge Performance
The evidence thus far shows that the mandatory retirement reform results in increased
output and citations per judge. Conceptually, the experiment is to compare average
court performance before and after the change in the mandatory retirement rule. The
next question is to understand why this is occurring. As discussed in Section 2.1,
there is plenty of previous evidence that age is negatively correlated with measures
of of an individual's cognitive and physical performance. The difficulty is that age
is not a treatment in the sense used by the potential outcomes framework. Holland
(1986) observes that individual characteristics such as age, sex, or race cannot be
experimentally varied, and hence one cannot properly discuss a causal effect of age.
    One way to attack this problem is to compare judges of different ages in the same
court-year. The benefit of this approach is that judges are being evaluated using exactly
the same criteria ­ the number of cases and future citations for a specific setting and
period. We can take advantage of the panel structure and control for heterogeneity in
a judge's base-line performance. We can then ask if the relative ranking of the judge's
performance changes with age.


4.1    Empirical Approach
This approach is implemented with the following specification. Assume a quadratic
age model of performance variable yist for judge i working in court s at year t:

                                 0
                     yist = st + i + 1 Aist + 2 A2
                                                 ist + Xist  +     ist                 (3)
                                                                  0
where Aist is the age (in years) for judge i in court s at t, and i is a judge-specific
intercept for performance in their first year on the court. This provides a judge-
specific baseline value such that our estimates for the effect of age, ^1 , are relative to
the individual's baseline. The main source of bias comes from the time-varying changes
in the court work environment which are systematically correlated with age. Thus, we
include a full set of court-year fixed effects. Therefore any estimated coefficients are
also relative to the court average in each year. The regressions effectively compare
judges sitting on the same court, working at the same time, but who are of different
ages. Again, standard errors are clustered by state.
    Xist includes a number of additional items which we add in follow-up specifications.


                                            32
First, we have cohort fixed effects ­ indicators for each decade that the judge started
on the court. This covariate is meant to rule out mechanical variation due to cohort
differences across the time period. In the same vein, we have court-specific linear
trends in judge starting cohort: formally, judge starting-year interacted with court
fixed effect. This allows for judges in different states to have a different confounding
trend in starting year and performance.
   In the baseline specification, we specify yist in logs (as above) and the age variable
is in levels. This means that the coefficients can be interpreted as the proportional
change in performance due to a one-year increase in judge age. In follow-up results, we
report results with yist in levels and in rank percentiles by court-year. That is, the judge
with the highest measure in a year is given a 1, the lowest a zero, and all other judges
uniformly distributed on that interval according to rank. In this specification, the level
differences do not matter, and the measure is more robust to outliers (Chetty et al.,
2014). The interpretation of coefficients is similar to median (quantile) regression.
   In addition to the quadratic model regressions, we plot out the dynamic changes in
performance over the lifespan by estimating

                                    0
                        yist = st + i +          g Ag
                                                    ist + Xist  +   ist                 (4)
                                          g G

where now instead of a quadratic specification for age, we have a vector of indicator
variables Ag
           ist , g  G, equaling one when judge i is in age group g . The age groups,
chosen for convenience, are 0-44, 45-49, 50-54, 55-59, 60-64, 65-60, 61-64, 65-69, 70-
74, and 75+. Appendix Figure C.1 shows the distribution in our data for these age
groups. The qualitative results of the dynamic age analysis are not sensitive to how
these groups are defined.
   For the dynamic analysis we drop the first and last years of each judge career.
We drop these observations because in the first and last years, judges have a partial
caseload by construction. In the quadratic age model, this sample adjustment does not
make a big difference in estimates. But it can shift estimates around a lot for younger
and older judges when estimating the age group effects.
   It is important to note why we do not report a specification with judge fixed effects.
Age (in years) is perfectly linear within judge. Therefore, 1 and 2 are not identified
when including both judge fixed effects and year (or court-year) fixed effects. There is
no straight-forward estimation approach that would allow judge fixed effects and also


                                            33
account for the large global variation in citations over time across all courts. Further,
with judge fixed effects the age and experience effect cannot be distinguished.
       Since judge fixed effects are not an option, a potential issue with the previous
specifications is that they are applied to an unbalanced sample of judges. Judges
start and end at different ages, so the estimated effects could be driven by selection
of different types of judges into different starting and ending ages. To address this
issue, we produce a set of regressions using balanced samples of judges. First, we take
overlapping ten-year age groups across the lifespan (45-54, 50-59, 55-64, 60-69, 65-
74) and limit to judges that worked continuously in that age group. The distribution
over these groups is shown in Appendix Figure C.2. Next, we produce estimates from
Equation 3 restricting to those balanced samples. This is similar to using judge fixed
effects as we are keeping the set of judges constant. On the other hand, the judges
come from many different courts and years, and there could be confounding variation
in citations across courts over time. Therefore for the balanced-sample analysis, the
preferred outcome is the rank percentile in citations. The rank percentile provides a
performance measure that is comparable across courts and over time.


4.2       Main Results on Judge Age and Judge Performance
Now we report the main results for variation of judge performance by age. The regres-
sion estimates from Equation (3) are reported in Table 8.25 There is a highly significant
negative relationship between age and judge performance as measured by positive ci-
tations to a judge's opinions in a year. The estimate doesn't change that much when
adding the judge's first-year as a baseline to the regression (Column 2), or when adding
cohort fixed effects and state-specific cohort trends (Column 3). As seen in Column 5,
the effect also holds using a rank percentile specification in work performance.
       Columns 4 and 6 assume a quadratic model for age. Both of these columns show
that the negative linear estimates from the other columns conceal a concave rela-
tionship, where the linear term is actually positive. The quadratic term is negative
and significant, indicating that the negative relationship between age and performance
accelerates at later ages. Taking the quadratic model at face value, the coefficient
estimates indicate that judge performance is maximized around age 47 (Column 6) to
48 (Column 4). Given that the median age of working judges is 61, these estimates
  25
     See Appendix Table C.1 for identical results using inverse hyperbolic sine of cites, rather than log
of cites.


                                                   34
                              Table 8: Judge Age and Judge Performance

                                  (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)            (5)           (6)
                                                Log Positive Cites                       Rank Percentile Cites


        Judge Age (Years)     -0.00822**    -0.00812**    -0.00712**      0.0322*      -0.00468**      0.0166+
                               (0.00134)     (0.00107)     (0.00121)      (0.0126)     (0.000826)     (0.00894)


        Age Squared                                                     -0.000331**                  -0.000179*
                                                                         (0.000111)                  (0.0000788)


        Court-Year FE              X             X             X             X             X              X
        First-Year Baseline                      X             X             X             X              X
        Cohort FE / Trends                                     X             X             X              X
        N                        14981         14981        14981          14981         14972          14972
        R-sq                      0.670         0.695         0.700         0.701         0.109          0.112
Observation is a judge working in a year. "Log Positive Cites" is log of positive cites to a judge in a year. "Rank
Percentile Cites" means judges are uniformly distributed between zero and one based on number of positive citations
within court-year (0 is lowest, 1 is highest). Court-Year FE is interacted court-year fixed effects. First-Year Baseline
means a judge's value for the outcome in their first year on the court is included as a control. Cohort FE means fixed
effect for decade that the judge started on the court. Cohort Trends means judge starting-year interacted with court
fixed effect. Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. + p<.0.1, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01.




suggest a negative age-performance relationship for almost all judges.
       To show further the dynamics of the effect, Figure 7 reports the age-group estimates
from Equation (4). Each item in the graphs shows the difference in citations between
the respective five-year age group and the baseline group of judges who are 44 or
younger. These regressions are consistent with the quadratic model, showing an initial
increase in performance and then a steady decrease starting in the late 40s or early
50s. This trend holds for both positive citations and out-of-state citations, and for the
log outcome as well as the within-court-year percentile rank.
       As seen in Figure 8, the age-performance effect holds for alternative quality mea-
sures: cites within ten years of an opinion, all cites (not just positive), discussion cites,
and out-of-state cites. Appendix Tables C.2 and C.4 report the associated regres-
sion results. For each of these variables, the relationship is concave in the quadratic
specification.26
  26
    Appendix Table C.3 reports the life-cycle estimates for three additional measures. Columns 1 and
2 show that there is a similar aging effect for forward citations more than ten years after an opinion is
published; presumably, judges have less professional influence on these long-term citations. Columns
3 and 4 show that there is a similar effect on the proportion of cases by a judge that has at least


                                                          35
                                                    Figure 7: Dynamic Analysis of Judge Age and Judge Performance

                                                      (A) Log Positive Cites                                                                                          (B) Rank Percentile Positive Cites
                                        .2                                                                                                                      .2




                                                                                                          Effect on Rank Percentile in Citations
 Effect on Log Positive Citations




                                        .1                                                                                                                      .1



                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                 0



                                        -.1
                                                                                                                                                                -.1



                                        -.2
                                                                                                                                                                -.2
                                              -44    45-49   50-54   55-59 60-64   65-69   70-74   75+                                                                -44   45-49   50-54   55-59 60-64   65-69   70-74   75+
                                                                      Age Groups                                                                                                             Age Groups


                                                    (C) Log Out-of-State Cites                                                                                  (D) Rank Percentile Out-of-State Cites
                                                                                                          Effect on Rank Percentile in Out-of-State Citations




                                                                                                                                                                .2
                                        .2
 Effect on Log Out-of-State Citations




                                                                                                                                                                .1
                                        .1




                                         0                                                                                                                       0




                                        -.1                                                                                                                     -.1




                                        -.2
                                                                                                                                                                -.2
                                              -44    45-49   50-54   55-59 60-64   65-69   70-74   75+                                                                -44   45-49   50-54   55-59 60-64   65-69   70-74   75+
                                                                      Age Groups                                                                                                             Age Groups

Dynamic coefficient plots for estimates of five-year age group differences, relative to the age < 45 group. Observation
is a judge working in a year. All graphs contain court-year interacted fixed effects, first year baselines, and cohort fixed
effects. Outcomes are in logs or rank percentiles, as indicated. 95% confidence intervals constructed using standard
errors clustered by state.




                                                                                                         36
                                                          Figure 8: Dynamic Analysis: Additional Performance Measures

                                                    (A) Positive Cites in Levels                                                                         (B) Log Positive Cites within Ten Years
                                       50                                                                                                                .2




                                                                                                           Effect on Log Positive Citations (10 Years)
 Effect of Age on Positive Citations




                                                                                                                                                         .1




                                        0                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                         -.1




                                       -50                                                                                                               -.2


                                              -44     45-49   50-54   55-59 60-64   65-69   70-74   75+                                                        -44   45-49   50-54   55-59 60-64   65-69   70-74   75+
                                                                       Age Groups                                                                                                     Age Groups


                                                              (C) All Cites                                                                                            (D) Discussion Cites
                                             .2                                                                                                          .2
                                                                                                           Effect on Log Discussion Citations
 Effect on Log Citations (Total)




                                             .1
                                                                                                                                                         .1


                                              0
                                                                                                                                                          0

                                             -.1

                                                                                                                                                         -.1
                                             -.2


                                                                                                                                                         -.2
                                             -.3
                                                    -44    45-49 50-54 55-59 60-64 65-69 70-74      75+                                                        -44   45-49   50-54   55-59 60-64   65-69   70-74   75+
                                                                        Age Groups                                                                                                    Age Groups

Dynamic coefficient plots for estimates of five-year age group differences, relative to the age < 45 group. Observation
is a judge working in a year. All graphs contain court-year interacted fixed effects, first year baselines, and cohort fixed
effects. Outcomes are as indicated. 95% confidence intervals constructed using standard errors clustered by state.




                                                                                                          37
                                                                        Figure 9: Dynamic Analysis: Quantity vs. Quality

                                                         (A) Quantity: Log # of Opinions                                                                                             (B) Quality: Log Cites per Opinion
 Effect on Rank Percentile in Number of Opinions




                                                   .1                                                                                                                          .1




                                                                                                                 Effect on Rank Percentile in Positive Citations per Opinion
                                                    0                                                                                                                           0




                                                   -.1                                                                                                                         -.1




                                                   -.2                                                                                                                         -.2




                                                   -.3                                                                                                                         -.3
                                                         -49   50-54   55-59     60-64    65-69   70-74   75+                                                                         -49   50-54   55-59     60-64    65-69   70-74   75+
                                                                               Age Groups                                                                                                                   Age Groups

Dynamic coefficient plots for estimates of five-year age group differences, relative to the age < 45 group. Observation
is a judge working in a year. All graphs contain court-year interacted fixed effects, first year baselines, and cohort fixed
effects. 95% confidence intervals constructed using standard errors clustered by state.




                                                    Figure 9 breaks out the age effect by quantity (Panel A) and quality (Panel B). As
can be seen in the figure, there is not much of an age trend for the caseload, but a large
and significant negative effect on citations per opinion. These estimates suggest that
the aging effect on performance is driven by changes in work quality, rather than by
changes in work quantity. At a minimum, we can rule out older judges compensating
lower quality with higher quantity.
                                                    Next we show that aging effects are not driven by changes in the types of cases
that older judges work on. As shown in Appendix Table C.5 and Appendix Figure
C.3, case categories and case importance are not significantly related to judge age.
This null is seen under both random/rotating assignment of judges to cases and under
discretionary assignment. Overall, these statistics suggest that observed differences in
work quality across the lifespan are not mainly driven by changes in the types of cases
that older judges rule on.
                                                    The effect of age on performance is robust to a variety of alternative specifications.
Appendix Figure C.4 shows that the results look very similar without any fixed effects
(Panel A), or instead adding experience fixed effects (Panel B). We include results
one positive citation, suggesting the older judges work on more cases that have no impact. Third,
Columns 5 and 6 show that the effect is robust and similar when dropping the top 5% of cases by
number of cites in each court-year; this means that the variation over the lifespan is not driven by the
production of more or fewer "blockbuster" cases.


                                                                                                                38
separately by mandatory and voluntary retirement (Appendix Table C.6); they are
similar. The results are robust to alternative weighting (Appendix Figure C.6) and
alternative clustering of standard errors (Appendix Figure C.7).
       We also separate our results before/after 1970. Appendix Figure C.5 shows that
the age trend is shallower in the latter period. Judges from more recent cohorts show
decreasing performance starting at later ages, and it remains high until after the age
of 70. In the earlier period, performance dips significantly starting at age 65. This
difference could be due to significant health differences between cohorts of judges in
the early and late period. Another possibility is that support technologies, such as
higher-skill clerks or legal research databases, have made judges more productive later
in life.27
       We analyze a number of alternative outcomes (see Appendix Table C.7). Older
judges tend to write the same amount in terms of total words written, have cases
that are similar in length, and do about the same amount of caselaw research. These
null effects are inconsistent with an alternative "verbosity" explanation of the citations
effect. That is, citations do not reflecting variation in quality due to aging, but rather
that younger judges are more verbose in research and explaining the previous caselaw,
and therefore get more cites due to explaining rules more. These null estimates are
also inconsistent with a "clerks" explanation for age-performance variation ­ that older
judges rely more or less on clerks than younger judges. If that were the case, we would
expect systematic variation in the tasks that clerks are most responsible for ­ writing
and researching.
       Appendix Table C.7 also shows that older judges affirm (rather than reverse) lower-
court cases at about the same rate as younger judges. This is important for our
interpretation of the results because it suggests that older judges are not systematically
more accepting about the legal status quo. If our result on cites were driven by older
judges being less innovative, we would expect to see that in fewer reversals of lower
                                                              28
courts. We see no difference in reversal rate by age.
       For completeness, Appendix Table C.8 reports a two-stage least-squares (2SLS)
specification where we instrument for judge age using the mandatory retirement treat-
  27
      As additional heterogeneity analysis, we compare judges by gender, and by the judge appointment
system. We find that aging effects are the same across genders (unreported).
   28
      We also see in Appendix Table C.7 that older judges are overruled by the U.S. Supreme Court at
about the same rate, tend to dissent less often, and are superseded more often by statute. The latter
is a rare outcome.



                                                 39
ment indicators. This specification relies on unrealistic exogeneity assumptions, as the
reforms affect performance through other channels besides age. That said, we get a
strong first stage and estimate a significantly negative 2SLS effect of age on perfor-
mance. The 2SLS coefficient is about ten times as large as the OLS coefficient, bring-
ing the estimates more in line with the effect of mandatory retirement on performance
measured above.


4.3    Analysis of Balanced Judge Samples
As discussed in Section 4.1 above, an issue with the previous results is that they are
made on unbalanced samples of judges. Judges are entering and leaving the sample at
different ages. It could very well be that the negative effect of aging on performance is
driven by this attrition bias. To address this issue, we construct balanced samples of
judges by age group across the lifespan.
   The regression results using balanced samples are visualized by the coefficient plots
in Figure 10. Each of these coefficient plots reports the estimate for ^ (with 95%
confidence interval) from Equation 3 (the linear model, without the quadratic age
term) using a sample of judges that work continuously for the ten years of the age
group indicated in the horizontal axis. The plots go from left to right starting from
45-54, to 50-59, and so on, up until 65-74. Because the judges are working continuously,
the estimates give within-judge changes over time and are not biased by selective entry
or exit. Because the outcomes are within-court-year rank percentiles, no fixed effects
are needed and the performance measures are comparable across courts and years.
   We can see in Panel A that there is a negative effect of age on performance across
the samples. The effect in the earliest cohort is not significant. As we move to later
samples, the effect becomes more negative and more statistically significant. This is
consistent with an increasingly negative effect of aging on performance later in the
lifespan. These baseline results are robust to alternative weighting and alternative
clustering of standard errors (Appendix Figure C.8). In Panel B, we see a similar
trend for out-of-state cites.
   In Panel C and Panel D, we look at quantity (number of opinions) and quality
(citations per opinion) respectively, in the balanced samples of judges. We see mostly
insignificant effects on the workload (number of opinions). Meanwhile, there is a large
negative effect for quality (citations per opinion) starting quite early: in the 50-59
sample. These results provide additional support for the view that the age-performance

                                           40
                                                                      Figure 10: Effect of Age on Performance in Balanced Judge Samples

                                                                   (A) Rank Percentile Positive Cites                                                                               (B) Rank Percentile Out-of-State Cites
                                                            .005




                                                                                                                      Effect of Age on Rank Percentile in Out-of-State Citations
 Effect of Age on Rank Percentile in Citations




                                                                                                                                                                                   .005

                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                      0

                                                           -.005
                                                                                                                                                                                   -.005

                                                            -.01
                                                                                                                                                                                    -.01


                                                           -.015                                                                                                                   -.015


                                                            -.02                                                                                                                    -.02


                                                           -.025                                                                                                                   -.025
                                                                     45-54   50-59        55-64      60-69   65-74                                                                         45-54   50-59        55-64      60-69   65-74
                                                                                     Judge Age Group                                                                                                       Judge Age Group


(C) Quantity: Rank Percentile # of Opinions                                                                                                                                         (D) Quality: Rank Percentile Cites per
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Opinion
  Effect of Age on Rank Percentile in Number of Opinions




                                                           .005
                                                                                                                                                                                   .005
                                                                                                                      Effect of Age on Rank Percentile in Citations per Opinion




                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                      0

                                                           -.005
                                                                                                                                                                                   -.005
                                                            -.01
                                                                                                                                                                                    -.01
                                                           -.015

                                                                                                                                                                                   -.015
                                                            -.02

                                                                                                                                                                                    -.02
                                                           -.025
                                                                     45-54   50-59        55-64      60-69   65-74
                                                                                     Judge Age Group                                                                               -.025
                                                                                                                                                                                           45-54   50-59        55-64      60-69   65-74
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Judge Age Group

Performance-Age estimates for separate balanced samples of judges based on age group. Observation is a judge working
in a year. Outcomes are in rank percentiles, regressed on age (in years) for the specified group. 95% confidence intervals
constructed using standard errors clustered by state.




                                                                                                                     41
                                                       Figure 11: Effect of Age on Performance in First Years of Judgeship


                                                 .6
   Positive Citations per Opinion (Norm. Rank)




                                                 .5




                                                 .4




                                                 .3
                                                       1       2       3       4      5      6        7       8       9      10
                                                                                   Years on Court

                                                                            Started 40-44             Started 45-49
                                                                            Started 50-54             Started 55-59
                                                                            Started 60-64             Started 65-69

Notes. Time series for average rank percentile (within court year) in positive citations for the first ten years of a judge
career, separately by starting age (indicated in legend).




effect is driven by work quality (rather than quantity).


4.4                                                   Experience and Attrition
There are two final issues that are relevant to the interpretation of an aging effect
on judge performance. First, older judges mechanically tend to have more judicial
experience than younger judges. We would like to disentangle these effects by holding
experience constant. Second, we only observe the performance of judges who are on
the court ­ we do not observe performance in other jobs. We analyze variation in
performance according to entry and exit timing, to understand better what direction
selective attrition is influencing our estimates.
                            First, to get at the experience issue, we look at how judge performance evolves over


                                                                                       42
                         Table 9: Effects of Starting Age and Ending Age

                                       (1)            (2)         (3)         (4)               (5)
                                                     Effect on Log Positive Cites

             Judge Start Age       -0.00700**     -0.000885                                  -0.00147
                                    (0.00155)     (0.00232)                                 (0.00222)

             Judge End Age                                      -0.000612      0.0151**     0.0152**
                                                                (0.00132)      (0.00177)    (0.00181)

             Court-Year FE              X             X              X             X             X
             Age FE                                   X                            X             X
             N                        13655         13643          14618         13643         13643
             adj. R-sq                0.672         0.678          0.668         0.682         0.682
Effect of judge start age and end age on judge performance. Observation is a judge working in a year. Standard errors
clustered by state in parentheses. + p<.0.1, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01.




the first ten years on the court, but comparing judges by their starting age. We can
see this variation in Figure 11. The judges in the different time series have the same
amount of experience (years on the state supreme court), but they start at different
ages. As before, we see a generally negative trend in quality over time. Moreover,
we can see clearly that younger starting judges begin at a higher quality level than
older starting judges. This difference is maintained over time. Therefore, increased
age reduces work performance even holding experience constant.
    To get at selective attrition, we hold age constant with age fixed effects, and then
regress performance on starting age or ending age. Table 9 provides this additional
analysis of how age and performance relate to career transition choices. First, we
see that holding age fixed, the start age has no effect (Column 2). This result again
supports the view that there is no important experience effect relative to the aging
effect. Second, we look at the effect of judge's ending age, holding current age constant
(Column 4). We see a significant positive effect. At a given age, judges who will end
up working longer have relatively high performance in their job. This means that there
is positive selection in terms of judges staying on the court. Lower-performing judges
tend to leave the court at younger ages.
    The reported life-cycle evidence must be interpreted with this selective exit result
in mind. It suggests that all of our estimates for late-life performance decreases are, if


                                                        43
anything, an underestimate. If our regressions included the judges who tend to leave
at younger ages, the estimated performance declines would be even steeper.


4.5     The Role of Clerks
As mentioned above, state supreme court judges receive the help of clerks in research
and writing their opinions. Therefore, the observed effects of age on performance could
be driven in part by changes in how judges hire or manage their staff. Ideally, we could
check whether there are systematic differences in the types of clerks that older or
younger judges hire. But there are no datasets available on clerks in the state court
system.
    In the federal courts, however, there is a dataset on clerkships collected by Bonica
et al. (2017). These authors have kindly shared their data on clerk law schools. As
described in further detail in Appendix A.5, we link the clerkships to judge age using
the Federal Judicial Center dataset. We measure clerk quality using Leiter's (2000)
"quality of student body" ranking, which is constructed from LSAT scores and college
GPA.
    We then regress clerk quality on judge age using court-year fixed effects. Appendix
Table A.5 shows that there is no relationship, positive or negative, between a judge's
age and the quality of their clerks. With the caveat that this analysis is for federal
courts, rather than state courts, it still provides suggestive evidence that clerks are
probably not the main driver of observed variation in work performance over the judge
life cycle.


5      Team Effects of Aging
Now we have analyzed the court-level effect of mandatory retirement (Section 3) and
the judge-level life-cycle effect of aging (Section 4). To connect these analyses, let us
use the life-cycle estimates to form a prediction of the effects on court performance
due to the retirement reform's effect on age. Specifically, we can multiply the reform's
effect on age (decrease by 3 years, Table 3) by the life-cycle effect of age on citations
(about 1 percent decrease per year, Table 8). Together, these estimates suggest that
the reform would increase cites by about 3 percent due to the aging effect. But what
we see in the reform DD regression is a much larger effect: about 25 percent. The bias


                                           44
due to selective attrition (Section 4.4) could account for some of this difference, but
given the especially large difference it seems that the reform is affecting performance
through channels other than shifting the court's age composition.
   The disconnect between the reform and the life-cycle estimates can also be seen in
the relative importance of quantity and quality. The retirement reform effect is driven
mostly by an increase in quantity (number of published opinions), with relatively small
increases in measured work quality (citations per opinion). Meanwhile, the aging effect
is driven mostly by quality (citations per opinion), with not much effect on quantity
(number of authored opinions). Again, the effect on individual judge age does not seem
to be the principal mechanism by which retirement reforms affect court performance.
   To explore further these issues, we first revisit the retirement-reform regressions us-
ing judge fixed effects instead of court fixed effects. Formally, we estimate (1) including
judge indicators i rather than state indicators s . These regressions will summarize
the within-judge effect of the reforms, focusing on those judges that stay on the court
and are not removed due to old age. If the retirement reform works primarily through
composition, the results with judge fixed effects would be zero. If the estimates are non-
zero, we can reject that composition is the primary driver of how mandatory retirement
improves performance.
   Table 10 shows the difference-in-difference estimates for the specification with judge
fixed effects. There is a positive and significant effect, about half of the magnitude of the
full effect measures from Table 4. As before, the estimates are robust to the addition of
a number of exogenous state characteristics interacted with year fixed effects. Appendix
Figure D.1 shows the corresponding event study estimates, which tell the same story.
Appendix D reports additional robustness checks along the same lines as Section 3.
Again suggesting that the within-judge effects are not as large as the court-wide effects,
the results are generally not as robust as the court-level effects in terms of magnitude
and statistical significance.
   As before, we look at quantity and quality separately using judge fixed effects.
Table 11 reports the results. We see, similar to the baseline results, that quantity
goes up robustly, but not as much as the court-level effect in terms of magnitudes.
The quality effects are positive, yet not as robust across specifications. These results
suggest that after the older judges are removed, the remaining younger judges take on
more work without a reduction in work quality.
   More generally, these estimates suggest that the effect of the mandatory retirement


                                             45
                 Table 10: Effect of Reform on Log Cites, Judge Fixed Effects

                                                      (1)              (2)           (3)             (4)             (5)
                                                                  Effect on Log Cites per Judge-Year


                 Retirement Reform                   0.175*         0.173*         0.170*           0.221*          0.216*
                                                    (0.0768)        (0.0726)       (0.0728)     (0.0872)        (0.0868)


                 Judge FE, Year FE                     X               X              X                X              X
                 Court Trends/Windows                                  X              X                X              X
                 Init Court Rules × Year FE                                           X                X              X
                 Init Case Types × Year FE                                                             X              X
                 Init Age × Year FE                                                                                   X
                 N                                   14905           14905          14905           14905           14905
                   R-sq                            0.675        0.683      0.691       0.700       0.707
Observation is a judge working in a year. "Retirement Reform" is an indicator for the ten years after the introduction
of mandatory retirement. Court Treat Windows means court-specific treatment windows (ten years before and after
reform). "Init X" × year FE means initial values are interacted with year. "Init Court Rules" includes a state's 1947
rules for judge selection/retention system, admin office, intermediate appellate court, number of judges, and term length.
"Init Case Types" includes a court's 1947 average values for case characteristics (legal area and related industries). "Init
Age" includes the initial mean and standard deviation for judge age on the court. Standard errors clustered by state in
parentheses. + p<.0.1, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01.




             Table 11: Effect of Reform on Quantity/Quality, Judge Fixed Effects

                                             (1)            (2)              (3)               (4)             (5)             (6)
                                             Quantity (# of Opinions)                         Quality (Cites per Opinion)


         Retirement Reform                 0.0863*      0.0869*         0.0931+               0.0594         0.0564          0.0948*
                                          (0.0369)      (0.0383)        (0.0502)            (0.0399)         (0.0380)        (0.0382)


         Judge FE, Year FE                    X               X              X                  X               X               X
         Court Trends/Windows                                 X              X                                  X               X
         Init Court Rules × Year FE                                          X                                                  X
         Init Case Types × Year FE                                           X                                                  X
         Init Age × Year FE                                                  X                                                  X
         N                                  14905          14905           14905              14905           14905           14905
           R-sq                             0.648       0.674       0.706          0.815       0.821       0.836
Observation is a judge working in a year. "Retirement Reform" is an indicator for the ten years after the introduction
of mandatory retirement. Court Treat Windows means court-specific treatment windows (ten years before and after
reform). "Init X" × year FE means initial values are interacted with year. "Init Court Rules" includes a state's 1947
rules for judge selection/retention system, admin office, intermediate appellate court, number of judges, and term length.
"Init Case Types" includes a court's 1947 average values for case characteristics (legal area and related industries). "Init
Age" includes the initial mean and standard deviation for judge age on the court. Standard errors clustered by state in
parentheses. + p<.0.1, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01.




                                                                  46
reform is driven not just by older judges being replaced. In addition to that, there is
a positive effect on the younger judges who are working before and after the reform.
Thus, there is not just an individual but a team effect of aging workers upon co-workers.
The presence of older judges appears to reduce the productivity of younger judges.
       There could be two reasons for this team effect. First, it could be that the presence
of older judges imposes unobserved work burdens on younger judges. That is, to
maintain a reasonable work product level, the younger judges have to help the older
judges with their work. The reforms remove the older judges and remove this burden,
so then the younger judges have more time to provide higher performance.
       A second, perhaps subtler, explanation of this effect is an "equal workload" norm
that, combined with the presence of relatively unproductive older judges, imposes a
workload cap on younger judges. As we saw in the life cycle regressions, all judges
are responsible for the same number of cases regardless of age. Thus, as a team, the
court would not want to increase the caseload above what can be handled by its lowest-
performing judges. In particular, before mandatory retirement a court has to maintain
a relatively low caseload so that the oldest judges can keep up with the equal load.
       Consistent with this latter equal-workload explanation, the effect of the reforms is
driven mostly by an increase in quantity rather than quality. With the oldest judges
removed, the younger judges coordinate on a higher workload. If the first explanation
(younger judges helping older judges) were more important, we would expect a similar
or larger effect on quality, consistent with the evidence in Ash and MacLeod (2015)
that judges prefer to increase quality rather than quantity at the margin when time
pressure is relieved.
       We find additional supporting evidence for the equal-workload mechanism in the
patterns of authorship rates before/after the reform. That is, we look at the court-level
proportion of cases that are authored (an individual judge signs his/her name) rather
than unsigned (per curiam) opinions of the court. Under an equal workload norm with
variation in productivity due to age, the best-performing younger judges have excess
work capacity and can expend that on unsigned opinions. After the reform and the
removal of older judges, therefore, we might expect fewer unsigned opinions. In our
data that is exactly what we find: The reform increases the proportion of cases that
are authored (Appendix Table D.2 Columns 1 and 2).29
  29
    Changes in authorship rate are not driving are main reform effects. The results are similar when
controlling for authorship rates (Appendix Table D.2 Columns 3 through 8).



                                                47
6     Conclusion
The goal of this paper has been to measure the effects of aging on judicial behavior
and court performance. Given that judges have low-powered incentives that do not
explicitly link pay to performance, these factors likely have a significant impact on
judge behavior. We find that mandatory retirement rules increase the performance
of courts as a whole. An important contributor to this effect is that physical aging is
associated with a reduction in work quality over the lifespan. We also have evidence for
a team effect of aging, where older judges reduce the performance of younger colleagues.
    These effects could be explained by the cognitive impacts of physiological aging
and the resulting interactions between judges. But there could be other mechanisms
besides cognitive factors. Part of the variation over the lifetime could be changes in
incentives, for example due to pensions vesting. A third possibility is that preferences,
rather than ability, change over the lifetime. Older judges might have different priorities
than younger judges, for example preferring to seek justice in particular cases rather
than seeking to influence the decisions in future cases. Younger judges might have
more career concerns and want to have a reputational impact. Finally, younger judges
might be noisier in their decision-making, which could be error-prone but also more
innovative, thereby leading to more cites. Future work could do more to disentangle
these mechanisms, perhaps in the lower courts where career concerns and decision
errors are easier to identify.
    We found a different age-performance profile than the previous work on federal cir-
cuit judges (Posner, 1995) and Australia High Court judges (Smyth and Bhattacharya,
2003). There could be many reasons for this difference, starting with our much larger
sample of judges. The U.S. federal courts (and the Australia High Court) are con-
sistently professionalized and selective, while state supreme courts have much more
variance in the types of individuals who become judges.
    In the state supreme courts, our results remain policy-relevant. As recently as
2016, Pennsylvanians voted (by a 2 percent ballot initiative margin) to increase the
mandatory retirement age for state supreme court judges from 70 to 75. It is likely that
other state-level changes in the retirement age will be proposed in the coming years.
New York State has had mandatory retirement at 70 since 1869, the same rule that
persists in many states. It cannot be, given changes in health and other technologies,
that the same maximum age could be optimal both now and in 1869.


                                            48
      In the case of federal judges, our results are especially relevant given that imposing
mandatory retirement is unconstitutional (Posner, 1995).30 While the use of senior
status and other incentives can put pressure on older judges (Choi et al., 2013), it
is still the case that many federal judges stay on the bench past their prime (e.g.
Goldstein, 2011). Our evidence provides more support for proposed reforms (including
a constitutional amendment) to mandate retirement for the oldest federal judges.
      What does our evidence say about an optimal retirement age? In the case of
judges, our estimates ­ along with some more structural assumptions ­ could be used to
compute an optimal retirement age (Diermeier et al., 2005; Chetty, 2009). If replacing
judges were cost-less, then we could impose mandatory retirement at the age where
performance peaks and judges begin to decrease in decision quality. According to
Figure 7, for example, this would be about 55 years old. Replacing judges is not cost-
less, however. Such a structural approach would have to estimate such costs in order
to deliver useful policy parameters.
      In labor economics, this research highlights the usefulness of direct measures of em-
ployee performance. A major challenge is that it is difficult to evaluate employees over
long periods of time. In particular, in the last century there have been transformative
changes in the nature of work. Computers are much more important, and jobs are
more complex and include "soft" factors such as the ability to manage employees (e.g.
Autor et al., 2008). A second challenge is that even if one could measure these factors,
using them in hiring and promotion decisions could have unexpected agency effects.
      These results may be useful to policymakers seeking to design better retirement
policies for judges and other high-skill jobs. When productivity decreases with age,
mandatory retirement can increase productivity on average. In particular, the results
are useful in an era where an aging workforce is resulting in large structural changes to
the economy (Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2017). Our results show that age matters, and
that it can effect team performance. Though we have used the mandatory retirement
rule change to estimate these effects, it does not imply that mandatory retirement is
necessarily the optimal rule. That depends on many factors, including the counterfac-
tual occupations for both the potential retirees and new judges. It may be that an
increased use of senior status to reduce the negative output effect of older judges on
younger judges is appropriate.
      Finally, the Age Discrimination Act of 1967 requires as a matter of law that work-
 30
      Federal judges "shall hold their offices during good behavior" (U.S. Const. Art. III Sec. 1).


                                                   49
ers be evaluated by their performance, and not by their age. In this study we have
connected the age of a judge to a performance measure that uses 18 or more years of
observations after they have worked. But in order to have employment reflect perfor-
mance, one would need a contemporaneous measure of performance. This is a problem
that is faced for many occupations filled by highly skilled professionals. It is certainly
a challenge for future work to build better contemporaneous evaluation measures, and
to design systems that comply with the law, while ensuring the productive employment
of older workers.




                                           50
References
Abraham, K. G. and Farber, H. S. (1987). Job duration, seniority, and earnings.
  American Economic Review, 77(3):278­297.
Acemoglu, D. and Restrepo, P. (2017). Secular stagnation? the effect of aging on
  economic growth in the age of automation. NBER.
Agarwal, S., Driscoll, J. C., Gabaix, X., and Laibson, D. (2009). The age of reason:
  Financial decisions over the life cycle and implications for regulation. Brookings
  Papers on Economic Activity, 2009:51­101.
Ash, E. and MacLeod, W. B. (2015). Intrinsic motivation in public service: Theory
  and evidence from state supreme courts. Journal of Law and Economics, 58(4).
Ashenfelter, O. and Card, D. (2002). Did the elimination of mandatory retirement
  affect faculty retirement? American Economic Review, 92(4):957­980.
Autor, D. H., Katz, L. F., and Kearney, M. S. (2008). Trends in us wage inequality:
  Revising the revisionists. Review Of Economics and Statistics, 90(2):300­323.
Ballesteros, S., Nilsson, L.-G., and Lemaire, P. (2009). Ageing, cognition, and neuro-
  science: An introduction. European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 21(2-3):161­
  175.
Bertrand, M., Duflo, E., and Mullainathan, S. (2004). How much should we trust
  differences-in-differences estimates? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1):249­
  275.
Bloom, N., Eifert, B., Mahajan, A., McKenzie, D., and Roberts, J. (2012). Does man-
  agement matter? evidence from India. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(1):1­51.
Bloom, N., Lemos, R., Sadun, R., and Van Reenen, J. (2015). Does management
  matter in schools? Economic Journal, 125(125):647­674.
Bloom, N. and Reenen, J. V. (2007). Measuring and explaining management practices
  across firms and countries. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4):1351­1408.
Blundell, R. and Macurdy, T. (1999). Chapter 27 labor supply: A review of alternative
  approaches. In Ashenfelter, O. and Card, D., editors, Handbook of Labor Economics,
  volume 3, Part A, pages 1559­1695. Elsevier.
Bonica, A., Chilton, A. S., Goldin, J., Rozema, K., and Sen, M. (2017). Measur-
  ing judicial ideology using law clerk hiring. American Law and Economics Review,
  19(1):129­161.




                                         51
Borsch-Supan, A. and Weiss, M. (2016). Productivity and age: Evidence from work
  teams at the assembly line. Journal of the Economics of Ageing, 7:30­42.
Callaway, B. and Sant'Anna, P. H. (2019). Difference-in-differences with multiple time
  periods.
Carrell, S. E. and West, J. E. (2010). Does professor quality matter? evidence from ran-
  dom assignment of students to professors. Journal of Political Economy, 118(3):409­
  432.
Caughey, D. and Warshaw, C. (2018). Policy preferences and policy change: Dynamic
  responsiveness in the american states, 1936­2014. American Political Science Review,
  112(2):249­266.
Chetty, R. (2009). Sufficient statistics for welfare analysis: A bridge between structural
  and reduced-form methods. Annual Review of Economics, 1(1):451­488.
Chetty, R., Hendren, N., Kline, P., and Saez, E. (2014). Where is the land of op-
  portunity? the geography of intergenerational mobility in the united states. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(4):1553­1623.
Choi, S. J., Gulati, G. M., and Posner, E. A. (2008). Judicial evaluations and infor-
  mation forcing: Ranking state high courts and their judges. Duke LJ, 58:1313.
Choi, S. J., Gulati, G. M., and Posner, E. A. (2010). Professionals or politicians: The
  uncertain empirical case for an elected rather than appointed judiciary. Journal of
  Law, Economics, and Organization, 26(2):290.
Choi, S. J., Gulati, M., and Posner, E. A. (2013). The law and policy of judicial
  retirement: An empirical study. The Journal of Legal Studies, 42(1):pp.111­150.
Choudhry, N. K., Fletcher, R. H., and Soumerai, S. B. (2005). Systematic review:
  the relationship between clinical experience and quality of health care. Annals of
  Internal medicine, 142(4):260­273.
Christensen, R. K., Szmer, J., and Stritch, J. M. (2012). Race and gender bias in
  three administrative contexts: Impact on work assignments in state supreme courts.
  Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory.
Coviello, D., Ichino, A., and Persico, N. (2014). Time allocation and task juggling.
  American Economic Review, 104(2):609­23.
Coviello, D., Ichino, A., and Persico, N. (2015). The inefficiency of worker time use.
  Journal of the European Economic Association, 15(5):906­947.
Desjardins, R. and Warnke, A. J. (2012). Ageing and skills: A review and analysis



                                           52
  of skill gain and skill loss over the lifespan and over time. Technical report, ZBW-
  German National Library of Economics.
Diermeier, D., Keane, M., and Merlo, A. (2005). A political economy model of con-
  gressional careers. The American Economic Review, 95(1):pp. 347­373.
Dimitrova-Grajzl, V., Grajzl, P., Zajc, K., and Sustersic, J. (2012). Judicial incentives
  and performance at lower courts: Evidence from slovenian judge-level data. Review
  of Law & Economics, 8(1):215­252.
Epstein, L., Landes, W. M., and Posner, R. A. (2013). The Behavior of Federal Judges.
  Harvard University Press.
Frederiksen, A. and Flaherty Manchester, C. (2019). Responding to regulation: The
  effects of changes in mandatory retirement laws on firm-provided incentives.
Galenson, D. W. (2011). Old masters and young geniuses: The two life cycles of artistic
  creativity. Princeton University Press.
Gentzkow, M., Shapiro, J. M., and Sinkinson, M. (2011). The effect of newspaper entry
  and exit on electoral politics. American Economic Review, 101(7):2980­3018.
Goldstein, J. (2011). Life tenure for federal judges raises issues of senility, dementia.
  ProPublica.
Goodman-Bacon, A. (2018). Difference-in-differences with variation in treatment tim-
  ing. Working Paper 25018, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gordon, S. and Huber, G. (2007). The effect of electoral competitiveness on incumbent
  behavior. Quarterly Journal of Political Science, 2(2):107­138.
Grossmann, I., Na, J., Varnum, M. E., Park, D. C., Kitayama, S., and Nisbett, R. E.
  (2010). Reasoning about social conflicts improves into old age. Proceedings of the
  National Academy of Sciences, 107(16):7246­7250.
Gustman, A. L. and Steinmeier, T. L. (1986). A structural retirement model. Econo-
  metrica, 54(3):pp. 555­584.
Gustman, A. L. and Steinmeier, T. L. (1991). The Effects of Pensions and Retirement
  Policies on Retirement in Higher Education. American Economic Review, 81(2):111­
  15.
Gustman, A. L. and Steinmeier, T. L. (2005). The social security early entitlement
  age in a structural model of retirement and wealth. Journal of Public Economics,
  89(2):441 ­ 463.
Holland, P. W. (1986). Statistics and causal inference. Journal of the American Sta-
  tistical Association, 81(396):945­960.


                                            53
Keane, M. P. and Merlo, A. (2010). Money, political ambition, and the career decisions
  of politicians. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 2(3):pp. 186­215.
Kritzer, H. M. (2011). Competitiveness in state supreme court elections, 1946­2009.
  Journal of Empirical Legal Studies, 8(2):237­259.
Landes, W. M. and Posner, R. A. (2009). Rational judical behavior: A statistical
  study. The Journal of Legal Analysis, 1:775­831.
Lazear, E. P. (1979). Why is there mandatory retirement? Journal of Political Econ-
  omy, 87:1261­64.
Leiter, B. (2000). Measuring the academic distinction of law faculties. The Journal of
  Legal Studies, 29(S1):451­493.
Lemieux, T., MacLeod, W. B., and Parent, D. (2009). Performance pay and wage
  inequality. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(1):1­49.
Levin, S. G. and Stephan, P. E. (1991). Research productivity over the life cycle:
  Evidence for academic scientists. The American Economic Review, 81(1):pp. 114­
  132.
Lindenberger, U. (2014).      Human cognition again: Corriger la fortune.    Science,
  346(6209):572­578.
Lumsdaine, R. L. and Mitchell, O. S. (1999). Chapter 49 new developments in the
  economic analysis of retirement. In Ashenfelter, O. and Card, D., editors, Handbook
  of Labor Economics, volume 3, Part C, pages 3261 ­ 3307. Elsevier.
Medoff, J. L. and Abraham, K. G. (1980). Experience, performance and earnings.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 95:703­36.
Meng, A., Nexø, M. A., and Borg, V. (2017). The impact of retirement on age related
  cognitive decline­a systematic review. BMC geriatrics, 17(1):160.
Munnell, A. H. (2015). The average retirement age­an update. Center for retirement
  research, 1920:1960­1980.
Nixon, D. C. and Haskin, J. D. (2000). Judicial retirement strategies the judge's role
  in influencing party control of the appellate courts. American Politics Research,
  28(4):458­489.
Oster, S. M. and Hamermesh, D. S. (1998). Aging and productivity among economists.
  Review of Economics and Statistics, 80(1):154­156.
Posner, R. (2008). How Judges Think. Harvard University Press.
Posner, R. A. (1995). Aging and old age. University of Chicago Press.



                                          54
Prendergast, C. (2001). Selection and oversight in the public sector, with the los angeles
  police department as an example. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
  Research Working Paper: 8664.
Ramscar, M., Hendrix, P., Shaoul, C., Milin, P., and Baayen, H. (2014). The myth
  of cognitive decline: Non-linear dynamics of lifelong learning. Topics in Cognitive
  Science, 6:5­42.
Shepherd, J. M. (2009a). Are appointed judges strategic too?         Duke Law Journal,
  58(7):1589­1626.
Shepherd, J. M. (2009b). The influence of retention politics on judges' voting. The
  Journal of Legal Studies, 38(1):169­206.
Shi, L. (2009). The limit of oversight in policing: Evidence from the 2001 Cincinnati
  riot. Journal of Public Economics, 93(1-2):99­113. Shi, Lan.
Small, B. J., Dixon, R. A., and McArdle, J. J. (2011). Tracking cognition­health
  changes from 55 to 95 years of age. The Journals of Gerontology Series B: Psycho-
  logical Sciences and Social Sciences, 66(suppl 1):i153­i161.
Smyth, R. and Bhattacharya, M. (2003). How fast do old judges slow down?: A life
  cycle study of aging and productivity in the federal court of australia. International
  Review of Law and Economics, 23(2):141­164.
Stock, J. H. and Wise, D. A. (1990). Pensions, the option value of work, and retirement.
  Econometrica, 58(5):pp. 1151­1180.
Sullivan, D. and von Wachter, T. (2009). Job displacement and mortality: An analysis
  using administrative data. Quarterly Journal Of Economics, 124(3):1265­1306.
Tanaka, H. and Higuchi, M. (1998). Age, exercise performance, and physiological
  functional capacities. Advances in exercise and sports physiology, 4(2):51­56.
Teitelbaum, J. C. (2006). Age and tenure of the justices and productivity of the u.s.
  supreme court: Are term limits necessary? Florida State University Law Review,
  34:161­182.




                                           55
Appendix
A       Background and Data
A.1       Aging and Retirement Decisions


                                                      Figure A.1: Distribution of Judge Birth Decades

                                                    300
                   Frequency (Judge Observations)




                                                    200




                                                    100




                                                     0
                                                          1860s1870s1880s1890s1900s1910s1920s1930s1940s1950s
                                                                           Decade of Birth

Number of judges in each birth decade cohort. Vertical dashed line at median.




                                                                             56
                                 Figure A.2: Average Retirement Age for U.S. Workers and Judges,

                                (A) Average Retirement Age for U.S. Workers, by Gender, 1962-2013




                           (B) Average Retirement Age for State Supreme Court Judges, 1948-1994

                           80


                           75
  Average Retirement Age




                           70


                           65


                           60




                                  1950            1960           1970           1980            1990
                                                                 Year

Panel (A): Average retirement age by gender for U.S. workers, computed from CPS by Munnell (2015). Panel (B):
Average retirement age of state supreme court judges, by year. Error spikes give 25th and 75th percentiles.




                                                               57
                                 Figure A.3: Post-Judgeship Careers


          .4



          .3
   Mean




          .2



          .1



          0
               1940          1950               1960               1970               1980                1990
                                                          Year

                                        Other Judge                      Private Practice
                                        Politics                         Academia

Proportion of judges with documented careers after their state supreme court judgeship, including other judgeship,
private practice, politics, and academia. Plotted by five-year bins.




What do judges do after retirement? Figure A.3 shows the trends in these career
choices. At the beginning of the sample, few judges took on more work after their
judgeship. That has become more common in recent years. If they do take another
career, it is usually in private practice as an attorney.




                                                       58
A.2       Mandatory Retirement


                   Table A.1: Tabulations on Treatment and Control Judges

                           Number of Courts            Number of Obs (Judge-Year)              Number of Judges
 Reform                with Treatment Variation        Controls    Treated    Total       Controls    Treated    Total


 Retirement Age 70                 9                    11265       1390      12655         1240        172      1368


 Retirement Age 72                 3                    12373        884      13257         1348         88      1421


 Retirement Age 75                 2                    10584        259      12373         1191         34      1219


Notes. Summary tabulations on Retirement Reform Judges. The column gives the number of courts that experience
a change in the retirement rule. The second set of columns gives the number of judge-year observations in the control
and treatment groups (and total) when a change in retirement rule occurs in that year. The third list of columns gives
the number of judges in these respective groups.




Appendix Table A.1 provides tabulations on the relevant treatment variation in the
data for mandatory retirement reforms. The first column of numbers gives the number
of court-years where at least one treated (selected post-reform) and one control judge
(selected pre-reform) is on the court that year. The second set of columns gives the
number of judge-year observations in the control and treatment groups (and total). The
third list of columns gives the number of distinct judges in these respective groups.




                                                         59
                    Table A.2: Rules on Judge Senior Status, by State
State            Retirement Age   Seniority   Note
Alabama               70            Yes       Supernumerary judge
Alaska                70            No        Only to work on temporary assignments
Arizona               70            No        Only to work on temporary assignments
Arkansas             none           --        No retirement benefits if seek re-election past age 70
California           none           --
Colorado              72            No
Conneticut            70            Yes       State referee
Delaware             none           --
Florida               75            No        Allows temporary assignments
Georgia              none           --
Hawaii                70            No
Idaho                none           --
Illinois             none           --        Retirement Act for age 75, declared unconstitutional in 2009
Indiana               75            No
Iowa                  72            Yes
Kansas                75            No
Kentucky             none           --
Louisiana             70            No
Maine                none           --
Maryland              70            No
Massachusetts         70            No
Michigan              70            No
Minnesota             70            No
Mississippi          none           --
Missouri              70            Yes       Senior judge
Montana              none           --
Nebraska             none           --
Nevada               none           --
New Hampshire         70            No
New Jersey            70            No
New Mexico           none           --
New York              70            Yes       May serve after 70 until 76
North Carolina        72            No        Only to work on temporary assignments
North Dakota         none           --
Ohio                  70            No
Oklahoma             none           --
Oregon                75            No        Legislature may ask retired judges to work on temporary assignments
Pennsylvania          75            Yes       Senior judge
Rhode Island         none           --
South Carolina        72            --
South Dakota          70            No
Tennessee            none           --
Texas                 75            No        Conditions may vary based on Art. 5 of Texas Constitution
Utah                  75            No
Vermont               90            No
Virginia              73            No
Washington            75            No
West Virginia        none           --
Wisconsin             70            Yes       Can serve a judge on a temporary basis
Wyoming               70            Yes




                                                     60
A.3    Case Assignment

       Table A.3: Summary Statistics on Area of Law and Related Industries
Area of Law                      Freq.    Percent   Related Industrial Sector       Freq.   Percent

Criminal Law                     191810    21.85    Real Estate                     28527    13.64
Civil Procedure                  74757      8.52    Law Enforcement                 10758     5.14
Evidence                          66377     7.56    Automobiles                     10206     4.88
Torts                             57915      6.6    Insurance                        9158     4.38
Damages & Remedies                45073     5.14    Tax                              8509     4.07
Contracts                         40888     4.66    Construction & Engineering       6332     3.03
Real Property                     36408     4.15    Workers' Compensation            5397     2.58
Constitutional Law                34038     3.88    Banking                          4917     2.35
Family Law                        32191     3.67    Legal & Compliance Services      4682     2.24
Workers' Compensation             22955     2.62    Automobile Insurance             4124     1.97
Insurance Law                     19375     2.21    Property Management              4108     1.96
Administrative Law                18264     2.08    Transportation                   3890     1.86
Wills, Trusts & Estates           18179     2.07    Child Welfare                    3689     1.76
Tax & Accounting                  16978     1.93    Employment Services              3679     1.76
Employment Law                    14601     1.66    Health & Medical                 3478     1.66
Habeas Corpus                     13426     1.53    Oil & Gas                        3189     1.52
Appellate Procedure               13140      1.5    Railroads                        2777     1.33
Professional Responsibility      12052      1.37    Hospitals                        2719      1.3
Motor Vehicles & Traffic Law       9644      1.1    Education                        2586     1.24
Land Use Planning & Zoning        9122      1.04    Trucking                         2097       1
Government                         8942     1.02    Bridges & Roads                  1751     0.84
Mortgages & Liens                  7531     0.86    Agriculture & Farming            1729     0.83
Landlord & Tenant                  5499     0.63    Mortgage Lending                 1680      0.8
Construction Law                   4997     0.57    Manufacturing                    1612     0.77
Elections & Politics               4972     0.57    Real Estate Agents & Brokers     1573     0.75
Eminent Domain                     4943     0.56    Unions                           1485     0.71
Labor Law                          4790     0.55    Financial Services               1469      0.7
Government Employees               4773     0.54    Judiciary                        1448     0.69
Debtor Creditor                    4260     0.49    Politics                         1336     0.64
Employee Benefits                  4208     0.48    Teachers                         1300     0.62
Medical Malpractice                4113     0.47    Medical Procedures               1273     0.61
Personal Property                  3994     0.46    Public Works                     1223     0.58
Corporate Law                      3958     0.45    Life Insurance & Annuities      1155      0.55
Negotiable Instruments            3843     0.44     Apartment Leasing               1127     0.54
Education Law                      3803     0.43    Mining & Natural Resources       1115     0.53
Banking & Finance                  3380     0.39    Drug Trafficking                 1105     0.53
Alcohol & Beverage                 3213     0.37    Sewer & Water                     990     0.47
Civil Rights                      3138     0.36     Electric                          985     0.47
Health Law                         2950     0.34    Water & Sewer                     972     0.46
Transportation Law                 2839     0.32    Physicians                        966     0.46
Partnerships                       2333     0.27    Firearms & Weapons                962     0.46
Natural Resources                  2301     0.26    Motorcycles                       919     0.44
Legal Malpractice                  2285     0.26    Water                             904     0.43
Products Liability                 2280     0.26    Food & Beverage                   888     0.42
Alternative Dispute Resolution     2144     0.24    Commercial Real Estate            883     0.42
Communications & Media             2048     0.23    Property & Casualty Insurance     854     0.41
Environmental Law                  1857     0.21    Administration                    837      0.4
                                             61
                 Table A.4: Case Assignment Rules on State Supreme Courts

                         Discretionary   Random        Rotating
                            Arizona        Idaho        Alaska
                           California    Louisiana     Alabama
                           Colorado     Mississippi   Arkansas
                          Connecticut New Hampshire     Florida
                           Delaware      New York      Georgia
                            Hawaii          Ohio         Iowa
                            Indiana    South Dakota     Illinois
                            Kansas       Tennessee      Maine
                           Kentucky        Texas      Minnesota
                         Massachusetts    Virginia     Missouri
                           Maryland     Washington     Montana
                          New Jersey     Wisconsin  North Carolina
                            Oregon                  North Dakota
                         Pennsylvania                 Nebraska
                           Wyoming                   New Mexico
                                                       Nevada
                                                      Oklahoma
                                                     Rhode Island
                                                    South Carolina
                                                         Utah
                                                       Vermont
                                                     West Virginia
List of states by rules for case assignment in state supreme courts. Rules collected by Christensen et al. (2012).




                                                          62
                                                 Figure A.4: Distribution of Citations by Case


                                   8.0e+04
  Frequency (State-Year Observations)




                                   6.0e+04




                                   4.0e+04




                                   2.0e+04




                                        0
                                             0           10          20            30            40             50
                                                                    Positive Citations

Notes. Hstiogram of the number of positive cites per case in the dataset. Vertical dashed line at the median.




                                                                      63
A.4                                               Judge Performance


                                                       Figure A.5: Distributions of Outcome Variables - Judge-Year

                                                      (A) Log Positive Cites                                                                            (B) Log Out-of-State Cites
                                       1000                                                                                                  1000
 Frequency (Judge-Year Observations)




                                                                                                       Frequency (Judge-Year Observations)
                                       800                                                                                                   800



                                       600                                                                                                   600



                                       400                                                                                                   400



                                       200                                                                                                   200



                                         0                                                                                                     0
                                              0          2            4               6       8                                                     0          2               4                6   8
                                                               Log Positive Citations                                                                              Log Out-of-State Citations


                                                      (C) Log # of Opinions                                                                             (D) Log Cites per Opinion
                                       1500                                                                                                  1500
 Frequency (Judge-Year Observations)




                                                                                                       Frequency (Judge-Year Observations)




                                       1000                                                                                                  1000




                                       500                                                                                                   500




                                         0                                                                                                     0
                                                  2          3            4               5       6                                                 0               2                     4         6
                                                              Log Number of Opinions                                                                          Log Positive Citations per Opinion

Notes. Histograms of judge-year performance measures. Vertical dashed line at median.




A.5                                               Clerk Quality and Judge Age
A potential confounder for the relationship between judge age and judge performance
is selection of different types of clerks to judges by different ages. To check this, we
require a dataset on clerk quality, which we could then match to judge age and look for
systematic variation in clerk quality. Here, we do this with a dataset of federal court
clerks for which we have the ranking of the law schools they attended.
                                        Data on clerks is not available for state supreme courts. But it is available for a
large sample of judges in the federal courts for the years 1995 through 2004, collected


                                                                                                      64
by Bonica et al. (2017). We used the information on clerk law school attendance from
this dataset.
    We have data on law school rankings from Leiter (2000), who produced a variety of
rankings using data from 1998. For our purposes, it is helpful that there is a ranking
on "quality of student body", constructed from LSAT scores and college GPA. This
ranking is available for the top 50 schools, with Yale at #1, Georgetown at #10,
Fordham at #25, and Chicago-Kent at #50.
    For each clerkship, we have information on the judge and the clerk. For the judge,
we have information on the court and the age in years. For circuit judges, we have
the specific circuit (1st, 2nd, D.C., etc). For the district courts, the data do not
include the specific court. Therefore the best specification, in terms of netting out all
court-year-level factors, restricts analysis to the circuit courts.

     Table A.5: Judge Age and Clerk Quality (Evidence from U.S. Federal Courts

                                        (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)          (5)           (6)
                                              Clerk Law School Ranking (Higher is Worse Ranking)


           Judge Age (Years)         -0.00162      0.0593        0.0306     0.0199       0.0767*    0.0396
                                      (0.0304)    (0.0539)       (0.0643)   (0.0214)     (0.0388)   (0.0453)


           Judge Sample                      Only Circuit Courts                    All Federal Courts
           Court-Year FE                 X           X              X
           Court-Type X Year FE                                                X            X            X
           School Ranks Included       1-25         1-50          1-50       1-25         1-50       1-50
           Max Age 70                                               X                                    X
           N                           3215         3683          3483       7623         9632       9174
           Adj. R-sq                    0.040      0.052      0.047         0.045      0.071      0.068
Notes. Observation is a clerk-year. "Clerk Law School Ranking" is the student body quality ranking, 1-50, from Leiter
(2000). Standard errors clustered by judge in parentheses. + p<.0.1, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01.




    Appendix Table A.5 reports the estimates for a regression of clerk law school ranking
on judge age. The regression for circuit courts (Columns 1 through 3) include court-
year fixed effects. The regression for all federal courts (Columns 4 through 6) includes
court-type × year fixed effects. Columns 1 and 4 include clerks from the top 25 schools.
Columns 2, 3, 5, and 6 include the full ranking of 50 schools. Columns 3 and 6 exclude
judges above the age of 70. Standard errors are clustered by judge.
    Overall, there is no consistent relationship between judge age and clerk quality. In

                                                            65
the preferred specifications in the circuit courts, there is no relationship. When includ-
ing all courts (where we cannot include court-year fixed effects), there is a statistically
significant positive effect, suggesting that older judges get worse-ranked clerks.


B        Additional Analysis of Mandatory Retirement
         Reforms

               Table B.1: Effect of Reform on Citations: Additional Measures

                                    (1)         (2)             (3)        (4)           (5)      (6)
                                  Cites After 10 years             Has Cite             Drop 5% Outliers

          Ret. Reform              0.140*       0.169*        0.0218       0.0307      0.233**      0.263**
                                  (0.0648)     (0.0688)      (0.0243)     (0.0268)     (0.0774)     (0.0836)

          Year / Court FE             X            X             X            X            X            X
          Trends/Windows                           X                          X                         X
          N                        15010         15010         15010        15010        14763        14763
          R-sq                     0.410         0.473         0.773        0.804        0.454        0.520
Notes. Observation is a judge working in a year. "Retirement Reform" is an indicator for the ten years after the
introduction of mandatory retirement. "Cites after 10 Years" means the log of the positive cites to a judge's cases in a
year, from cases more than ten years later. "Has Cite" means the proportion of cases with at least one positive citation.
"Drop 5% Outliers" is the baseline outcome (log of positive cites to a judge's cases in a year) but for each court-year,
the top 5% of cases by cite count are dropped. Court Treat Windows means court-specific treatment windows (ten
years before and after reform). Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. + p<.0.1, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01.




                                                          66
                 Table B.2: Effect of Reform on Citations: Different Windows

                                         (1)            (2)          (3)            (4)        (5)           (6)
                                                              Effect on Log Positive Cites
             Treatment Window                     6                          14                        All


             Retirement Reform         0.171**        0.159**      0.218**        0.204**    0.0493      0.303**
                                       (0.0552)       (0.0532)    (0.0776)        (0.0693)   (0.114)     (0.0929)


             Year FE, Court FE            X              X            X              X         X              X
             Court Trends/Windows                        X                           X                        X
             N                           2357          2357         2357           2357       2357           2357
              R-sq                        0.811       0.883      0.812     0.885      0.810     0.880
Notes. Observation is a judge working in a year. "Retirement Reform" is an indicator for the ten years after the
introduction of mandatory retirement. Court Treat Windows means court-specific treatment windows (ten years before
and after reform). Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. + p<.0.1, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01.




                                                             67
                Table B.3: Effect of Reform on Log Cites: Senior Status Rules

                                 (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)        (8)
                                                      Effect on Log Citations per Judge-Year


   Retirement Reform           0.209*     0.282*     0.245**      0.246*     0.251**     0.243*     0.202*     0.270*
                              (0.0879)    (0.119)    (0.0809)     (0.0904)   (0.0799)   (0.0896)   (0.0904)    (0.103)


   × Grandfather Rule          0.0657      -0.127
                               (0.111)    (0.146)


   × Finish Term                                      -0.115      -0.0939
                                                     (0.0762)     (0.0983)


   × Finish Term Half                                                        -0.355**   -0.0573
                                                                             (0.0749)   (0.109)


   × Finish Year                                                                                     0.134      -0.135
                                                                                                    (0.120)    (0.115)


   Year FE, Court FE              X          X          X            X          X          X           X          X
   Court Trends/Windows                      X                       X                     X                      X
   N                            9868       9868       9868         9868       9868        9868       9868       9868
   R-sq                          0.370     0.438      0.370      0.438       0.371        0.438       0.370      0.438
Observation is a judge working in a year. "Retirement Reform" is an indicator for the ten years after the introduction of
mandatory retirement. Coefficients are interacted with respective senior status rules (respectively: the rule not applying
to sitting judges, being allowed to finish the term, being allowed to finish terms that are over halfway finished, and
being able to finish out the year). Court Treat Windows means court-specific treatment windows (ten years before and
after reform). Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. + p<.0.1, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01.




                                                             68
                Table B.4: Effect of Reform on Log Cites, Only Reform States

                                                      (1)             (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)
                                                            Effect on Log Citations per Judge-Year


                   Retirement Reform                0.295**         0.262**     0.273*       0.349*        0.552**
                                                   (0.0818)         (0.0869)    (0.113)      (0.158)       (0.176)


                   Court FE, Year FE                   X               X          X            X             X
                   Court Trends/Windows                                X          X            X             X
                   Init Court Rules × Year FE                                     X            X             X
                   Init Case Types × Year FE                                                   X             X
                   Init Age × Year FE                                                                        X
                   N                                 5562            5562        5562         5562          5562
                    R-sq                              0.288      0.346      0.382      0.435      0.457
Observation is a judge working in a year. "Retirement Reform" is an indicator for the ten years after the introduction
of mandatory retirement. Court Treat Windows means court-specific treatment windows (ten years before and after
reform). "Init X" × year FE means initial values are interacted with year. "Init Court Rules" includes a state's 1947
rules for judge selection/retention system, admin office, intermediate appellate court, number of judges, and term length.
"Init Case Types" includes a court's 1947 average values for case characteristics (legal area and related industries). "Init
Age" includes the initial mean and standard deviation for judge age on the court. Standard errors clustered by state in
parentheses. + p<.0.1, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01.




               Table B.5: Effect of Reform on Citations: Alternative Clustering

                                                        (1)             (2)           (5)            (6)


                         Clustering Group               State and Year              None (Robust)


                         Retirement Reform            0.228**         0.253**     0.228**       0.253**
                                                      (0.0458)       (0.0436)     (0.0291)      (0.0300)


                         Court FE, Year FE                 X               X            X            X
                         Court Trends/Windows                              X                         X
                         N                             15010           15010       15010           15010
                        R-sq                         0.460      0.526      0.460      0.526
Notes. Observation is a judge working in a year. "Retirement Reform" is an indicator for the ten years after the
introduction of mandatory retirement. Court Treat Windows means court-specific treatment windows (ten years before
and after reform). Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. + p<.0.1, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01.




                                                               69
              Table B.6: Effect of Reform on Log Cites, Alternative Weighting

                                                       (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)
                                                    Effect on Log Positve Cites per Judge-Year


                        Retirement Reform           0.211**       0.253**    0.133+      0.181*
                                                    (0.0750)      (0.0858)   (0.0736)   (0.0802)


                        Weighting                      # of Opinions            Judges Equal
                        Court FE, Year FE              X             X          X          X
                        Court Trends/Windows                         X                     X
                        N                            15010         15010      15010      15010
                        R-sq                         0.496     0.569      0.421       0.499
Observation is a judge working in a year. "Retirement Reform" is an indicator for the ten years after the introduction
of mandatory retirement. Court Treat Windows means court-specific treatment windows (ten years before and after
reform). Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. + p<.0.1, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01.




          Table B.7: Effect of Reform on Log Cites, with Time-Varying Controls

                                (1)         (2)        (3)           (4)        (5)       (6)         (7)         (8)
                                                    Effect on Log Positive Cites per Judge-Year


  Retirement Reform           0.106+      0.148*     0.251**      0.271**    0.202**    0.225**     0.143**     0.172*
                             (0.0572)    (0.0703)    (0.0886)     (0.0804)   (0.0725)   (0.0804)   (0.0504)    (0.0644)


  Court FE, Year FE              X          X           X            X          X          X           X          X
  Court Trends/Windows                      X                        X                     X                      X
  Case Controls                  X          X
  Rule Controls                                         X            X
  Judge Experience FE                                                           X          X
  Lagged Dep. Var.                                                                                     X          X
  N                            15010      15010       13863        13863      15006      15006       13304      13304
  R-sq                         0.611        0.652      0.457       0.523       0.478       0.545       0.585      0.609
Observation is a judge working in a year. "Retirement Reform" is an indicator for the ten years after the introduction
of mandatory retirement. Court Treat Windows means court-specific treatment windows (ten years before and after
reform).Case controls means the first five principal components of the matrix of controls for legal topic and related
industries. Rule controls means rules for selection and retention of juges and other institutional items. Judge Experience
FE means fixed effects for yeras on the court. Lagged Dep. Var. means the court-year lag of the dependent variable
(log positive cites in the previous year). Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. + p<.0.1, * p<0.05, **
p<0.01.




                                                             70
   Table B.8: Effect of Reform on Citations: Separately by Maximum Age Imposed

                                            (1)            (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)             (6)
                                                                   Effect on Log Positive Cites
              Maximum Age                           70                          72                           75


              Retirement Reform           0.212+         0.291*       0.396**        0.310**      0.155+          0.165**
                                          (0.117)        (0.133)      (0.113)        (0.0773)     (0.0899)        (0.0384)


              Court FE, Year FE              X             X              X             X            X               X
              Court Trends/Windows                         X                            X                            X
              N                           15010          15010         15010          15010        15010           15010
               R-sq                        0.459     0.524     0.459      0.518      0.458     0.517
Notes. Observation is a judge working in a year. "Retirement Reform" is an indicator for the ten years after the
introduction of mandatory retirement. Court Treat Windows means court-specific treatment windows (ten years before
and after reform). Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. + p<.0.1, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01.




     Table B.9: Effect of Mandatory Retirement Reform, Merit vs. Other Systems

                                                           (1)           (2)                (3)       (4)
                                                                   Effect on Log Positive Cites
                         Appointment System                      Merit                   Other System


                         Retirement Reform               -0.124       -0.0314           0.193*      0.243*
                                                         (0.130)      (0.112)          (0.0849)     (0.107)


                         Year FE, Court FE                 X              X                  X           X
                         Court Trends/Windows                             X                  X           X
                         N                                2442           2442           12568        12568
                         R-sq                        0.375      0.428        0.474      0.535
Notes. Observation is a judge working in a year. "Retirement Reform" is an indicator for the ten years after the
introduction of mandatory retirement. "Experience" is the years of experience of each judge. Each of the outcome
about the end of judgeship are dummy equal to 1 indicating how the judgeship ended. Court Treat Windows means
court-specific treatment windows (ten years before and after reform). Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses.
+ p<.0.1, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01.




                                                                 71
  Table B.10: Effect of Mandatory Retirement Reform, Other Institutional Features

                                                                       (1)         (2)              (3)          (4)        (5)                (6)
                                                                                                           Effect on How Judgeship Ended
                                                                          Experience           Retirement      Death     Other Job      Lost Election


       Retirement Reform                                             -1.301*     -1.464*         -0.0123       0.00633    0.00687            -0.0134
                                                                     (0.593)     (0.695)        (0.0463)      (0.0281)   (0.0505)            (0.0163)


       Year FE, Court FE                                                  X         X               X            X          X                   X
       Court Trends/Windows                                                         X               X            X          X                   X
       N                                                             15010        15010            15010       15010       15010              15010
        R-sq                       0.162      0.189           0.155       0.114        0.125          0.074
Notes. Observation is a judge working in a year. "Retirement Reform" is an indicator for the ten years after the
introduction of mandatory retirement. "Experience" is the years of experience of each judge. Each of the outcome
about the end of judgeship are dummy equal to 1 indicating how the judgeship ended. Court Treat Windows means
court-specific treatment windows (ten years before and after reform). Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses.
+ p<.0.1, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01.




                    Figure B.1: Event-Study Effect of Reform with Initial Covariates

                                                                          Effect on Log Positive Citations

                                                      p-value = .821                                                                p-value = .001
                                                .4
             Effect on Log Positive Citations




                                                .2




                                                 0




                                                -.2




                                                -.4
                                                      -6   -5   -4   -3     -2 -1     0   1    2   3   4    5    6  7    8   9     10   11    12
                                                                          Years Before and After Mandatory Retirement Reform

Court performance before and after reforms implementing retirement ages of 70, 72 or 75. The outcome is the log
positive citations of a judge in a year. Time series is a coefficient plot from the event study regression (2), with
coefficents estimated relative to the year before the reform. Regression includes court and year fixed effects and court-
specific event windows, plus initial rules, cases, and age variables, interacted with year. 95% confidence intervals
constructed with standard errors clustered by state.




                                                                                              72
           Table B.11: Effect of Reform on Inverse Hyperbolic Sine of Citations

                                                (1)      (2)         (3)        (4)           (5)
                                             Inverse Hyperbolic Sine of Positive Cites per Judge-Year

       Retirement Reform                     0.231**      0.257**      0.240**      0.324**          0.304**
                                             (0.0787)     (0.0868)     (0.0860)     (0.0941)         (0.0960)

       Court FE, Year FE                         X            X            X            X               X
       Court Trends/Windows                                   X            X            X               X
       Init Court Rules × Year FE                                          X            X               X
       Init Case Types × Year FE                                                        X               X
       Init Age × Year FE                                                                               X
       N                                      15010        15010         15010        15010           15010
       R-sq                                   0.451        0.519         0.530        0.546           0.556
Notes. DD effect of mandatory retirement reform on inverse hyperbolic sine (asinh) positive citations to a judge's
opinions in ten years after reform, relative to ten years before reform. Observation is a judge working in a year. "Ret.
Reform" is a treatment indicator for the ten years after the introduction of mandatory retirement. Court Treat Windows
means court-specific treatment windows (ten years before and after reform). "Init X" × year FE means initial values are
interacted with year. "Init Court Rules" includes a state's 1947 rules for judge selection/retention system, admin office,
intermediate appellate court, number of judges, and term length. "Init Case Types" includes a court's 1947 average
values for case characteristics (legal area and related industries). "Init Age" includes the initial mean and standard
deviation for judge age on the court. Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. + p<.0.1, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01.




                                                           73
                                        Figure B.2: Event-Study Effect on Performance: Alternative Cite Measures

                                   (A) Effect on Positive Citations (in Levels)                                                                                    (B) Effect on Log Positive Citations within 10
                                 200
                                             Pr ( [ k  -2 ] = 0) =.974                                      Pr ( [ k  0 ] = 0) =0                                                     Years
                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                     Pr ( [ k  -2 ] = 0) = .810                                     Pr ( [ k  0 ] = 0) =0
 Effect on Positive Citations




                                 150




                                                                                                                                     Effect on Log Positive Citations
                                 100
                                                                                                                                                                          .5

                                  50



                                   0                                                                                                                                       0


                                 -50
                                        -6     -5   -4   -3 -2 -1      0   1    2   3   4    5    6  7    8   9      10   11   12
                                                           Years Before and After Mandatory Retirement Reform
                                                                                                                                                                          -.5
                                                                                                                                                                                -6     -5   -4   -3     -2 -1     0   1    2   3   4    5    6  7    8   9   10   11   12
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Years Before and After Mandatory Retirement Reform


                                            (C) Effect on Log All Cites (including                                                                                               (D) Effect on Log Discussion Citations
                                                        non-positive)                                                                                                     .6
                                                                                                                                                                                     Pr ( [ k  -2 ] = 0) =.867                                      Pr ( [ k  0 ] = 0) =0

                                            Pr ( [ k  -2 ] = 0) =.992                                       Pr ( [ k  0 ] = 0) =0
                                                                                                                                     Effect on Log Discussion Citations
                                 .6
                                                                                                                                                                          .4
 Effect on Log Total Citations




                                 .4
                                                                                                                                                                          .2


                                 .2
                                                                                                                                                                           0


                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                          -.2


                                 -.2
                                                                                                                                                                          -.4
                                                                                                                                                                                -6     -5   -4   -3     -2 -1     0   1    2   3   4    5    6  7    8   9   10   11   12
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Years Before and After Mandatory Retirement Reform
                                 -.4
                                       -6     -5    -4   -3     -2 -1     0   1    2   3   4    5    6  7    8   9   10   11   12
                                                              Years Before and After Mandatory Retirement Reform

Judge performance before and after reforms implementing retirement ages of 70, 72 or 75. Panel A: outcome is number
of positive citations of a judge in a year (in levels, rather than logs). Panel B: outcome is the log positive citations of a
judge in a year that were made within ten years of a case. Panel C: outcome is the log total citations of a judge in a
year (including non-positive negative cites). Panel D: outcome is the log discussion citations of a judge in a year. Time
series is a coefficient plot from the event study regression (2), with coefficents estimated relative to the year before the
reform. Regression includes court and year fixed effects and court-specific event windows. 95% confidence intervals
constructed with standard errors clustered by state.




                                                                                                                                    74
                                           Figure B.3: Event-Study Effect of Reform: Collapsed Court-Year Data

                                                                     Effect on Log Positive Citations

                                           p-value = .821                                                               p-value = .001
                                     .4
  Effect on Log Positive Citations




                                     .2




                                      0




                                     -.2




                                     -.4
                                             -6   -5   -4   -3     -2 -1     0   1    2   3   4    5    6  7    8   9   10   11   12
                                                                 Years Before and After Mandatory Retirement Reform

Court performance before and after reforms implementing retirement ages of 70, 72 or 75. The outcome is the log
positive citations of a court in a year. Time series is a coefficient plot from the event study regression (2), with
coefficents estimated relative to the year before the reform. Regression includes court and year fixed effects and court-
specific event windows. 95% confidence intervals constructed with standard errors clustered by state.




                                                                                     75
Figure B.4: Event-Study Effect of Reform on Court Performance: Only Reform States


                                                                     Effect on Log Positive Citations
                                      1
                                                Pr ( [ k  -2 ] = 0) =.917                                      Pr ( [ k  0 ] = 0) =0
  Effect on Log Positive Citations




                                     .5




                                      0




                                     -.5
                                           -6     -5   -4   -3     -2 -1     0   1    2   3   4    5    6  7    8   9   10   11   12
                                                                 Years Before and After Mandatory Retirement Reform

Court performance before and after reforms implementing retirement ages of 70, 72 or 75. Sample limited to reform
states. The outcome is the log positive citations of a judge in a year. Time series is a coefficient plot from the event
study regression (2), with coefficents estimated relative to the year before the reform. Regression includes court and
year fixed effects and court-specific event windows. 95% confidence intervals constructed with standard errors clustered
by state.




                                                                                     76
    Figure B.5: Event-Study Effect of Reform on Court Performance: 10 Pre-Periods

                                                                    Effect on Positive Citations

                                     .6      Pr ( [ k  -2 ] = 0) =.011                                Pr ( [ k  0 ] = 0) =.027
  Effect on Log Positive Citations




                                     .4



                                     .2



                                      0



                                     -.2



                                     -.4
                                           -10 -9   -8   -7   -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6                      7   8   9   10
                                                              Years Before and After Mandatory Retirement Reform

Judge performance before and after reforms implementing retirement ages of 70, 72 or 75. The outcome is the log
positive citations of a judge in a year. Ten periods before and after included. Time series is a coefficient plot from
the event study regression (2), with coefficents estimated relative to the year before the reform. Regression includes
court and year fixed effects and court-specific event windows. 95% confidence intervals constructed with standard errors
clustered by state.




                                                                                  77
                                          Figure B.6: DD Effect of Reform, Dropping each Treated State Individually


                                                          AL                                AZ                            CO                                    CT
  Effect of Mandatory Retirement Reform




                                                          FL                                IA                                KS                            MA




                                                      MN                                OR                                    PA                                TX




                                                          VA                            WA                                    WI                            WY




                                            0   .1   .2        .3   .4   .5   0   .1   .2        .3   .4   .5   0   .1   .2        .3   .4   .5   0   .1   .2        .3   .4   .5



Coefficient for the effect of mandatory retirement at ages of 70, 72 or 75 on judge performance. The outcome is the log
positive citations of a judge in a year. Each subfigure plots the coefficient from regression 1 excluding one treated state
at a time. Includes court and year fixed effects, court-specific windows and trends.




                                                                                                           78
                                        Figure B.7: Event-Study Effect on Court Performance: Only Reform States

                                                                                             Effect on Log Positive Citations
                                            1
                                                          Pr ( [ k  -2 ] = 0) =.917                                                                                                                    Pr ( [ k  0 ] = 0) =0
   Effect on Log Positive Citations




                                            .5




                                            0




                                       -.5
                                                     -6          -5      -4      -3     -2 -1     0   1    2   3   4    5    6  7    8   9                                                                            10       11        12
                                                                                      Years Before and After Mandatory Retirement Reform

Court performance before and after reforms implementing retirement ages of 70, 72 or 75. Sample limited to reform
states. The outcome is the log positive citations of a judge in a year. Time series is a coefficient plot from the event
study regression (2), with coefficents estimated relative to the year before the reform. Regression includes court and
year fixed effects and court-specific event windows. 95% confidence intervals constructed with standard errors clustered
by state.




Figure B.8: Event-Study Effect on Performance: Adjustment for Staggered Treatment
                                      (A) Un-Weighted Averaged Estimates                                                                                            (B) Weighted Average Estimates

                                      0.6
                                                                                                                                                              0.6

                                      0.4
  Effect on Log Positive Citations




                                                                                                                           Effect on Log Positive Citations




                                                                                                                                                              0.4

                                      0.2
                                                                                                                                                              0.2

                                      0.0                                                                                                                     0.0


                                      0.2                                                                                                                     0.2

                                                 6   5   4   3      2 1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                                                                6   5   4   3      2 1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
                                                                 Years Before and After Mandatory Retirement Reform                                                                 Years Before and After Mandatory Retirement Reform
Log positive cites to court before and after reforms implementing retirement ages of 70, 72 or 75. Time series is a
coefficient plot from the event study regression (2), with coefficents estimated relative to the year before the reform.
Regression includes court and year fixed effects and court-specific event windows. Coefficients and standard errors
(clustered by state) adjusted for staggered treatment timing, following the method in Callaway and Sant'Anna (2019),
as described in Section 3.3. Panel B uses a weighted average of the estimates based on the number of judge-year
observations in the event-study window for each treated state.




                                                                                                                      79
                                     Figure B.9: Event-Study Effect, by Random and Discretionary Case Assignment

                                                           (A) Random Assignment                                                                                                              (B) Discretionary Assignment
                                     1
                                                                                                                                                                                       Pr ( [ k  -2 ] = 0) =.108                                       Pr ( [ k  0 ] = 0) =0
                                               Pr ( [ k  -2 ] = 0) =.232                                       Pr ( [ k  0 ] = 0) =0
                                                                                                                                                                           .5
 Effect on Log Positive Citations




                                                                                                                                        Effect on Log Positive Citations
                                    .5



                                                                                                                                                                            0


                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                           -.5
                                    -.5
                                          -6     -5   -4   -3     -2 -1     0   1    2   3   4    5    6  7    8   9   10    11   12                                              -6     -5   -4    -3     -2 -1     0   1    2   3   4    5    6  7    8   9   10    11   12
                                                                Years Before and After Mandatory Retirement Reform                                                                                       Years Before and After Mandatory Retirement Reform

Notes. Court performance before and after reforms implementing retirement ages of 70, 72 or 75. The outcome is the
log positive citations to the court in a year. Panel A includes courts with random or rotating assignment of cases. Panel
B includes courts with discretionary assignment of cases. Time series is a coefficient plot from the event study regression
(2), with coefficents estimated relative to the year before the reform. Regression includes court and year fixed effects
and court-specific event windows. 95% confidence intervals constructed with standard errors clustered by state.




          Table B.12: Effect of Mandatory Retirement Reform, Other Behavioral Dimensions

                                                                                        (1)               (2)                (3)                                                 (4)                     (5)                 (6)                (7)                  (8)
                                                                                         Work Output                    Caselaw Research                                                                 Overruled Rate                        Addendum Ops


             Retirement Reform                                                       0.0310            0.0455            -2.557                                            -0.211                  -0.0195**             -0.00439           0.283**             0.231**
                                                                                    (0.0643)          (0.0592)          (1.718)                                            (1.433)                 (0.00589)            (0.00593)           (0.0699)            (0.0769)


             Year FE, Court FE                                                           X                 X                  X                                                  X                        X                   X                  X                   X
             Court Trends/Windows                                                                          X                                                                     X                                            X                                      X
             N                                                                        15010             15010               15010                                          15010                    15010                  15010              15010              15010
  R-sq                        0.266       0.379      0.456     0.604      0.100        0.143      0.401       0.444
Observation is a judge working in a year. "Retirement Reform" is an indicator for the ten years after the introduction
of mandatory retirement. "Work Output" is log number of words written in a year. "Caselaw Research" is number of
previous cases cites. "Overruled rate" is being overruled by a higher court. "Addendum Ops" is number of dissenting
and concurring opinions (in logs). Court Treat Windows means court-specific treatment windows (ten years before and
after reform). Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. + p<.0.1, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01.




                                                                                                                                       80
C                                        Additional Material on Aging and Performance

                                         Figure C.1: Distribution over Age Groups for Life Cycle Coefficient Plots


                                         4000
   Frequency (Judge-Year Observations)




                                         3000




                                         2000




                                         1000




                                            0
                                                      40             50            60               70               80
                                                                            Age Groups

Notes. Number of judge-year observations in each five-year age group for the life cycle coefficient plots.




                                                                            81
                                         Figure C.2: Distribution over Age Groups for Balanced Sample Analysis


                                        3000
  Frequency (Judge-Year Observations)




                                        2000




                                        1000




                                           0
                                                        45-54       50-59      55-64        60-69      65-74
                                                                       Judge Age Group

Notes. Histogram of age groups for balanced sample analysis. Number of judge-years in each overlapping ten-year
balanced sample.




                                                                          82
               Table C.1: Judge Age and Inverse Hyperbolic Sine of Citations

                                                 (1)             (2)          (3)           (4)
                                                     Inverse Hyperbolic Sine of Positive Cites


                     Judge Age (Years)       -0.00831**     -0.00821**    -0.00714**      0.0327*
                                              (0.00138)      (0.00111)     (0.00125)      (0.0128)


                     Age Squared                                                        -0.000335**
                                                                                         (0.000114)


                     Court-Year FE               X               X            X              X
                     First-Year Baseline                         X            X              X
                     Cohort FE / Trends                                       X              X
                     N                         14981           14981        14981          14981
                       R-sq                       0.670        0.695         0.700          0.701
Observation is a judge working in a year. Outcome is inverse hyperbolic since (asinh) of positive cites to a judge in a
year. Court-Year FE is interacted court-year fixed effects. First-Year Baseline means a judge's value for the outcome
in their first year on the court is included as a control. Cohort FE means fixed effect for decade that the judge started
on the court. Cohort Trends means judge starting-year interacted with court fixed effect. Standard errors clustered by
state in parentheses. + p<.0.1, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01.




                                                            83
             Table C.2: Judge Age and Additional Measures of Performance, Logs

                        (1)           (2)         (3)                 (4)       (5)              (6)         (7)           (8)

                        Cites in 10 Years                All Cites                   Discuss Cites           Out-of-State Cites



 Judge Age          -0.00695**     0.0348**    -0.00747**       0.0321*      -0.00844**       0.0338**    -0.00882**     0.0292*

                     (0.00126)     (0.0121)    (0.00122)        (0.0130)     (0.00112)        (0.0110)    (0.00136)      (0.0131)



 Age Squared                     -0.000351**                  -0.000333**                   -0.000355**                -0.000320**

                                  (0.000107)                   (0.000115)                   (0.0000970)                (0.000115)



 Court-Year FE          X             X            X                  X          X               X            X             X

 1st-Year Base          X             X            X                  X          X               X            X             X

 Cohort FE/Trend        X             X            X                  X          X               X            X             X

 N                    14981         14981        14981           14981         14981           14981        14981         14981

 R-sq                  0.771         0.772       0.697               0.698     0.690           0.691        0.669         0.670
Observation is a judge working in a year. Outcomes are in logs. "Cites in 10 years" is log of positive cites to a judge in
a year, within ten years of a case. "All Cites" includes negative and distinguishing (not just positive) cites. "Discuss
cites" means the case was positively discussed and applied. "Out-of-state cites" means citations from courts in other
states. Court-Year FE is interacted court-year fixed effects. 1st-Year Base means a judge's value for the outcome in
their first year on the court is included as a control. Cohort FE means fixed effect for decade that the judge started
on the court. Cohort Trends means judge starting-year interacted with court fixed effect. Standard errors clustered by
state in parentheses. + p<.0.1, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01.




                                                              84
               Table C.3: Effect of Reform on Citations: Additional Measures

                                 (1)           (2)             (3)              (4)       (5)           (6)
                                Cites After 10 years                 Has Cite             Drop 5% Outliers


         Judge Age            -0.00786**     0.0284*      -0.000410**       0.00114    -0.00764**     0.0377**

                               (0.00117)     (0.0126)      (0.000131)      (0.00122)   (0.00137)      (0.0127)



         Age Squared                       -0.000305**                    -0.0000130                -0.000381**
                                           (0.000111)                    (0.0000107)                (0.000112)


         Court-Year FE            X             X              X                X          X             X
         1st-Year Base            X             X              X                X          X             X
         Cohort FE/Trend          X             X              X                X          X             X
         N                      14981         14981         14981           14981       14726         14726
          R-sq                   0.654         0.655         0.927          0.927        0.707        0.708
Notes. Observation is a judge working in a year. "Retirement Reform" is an indicator for the ten years after the
introduction of mandatory retirement. "Cites after 10 Years" means the log of the positive cites to a judge's cases in a
year, from cases more than ten years later. "Has Cite" means the proportion of cases with at least one positive citation.
"Drop 5% Outliers" is the baseline outcome (log of positive cites to a judge's cases in a year) but for each court-year,
the top 5% of cases by cite count are dropped. Court-Year FE is interacted court-year fixed effects. 1st-Year Base
means a judge's value for the outcome in their first year on the court is included as a control. Cohort FE means fixed
effect for decade that the judge started on the court. Cohort Trends means judge starting-year interacted with court
fixed effect. Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. + p<.0.1, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01.




                                                          85
     Table C.4: Judge Age and Additional Performance Measures, Rank Percentiles

                       (1)            (2)           (3)                 (4)             (5)              (6)         (7)             (8)

                       Cites in 10 Years                   All Cites                         Discuss Cites           Out-of-State Cites



 Judge Age         -0.00445**      0.0190+       -0.00460**       0.0172+            -0.00498**       0.0182*     -0.00366**      0.00134

                   (0.000878)      (0.00981)     (0.000815)       (0.00880)          (0.000812)      (0.00691)    (0.000685)      (0.00749)



 Age Squared                      -0.000198*                     -0.000184*                         -0.000196**                  -0.0000422

                                  (0.0000856)                   (0.0000771)                         (0.0000600)                  (0.0000661)



 Court-Year FE         X              X              X                  X                X               X            X                X

 First-Year            X              X              X                  X                X               X            X                X

 Cohort FE / T's       X              X              X                  X                X               X            X                X

 N                    13655         13655          8181            13655               13655           13655        13655          13655

 R-sq                 0.768          0.769         0.195               0.697           0.698           0.690        0.691           0.674
Observation is a judge working in a year. Outcomes are in rank percentiles. "Cites in 10 years" is log of positive cites to
a judge in a year, within ten years of a case. "All Cites" includes negative and distinguishing (not just positive) cites.
"Discuss cites" means the case was positively discussed and applied. "Out-of-state cites" means citations from courts in
other states. Court-Year FE is interacted court-year fixed effects. 1st-Year Base means a judge's value for the outcome
in their first year on the court is included as a control. Cohort FE means fixed effect for decade that the judge started
on the court. Cohort Trends means judge starting-year interacted with court fixed effect. Standard errors clustered by
state in parentheses. + p<.0.1, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01.




     Table C.5: Case Type and Importance by Judge Age and Case Allocation Rule

                                  (1)               (2)               (3)                           (4)                        (5)
                              Crim Cases        Civil Cases        Admin Cases                 Con Law Cases               Pred. Cites

  Age × Random                 0.00427           -0.00435                 -0.0164                   -0.0196                  -0.00127
                              (0.00845)         (0.00700)                (0.0115)                  (0.0129)                 (0.00188)

  Age × Not Rand                0.0265            -0.0198                -0.00161                   -0.0131                -0.0000133
                               (0.0209)          (0.0230)                (0.0176)                  (0.0194)                 (0.00229)

  Court-Year FE                   X                 X                         X                        X                         X
  N                             13643             13643                     13607                    13632                     13599
  adj. R-sq                     0.140             0.209                     -0.062                   -0.042                    0.397
Observation is a judge working in a year. "Random" is an indicator for random-assignment states, while "Not Rand"
means discretionary assignment. "Crim Cases" means proportion of cases on criminal law in a year (and respectively for
civil cases, administrative cases, and constitutional law cases). "Pred. Cites" means the predicted case quality computed
from an OLS regression with case characteristics (legal area and related industries). Standard errors clustered by state
in parentheses. + p<.0.1, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01.




                                                                 86
                                                                     Figure C.3: Dynamic Analysis: Case Types

                                                        (A) Share Civil Cases                                                                       (B) Share Criminal Cases
                                                                                                                                       .02

                                         .01


                                                                                                                                       .01




                                                                                                         Effect on Crime Cases
 Effect on Civil Cases




                                           0



                                                                                                                                         0
                                         -.01



                                                                                                                                       -.01
                                         -.02




                                         -.03                                                                                          -.02
                                                  -44    45-49 50-54 55-59 60-64 65-69 70-74      75+                                         -44    45-49   50-54   55-59 60-64   65-69   70-74   75+
                                                                      Age Groups                                                                                      Age Groups


                                            (C) Share Constitutional Cases                                                                    (D) Predicted Case Importance
                                  .02

                                                                                                                                       .06
 Effect on Constitutional Cases




                                                                                                         Effect on Predicted Quality




                                  .01
                                                                                                                                       .04



                                    0
                                                                                                                                       .02



                                  -.01
                                                                                                                                         0




                                  -.02                                                                                                 -.02
                                            -44     45-49   50-54   55-59 60-64   65-69   70-74   75+                                         -44    45-49   50-54   55-59 60-64   65-69   70-74   75+
                                                                     Age Groups                                                                                       Age Groups

Dynamic coefficient plots for estimates of five-year age group differences, relative to the age < 45 group. Observation
is a judge working in a year. All graphs contain court-year interacted fixed effects, first year baselines, and cohort fixed
effects. 95% confidence intervals constructed using standard errors clustered by state.




                                                                                                        87
                                    Figure C.4: Judge Age and Judge Performance, Additional FE Specifications

                                                 (A) No Fixed Effects                                                               (B) Adding Experience Fixed Effects
                                      .4                                                                                              .2
 Effect on Log Positive Citations




                                                                                                 Effect on Log Positive Citations
                                                                                                                                      .1
                                      .2


                                                                                                                                      0
                                      0

                                                                                                                                     -.1

                                     -.2
                                                                                                                                     -.2


                                     -.4
                                                                                                                                     -.3

                                           -44    45-49 50-54 55-59 60-64 65-69 70-74   75+                                                -44     45-49 50-54 55-59 60-64 65-69 70-74   75+
                                                               Age Groups                                                                                       Age Groups

Dynamic coefficient plots for estimates of five-year age group differences, relative to the age < 45 group. Outcom is
log positive cites. Observation is a judge working in a year. Panel A has no fixed effects; Panel B contains court-year
interacted fixed effects, first year baselines, cohort fixed effects, and fixed effects for number of years on court. 95%
confidence intervals constructed using standard errors clustered by state.




                                           Table C.6: Judge Age and Judge Performance, by Retirement Rule

                                                                                (1)                   (2)                                           (3)           (4)
                                                                              Voluntary Retirement                                               Mandatory Retirement
                                                                             Log Cites          Rank                                             Log Cites       Rank


                                                    Judge Age (Years)       -0.00962**        -0.00576**                                     -0.00615**       -0.00390**
                                                                             (0.00320)        (0.00147)                                          (0.00160)     (0.00122)


                                                    Court-Year FE                X                                X                                 X              X
                                                    First-Year Baseline          X                                X                                 X              X
                                                    Cohort FE / Trends           X                                X                                 X              X
                                                    N                          4688             4688                                               8967          8967
                     R-sq                       0.692        0.059             0.613        0.043
Observation is a judge working in a year. "Log Positive Cites" is log of positive cites to a judge in a year. "Rank
Percentile Cites" means judges are uniformly distributed between zero and one based on number of positive citations
within court-year (0 is lowest, 1 is highest). Court-Year FE is interacted court-year fixed effects. First-Year Baseline
means a judge's value for the outcome in their first year on the court is included as a control. Cohort FE means fixed
effect for decade that the judge started on the court. Cohort Trends means judge starting-year interacted with court
fixed effect. Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. + p<.0.1, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01.




                                                                                              88
                                             Figure C.5: Judge Age and Judge Performance, Before/After 1970

                                                    (A) Before 1970                                                                                     (B) After 1970
                                                                                                                                         .2
                                      .2
 Effect on Log Positive Citations




                                                                                                Effect on Log Positive Citations
                                                                                                                                         .1
                                      .1


                                                                                                                                          0
                                       0


                                                                                                                                         -.1
                                      -.1


                                                                                                                                         -.2
                                      -.2



                                      -.3                                                                                                -.3

                                             -44   45-49 50-54 55-59 60-64 65-69 70-74   75+                                                   -44   45-49 50-54 55-59 60-64 65-69 70-74      75+
                                                                Age Groups                                                                                        Age Groups

Dynamic coefficient plots for estimates of five-year age group differences, relative to the age < 45 group. Observation
is a judge working in a year. All graphs contain court-year interacted fixed effects, first year baselines, and cohort fixed
effects. Outcomes are log positive cites to a judge in a year. 95% confidence intervals constructed using standard errors
clustered by state.




                                            Figure C.6: Judge Age and Judge Performance, Alternative Weighting

                                    (A) Weighting by Number of Opinions                                                            (B) Weighting by Inverse Career Length
                                      .1
                                                                                                                                   .2
 Effect on Log Positive Citations




                                                                                                Effect on Log Positive Citations




                                       0
                                                                                                                                   .1



                                      -.1
                                                                                                                                    0



                                      -.2
                                                                                                                                   -.1



                                      -.3
                                                                                                                                   -.2

                                             -44   45-49 50-54 55-59 60-64 65-69 70-74   75+                                             -44    45-49   50-54   55-59 60-64   65-69   70-74   75+
                                                                Age Groups                                                                                       Age Groups

Observation is a judge working in a year. All graphs contain court-year fixed effects. "With Controls" means a baseline
for a judge's first year on the court, fixed effects for decade that the judge started on the court, and judge starting-year
interacted with court fixed effect.




                                                                                               89
                                              Figure C.7: Judge Age and Judge Performance, Alternative Clustering

                                     (A) Clustering at State-Year Level                                                                        (B) Clustering at Judge Level
                                        .2                                                                                               .2
 Effect on Log Positive Citations




                                                                                                      Effect on Log Positive Citations
                                        .1                                                                                               .1



                                         0                                                                                                0



                                        -.1                                                                                              -.1



                                        -.2                                                                                              -.2



                                        -.3                                                                                              -.3
                                               -44   45-49 50-54 55-59 60-64 65-69 70-74   75+                                                   -44    45-49 50-54 55-59 60-64 65-69 70-74     75+
                                                                  Age Groups                                                                                         Age Groups

Observation is a judge working in a year. All graphs contain court-year fixed effects. "With Controls" means a baseline
for a judge's first year on the court, fixed effects for decade that the judge started on the court, and judge starting-year
interacted with court fixed effect.




                                                        Table C.7: Additional Outcomes for Life Cycle Analysis

                                                                  (1)            (2)              (3)                                           (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)



                                                             Words Written   Affirm rate   Case Length                                    Research         Dissent    Overruled    Superseded



                                    Judge Age                   -0.00134       -0.00594      0.00154                                           -1.608     -0.00458*    0.00133     -0.00306**

                                                               (0.00132)       (0.0217)      (0.00109)                                     (1.043)        (0.00182)   (0.000975)   (0.000883)



                                    Court-Year FE                  X              X               X                                              X           X            X            X

                                    Cohort FE/Trends               X              X               X                                              X           X            X            X

                                    N                            13655          13655            13655                                         13655        13655       13655        13655

                                    R-sq                         0.563          0.747            0.719                                         0.607        0.504       0.328        0.464
Notes. Observation is a judge working in a year. "Words Written" is log of number of words written in opinions by a
judge in a year. "Affirm Rate" is the rate that a judge affirms (rather than reverses) a lower court. "Case length" is
words per opinion written. "Research" is previous cases cited in references. "Dissent" is rate of dissenting against other
judges. "Overruled" is rate of being overruled by a higher court. "Superseded" is rate of being reversed by legislation.
Court-Year FE is interacted court-year fixed effects. First-Year Baseline means a judge's value for the outcome in their
first year on the court is included as a control. Cohort FE means fixed effect for decade that the judge started on the
court. Cohort Trends means judge starting-year interacted with court fixed effect. Standard errors clustered by state
in parentheses. + p<.0.1, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01.




                                                                                                 90
                            Table C.8: Instrumenting Age with Reforms

                                               (1)            (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)
                                                     Effect on Log Positive Cites per Judge-Year

       Judge Age                           -0.0916**      -0.139**    -0.0766**      -0.0893**     -0.0888**
                                            (0.0278)      (0.0395)     (0.0232)       (0.0249)      (0.0244)

       Court FE, Year FE                        X              X           X             X              X
       Court Trends/Windows                                    X           X             X              X
       Init Court Rules × Year FE                                          X             X              X
       Init Case Types × Year FE                                                         X              X
       Init Age × Year FE                                                                               X
       Cragg-Donald F-stat                   44.526        39.694       43.803        46.821         45.943
       Kleibergen-Paap F-stat                10.372         7.416       17.520        16.991         21.625
       N                                     15010         15010        15010         15010          15010
       R-sq                                   0.460         0.526        0.538         0.555          0.565
Notes. 2SLS estimates for effect of age on performance, instrumenting with the retirement reforms. Observation is a
judge working in a year. "Retirement Reform" is an indicator for the ten years after the introduction of mandatory
retirement. Court Treat Windows means court-specific treatment windows (ten years before and after reform). "Init
X" × year FE means initial values are interacted with year. "Init Court Rules" includes a state's 1947 rules for judge
selection/retention system, admin office, intermediate appellate court, number of judges, and term length. "Init Case
Types" includes a court's 1947 average values for case characteristics (legal area and related industries). "Init Age"
includes the initial mean and standard deviation for judge age on the court. Standard errors clustered by state in
parentheses. + p<.0.1, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01.




                                                          91
                                                    Figure C.8: Balanced Judge Samples: Alternative Weighting and Clustering

                                                  (A) Weighting by Number of Opinions                                                                     (B) Weighting by Inverse Career Length
                                                                                                                                                          .01
 Effect of Age on Rank Percentile in Citations




                                                                                                          Effect of Age on Rank Percentile in Citations
                                                    0



                                                 -.005
                                                                                                                                                            0

                                                  -.01



                                                 -.015                                                                                                    -.01



                                                  -.02

                                                                                                                                                          -.02
                                                 -.025
                                                         45-54   50-59        55-64      60-69   65-74                                                            45-54   50-59        55-64        60-69   65-74
                                                                         Judge Age Group                                                                                          Judge Age Group


                                                     (C) Clustering at State-Year Level                                                                           (D) Clustering at Judge Level
                                                    0                                                                                                        0
 Effect of Age on Rank Percentile in Citations




                                                                                                          Effect of Age on Rank Percentile in Citations




                                                 -.005                                                                                                    -.005




                                                  -.01                                                                                                     -.01




                                                 -.015                                                                                                    -.015




                                                                                                                                                           -.02
                                                  -.02

                                                         45-54   50-59        55-64      60-69   65-74                                                            45-54   50-59        55-64      60-69     65-74
                                                                         Judge Age Group                                                                                          Judge Age Group

Performance-Age estimates for separate balanced samples of judges based on age group. Observation is a judge working
in a year. Outcomes are in rank percentiles, regressed on age (in years) for the specified group. 95% confidence intervals
constructed using standard errors clustered by state.




                                                                                                         92
D                                          Additional Material on Team Effects of Aging

Figure D.1: Event-Study Effect of Reform on Performance, with Judge Fixed Effects

                                     .6          Pr ( [ k  -2 ] = 0) =.981                                      Pr ( [ k  0 ] = 0) =.165
  Effect on Log Positive Citations




                                     .4



                                     .2



                                      0



                                     -.2



                                     -.4
                                            -6     -5   -4   -3     -2 -1     0   1    2   3   4    5    6  7    8   9   10   11   12
                                                                  Years Before and After Mandatory Retirement Reform

Judge performance before and after reforms implementing retirement ages of 70, 72 or 75. Outcome is log positive
citations for a judge in a year. Time series is a coefficient plot from the event study regression (2), with coefficents
estimated relative to the year before the reform. Regression includes court and year fixed effects and court-specific
event windows, plus judge fixed effects. 95% confidence intervals constructed with standard errors clustered by state.




                                                                                      93
         Table D.1: Effect of Reform, Other Quality Measures, Judge Fixed Effects

                        (1)             (2)             (3)       (4)         (5)                (6)              (7)              (8)            (9)      (10)

                       Cites in Levels                 Within 10 years               All Cites                    Discuss Cites              Out-of-State Cites



  Ret. Reform         37.25*           18.28       0.238**       0.177       0.167*         0.131              0.109+             0.123       0.155*      0.167

                      (17.63)         (17.56)      (0.0869)     (0.122)     (0.0721)       (0.0965)            (0.0543)         (0.0849)     (0.0772)    (0.105)



  Year / Judge FE        X              X               X          X             X               X                X                X               X        X

  Trends/Windows                        X                          X                             X                                 X                        X

  N                   14905           14905            14905     14905       14905          14905                14905            14905       14905       14905

  R-sq                0.585            0.667           0.739     0.809       0.678          0.753                0.667            0.749        0.641      0.718
Notes. Observation is a judge working in a year. "Retirement Reform" is an indicator for the ten years after the
introduction of mandatory retirement. "Cites in Levels" means the outcome is not logged. "Within 10 years" is the
log positive cites within ten years of an opinion. "All Cites" is the log number of all citations (positive, negative, and
distinguishing) to a judge in a year. "Discuss Cites" is only the positive cites where the latter judge discussed the cited
opinion. "Out-of-State Cites" is the count of number of positive citations from courts in other states. "Positive Cites"
is the number of positive cites (in levels). Court Treat Windows means court-specific treatment windows (ten years
before and after reform). Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. + p<.0.1, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01.




         Table D.2: Mandatory Retirement Reform: Relevance of Authorship Rates

                                 (1)              (2)              (3)            (4)                    (5)              (6)                (7)          (8)

                                Authorship Rate                    Log Pos. Cites                       Log # Opinions                     Log Pos. Cites / Case



  Retirement Reform            0.0638           0.0917**          0.206*         0.213*                0.140*           0.0933*            0.0451       0.0855+

                              (0.0383)          (0.0304)         (0.0838)    (0.0908)                (0.0549)         (0.0462)             (0.0464)     (0.0480)



  Authorship Rate                 -                -             0.406**         0.442*                0.526*           0.546**             -0.150       -0.117

                                                                 (0.151)      (0.180)                  (0.197)          (0.159)            (0.115)      (0.0823)



  Year FE, Court FE              X                 X                X                X                   X                X                   X            X

  Court Trends/Windows                             X                                 X                                    X                                X

  N                             2357             2357             15010          15010                 15010             15010              15010        15010

  R-sq                          0.642            0.826            0.465          0.529                 0.352             0.522              0.651        0.710
In Columns 1 and 2, an observation is court-year, while in Columns 3 through 8, an observation is a judge-year.
"Retirement Reform" is an indicator for the ten years after the introduction of mandatory retirement. "Authorship
Rate" is the proportion of total cases that have a signed author in the court-year. Court Treat Windows means court-
specific treatment windows (ten years before and after reform). Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. +
p<.0.1, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01.




                                                                            94
              Table D.3: Comparing Judges Selected Before/After the Reform

                                                 (1)               (2)                  (3)
                                            Starting Age    Log Cites / Case    Rank Cites / Case


                   Selected Post Reform        -0.963            0.136**              0.186**
                                               (1.464)          (0.0240)             (0.0309)


                   Court × Year FE               X                  X                    X
                   N                            2186              2186                 2186
                   R-sq                         0.272              0.723                0.029
Observation is a judge working in a year. Sample includes judges selected within ten years before and after the
reform. "Selected Post Reform" is an indicator for judges selected within ten years after the introduction of mandatory
retirement. Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. + p<.0.1, * p<0.05, ** p<0.01.




One question not addressed directly in the main text is whether the mandatory retire-
ment effect is driven by selection or incentives. On the selection side, the performance
gain comes from the replacement of older judges with new, younger, better-performing
judges. On the incentive side, mandatory retirement might increase quality for sit-
ting judges by changing their incentives or their work environment. Incentive effects
could include the need to impress the chief justice so that one can stay on as a senior
justice, or else to maintain skills for obtaining non-judicial employment outside the
court. Work-environment changes could be due to spillovers from the replacement of
older judges with younger judges, so judges that stay on have to do less to support the
older judges. Our previous estimates have not disentangled the across-judge from the
within-judge effects of retirement reforms.
    To get at selection, we compare judges working on the same court at the same time,
but selected before/after the reforms. These regressions use court-year fixed effects so
hold time-varying factors constant. The results, reported in Appendix Table D.3, show
that the reforms did not significantly affect the starting age of judges. However, the
judges selected after the reforms tended to be high-quality, as measured by citations
per opinion.




                                                           95
E      The Age Discrimination in Employment Act of
       1967 Sec. 621
The Congress hereby finds and declares that

    1. in the face of rising productivity and affluence, older workers find themselves
      disadvantaged in their efforts to retain employment, and especially to regain
      employment when displaced from jobs;

       (a) the setting of arbitrary age limits regardless of potential for job performance
           has become a common practice, and certain otherwise desirable practices
           may work to the disadvantage of older persons;
       (b) the incidence of unemployment, especially long-term unemployment with
           resultant deterioration of skill, morale, and employer acceptability is, rela-
           tive to the younger ages, high among older workers; their numbers are great
           and growing; and their employment problems grave;
       (c) the existence in industries affecting commerce, of arbitrary discrimination
           in employment because of age, burdens commerce and the free flow of goods
           in commerce.
       (d) It is therefore the purpose of this chapter to promote employment of older
           persons based on their ability rather than age; to prohibit arbitrary age
           discrimination in employment; to help employers and workers find ways of
           meeting problems arising from the impact of age on employment.




                                           96
