                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       UNCERTAINTY AND GROWTH DISASTERS

                                       Boyan Jovanovic
                                           Sai Ma

                                      Working Paper 28024
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28024


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2020




We thank Henry Hyatt, Georgui Kambourov, and Iourii Manovskii for data, and Ian Dew-Becker,
Martina Hengge, Seung Lee, Milan Nedeljkovic, Sergio Rebelo, and John Rogers for comments
and suggestions. All errors are ours. The views expressed are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Reserve System, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Boyan Jovanovic and Sai Ma. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Uncertainty and Growth Disasters
Boyan Jovanovic and Sai Ma
NBER Working Paper No. 28024
October 2020
JEL No. E3

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper documents several facts on the real effects of economic uncertainty. First, higher
uncertainty is associated with a more dispersed distribution of output growth. Second, the relation
is highly asymmetric: A rise in uncertainty is associated with a sharp decline in the lower tail of
the growth distribution whereas it has a much smaller and insignificant impact on its upper tail.
Third, the negative response of growth to uncertainty shocks is larger when the equity market is
more volatile. We build a model in which growth and uncertainty are both endogenous: rapid
adoption of new technology raises economic uncertainty and may cause measured productivity to
decline. The equilibrium growth distribution is negatively skewed and higher uncertainty leads to
a thicker left tail and to more labor reallocation among jobs and among


Boyan Jovanovic
New York University
Department of Economics
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
Boyan.Jovanovic@nyu.edu

Sai Ma
Federal Reserve Board,
C Ave & 20th Street NW
Washington, DC 20551
sai.ma@frb.gov
1        Introduction

Contemporary macro literature often ...nds uncertainty about the future to be an impor-
tant driver of economic uctuations. A growing body of work proposes uncertainty as a
cause of economic slowdowns and sluggish recoveries. For example, Bloom (2009a) and
Bloom, Floetotto, Jaimovich, Saporta-Eksten and Terry (2018) argue that higher un-
certainty stems from the process governing technological innovation, which subsequently
causes a decline in real activity.
        Empirically, this evidence has been found to be robust to the use of various proxy
variables such as implied stock volatility (VIX), economic policy uncertainty (EPU) from
Baker, Bloom and Davis (2016), or a broad-based measure of macroeconomic and ...nan-
cial uncertainty, as in Jurado, Ludvigson and Ng (2015) (JLN) and Ludvigson, Ma and
Ng (2019) (LMN). However, these papers usually investigate the impact of higher un-
certainty on mean growth either via a linear forecasting regression or a structural vector
autoregression (SVAR). Consequently, they are silent about the e¤ect of uncertainty on
the volatility or other higher moments of the growth distribution, and this may underes-
timate the impact of economic uncertainty on growth downside risk.
  In this paper, we provide evidence that uncertainty is highly correlated with the higher
moments of the growth distribution. Figure 1 depicts the contemporaneous relationship
between JLN macro uncertainty and 36-month rolling window average growth of industrial
production (hereafter "IP") in the left panel, IP growth volatility in the middle panel, and
IP growth skewness in the right panel. While uncertainty is highly negatively correlated
( 36%) with mean growth as the literature has shown, we ...nd that uncertainty is also
highly correlated with growth volatility (44%) and growth skewness ( 22%). Therefore,
higher uncertainty is not only associated with lower mean growth but also contributes to
a more dispersed and negatively skewed growth distribution.
   We estimate the distribution of future real growth of IP as a function of uncertainty
measures using quantile regression methods.1 We document three stylized facts. First,
higher economic uncertainty is associated with a more dispersed and left-skewed future
growth distribution. A one-standard-deviation increase in uncertainty statistically sig-
ni...cantly increases the interquartile range of the one-month ahead annualized growth
distribution by 2%; and decreases the lower 5th percentile by 5%. This indicates that the
marginal e¤ects of higher uncertainty are to signi...cantly increase growth downside risk.
    1
    This empirical model is based on Adrian, Boyarchenko and Giannone (2019) (ABG). Instead of using
an uncertainty measure, ABG uses the national ...nancial condition index (NFCI) as the conditioning
variable to estimate the growth distribution.


                                                 1
                           Mean Growth                Growth Volatility             Growth Skewness
               1.1                            0.14                           1.5

                                                                                1
                                              0.12
                                                                             0.5
              1.05
                                               0.1
                                                                                0

                                                                             -0.5
                                              0.08
                 1
                                                                               -1
                                              0.06
                                                                             -1.5

              0.95                            0.04                             -2
                     0.6       0.8        1          0.6      0.8        1          0.6      0.8        1
                            Uncertainty                    Uncertainty                    Uncertainty

Figure 1: Uncertainty and Higher Moments of Growth. Note: this ...gure depicts the contem-
poraneous relationship between JLN macro uncertainty and 36-month rolling window average industrial
production (IP) growth (left panel), growth volatility (middle panel), and growth skewness (right panel).
The sample spans the period 1973:01 to 2018:12.


    Second, the response of IP growth to changes in uncertainty is highly asymmetric,
the response being much higher when uncertainty rises than when it falls. An increase in
uncertainty is associated with a larger decrease in the lower tail of the growth distribution
while it has a much smaller impact on its upper tail. These results suggest that higher
uncertainty could lead to an abrupt economic decline whereas lower uncertainty does
not necessarily rebound the economy from the recession. Third, higher asset volatility
magni...es the negative impact of uncertainty on growth. We ...nd that when the equity
market is more volatile as measured by a higher VIX, an increase in macro uncertainty
has a larger negative impact on the lower tail of the expected growth distribution. A
one-standard deviation increase in VIX increases in the marginal e¤ect of uncertainty on
the lower 5th percentile by 10%.
   Motivated by this evidence, we present and estimate an endogenous growth model
that generates uncertainty. Equilibrium growth results from the adoption of technologies
of uncertain quality. A technology'
                                  s "quality"refers to how closely the technology'
                                                                                 s needs
match the economy'   s input endowments. Since technology needs are unpredictable, its
rapid irreversible adoption raises uncertainty and can even lead to a decline in output
and, hence, to negative growth.
    Uncertainty thus a¤ects growth because of technological commitment and the ex-post
mismatch between the technology and the ...rm'   s inputs. Firms adopt technologies the
exact character of which they do not know; a ...rm may have to commit to the scale of its
factory and to the size of its labor force, as argued by Ramey and Ramey (1991), or it

                                                              2
may be have to commit to the skill and occupational composition of the labor force. The
mismatch is distributed symmetrically but the cost of that mismatch is quadratic so that
maximal losses from technology adoption exceed the maximal gains. The ...rm'
                                                                           s growth
rate is therefore negatively skewed as observed in the data.
   How well a technology ...ts a ...rm'
                                      s asset endowments is revealed only after the fact.
An ex-post mismatch causes a resulting adjustment which we hypothesize will show up in
job-to-job mobility whereby workers move from one ...rm to another, and in occupational
mobility which may also be internal to the ...rm when it reallocates workers among tasks
that di¤er in their occupational label.
   The model provides an analytic characterization of the equilibrium growth distribu-
tion. Consistent with our empirical evidence, higher uncertainty about the newly adopted
technologies leads to a lower average growth as well as a more dispersed and negatively
skewed growth distribution. By assuming that the uncertainty has no long-run impacts
on growth, the calibrated model is able to quantitatively match the marginal e¤ect of
uncertainty on several key moments of the growth distribution. As in the data, the model
suggests that higher asset price volatility, measured from the estimated option prices of
a Lucas (1978) representative security, leads to a higher marginal e¤ect of uncertainty on
the lower tail of the growth distribution.

Related Literature

Our paper relates closely to two major strands of literature. First, a growing body of
empirical studies the real e¤ect of uncertainty. Carriero, Clark and Marcellino (2018)
...nds that economic uncertainty has a strong negative e¤ect on economic outcomes. Simi-
larly, based on breaks in the volatility of macroeconomic variables, Angelini, Bacchiocchi,
Caggiano and Fanelli (2019) shows that macro uncertainty has a contractionary e¤ect on
output. Using a shock-restricted SVAR approach, Ludvigson et al. (2019) ...nds that ...nan-
cial uncertainty is a possible source of business cycle uctuations. In spite of the mixed
evidence on which type of uncertainty has a contractionary e¤ect on economic growth, it'
                                                                                       s
evident that the higher uncertainty about future economic conditions exhibits a large im-
pact on mean growth. However, all these papers investigate uncertainty and real variables
using a structural vector autoregression (SVAR) framework and thus cannot establish a
relationship between uncertainty and higher moments of the growth distribution.2
      One exception is Hengge (2019). As we do in our paper, she also uses quantile re-
  2
    Other examples include Baker and Bloom (2013), Caldara, Fuentes-Albero, Gilchrist and Zakrajsek
(2016), Alfaro, Bloom and Lin (2016), and Shin and Zhong (2018).



                                                3
gression analysis and shows that the relationship between macroeconomic uncertainty
and future quarterly GDP growth is highly nonlinear and asymmetric. Our empirical
evidence on the asymmetric response of expected IP growth to higher uncertainty is con-
sistent with hers despite our use of monthly IP as the measure of economic growth. Using
quantile regression estimates, we further construct the Growth-at-Risk measure and study
its interaction with asset pricing volatility and capacity utilization both empirically and
theoretically. To the best of our knowledge, we are the ...rst to provide a theoretical frame-
work to study the impact of uncertainty on higher moments of the growth distribution.
    Second, a large body of theoretical literature proposes that higher economic uncer-
tainty causes lower output growth. Prescott and Visscher (1980) argue that workers'
comparative advantages for performing various tasks di¤er and ...rms need to learn them
at a cost. If a new technology garbles their aptitudes for some of the workers, this
gives rise to a reallocation cost that lowers output. More generally, there are models of
the real options e¤ects of uncertainty (Bernanke (1983), McDonald and Siegel (1986)),
models in which uncertainty inuences ...nancing constraints (Gilchrist, Sim and Zakrajsek
(2010), Arellano, Bai and Kehoe (2011)), investment (Fajgelbaum, Schaal and Taschereau-
Dumouchel (2017)), or precautionary saving (Basu and Bundick (2017), Leduc and Liu
(2016), Fernández-Villaverde, Pablo Guerrón-Quintana and Uribe (2011), Bianchi, Kung
and Tirskikh (2018)). Our notion of uncertainty in the model is similar to Bloom (2009a)
and Bloom et al. (2018) that assume that higher uncertainty originates directly in the
process governing technological innovation and adoption.
   Our paper is also related to papers on disaster risk and business cycles. Gourio (2012)
studies the impact of disastrous shocks on the ...rst moments of real variables whereas our
paper focuses on the second and third moments. Related to our ...ndings, Berger, Dew-
Becker and Giglio (2020) and Dew-Becker, Tahbaz-Salehi and Vedolin (2020) theoretically
and empirically emphasize the importance of time-varying second moment and skewness
in thinking about uncertainty shocks.
   Our model follows the putty-clay tradition of Johansen (1959), and assumes irreversible
technological commitment, building on Ramey and Ramey (1991) and Jovanovic (2006).
It derives closed-form expressions for equilibrium growth and its distribution, and studies
the relationship between uncertainty and higher moments of the growth distribution.
Central to the model is investment in intangible capital which McGrattan and Prescott
(2014) and Bhandari and McGrattan (2018) estimate to be sixty percent of ...rms'total
assets. Parente (1994) and Klenow (1998) explain asymmetry at the level of the ...rm
by assuming that a technology improves with use through learning by doing. Upon an


                                              4
update, productivity drops sharply and then recovers gradually.
   Closely related is Ramey and Ramey (1991) which, in a one-period model also assumes
technological commitment so that output may decline when new technology is adopted,
and where greater variability of shocks reduces expected output. In Chalkley and Lee
(1998), Veldkamp (2005), and Fajgelbaum et al. (2017) agents observe shocks more accu-
rately when investment is high and therefore in a boom a negative shock to the e¢ ciency
of investment is quickly detected and so, when a bad shock hits, investment suddenly
drops. Thus, a negative TFP shock in a boom has a quicker impact than a positive shock
does in a slump ­investment responds asymmetrically to a symmetric exogenous shocks
because ...rms can detect negative shocks more quickly than positive ones. Our paper
shares the feature that uncertainty is endogenous ­agents'actions a¤ect how uncertain
they feel about future macroeconomic variables.
   The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides evidence on the
asymmetric real e¤ects of uncertainty. Section 3 presents the model, and analyzes its
empirical implications. Section 4 adds three extensions: A Markov-switching process for a
parameter that inuences the level of uncertainty induced by technological upgrading , an
alternative measure for aggregate output, and recursive preferences. Section 5 concludes
the paper.


2   Empirical Evidence

In this section, we describe the data and present the key empirical fact that the relation-
ship between future economic growth and uncertainty is highly nonlinear. To document
this feature in the data, we follow Adrian et al. (2019) and investigate the relationship
between uncertainty and future growth via forecasting quantile regressions. Compared
to the traditional OLS forecasting regressions, quantile regressions describe how the set
of conditional variables, including uncertainty measures, a¤ect di¤erent quantiles of the
future growth. This methodology thus allows the estimated relationship between uncer-
tainty and future growth to di¤er across quantiles. This extension of a simple linear
regression model can capture the potential nonlinear relationship between the shocks in
uncertainty and vulnerability of the growth, which is largely neglected in the literature.
More formally, we regress the h-month-ahead real IP growth (hereafter "IP growth") on
a vector of condition variables Xt ,

                                                      0
                                       ipt+h; =           ;h Xt   + "t ;               (1)



                                                  5
where the conditional variables Xt include a constant, the lag of the IP growth, and
uncertainty Ut .
   The regression slope can be obtained by minimizing the quantile-weighted absolute
value of errors:
                                        (                                                             )
                                  X                 1   ipt+h; > ;h xt j ipt+h;
                                                                 0
                                                                                      0
                                                                                        xt j
            ^    ;h   = arg min                                                              0            ;   (2)
                                            + (1        ) 1 ipt+h; < 0 ;h xt j ipt+h;          xt j
                                    t

where h is the forecasting horizon,                 is the quantile and 1 is the indicator variable. For
inference, standard errors are estimated via the bootstrap procedure described in Adrian
et al. (2019).

2.1     Data
The monthly IP data is obtained from FRED Economic database maintained by the
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. Our main measure of uncertainty, denoted by UtM ,
is the macroeconomic uncertainty index from Jurado et al. (2015) (hereafter JLN un-
certainty), which aggregates over a large number of individual uncertainties constructed
                                               M
from a panel of data. More speci...cally, let yjt 2 YtM = (y1M             M     0
                                                              t ; : : : ; yNC t ) be a variable
in a set of large macroeconomic series denoted by YtM . For each macro series yjt     M
                                                                                        , its h-
                                      M
period ahead uncertainty, denoted by Ujt (h), is de...ned to be the volatility of the purely
unforecastable component of the future value of the series, conditional on all information
available. Speci...cally,
                                             s
                               M                       M            M          2
                              Ujt (h)              E (yjt+h      E[yjt+h jIt ]) jIt ;


where It denotes the information available up to time t. Then h-period macro uncertainty
 M
Ujt (h) is an aggregate of individual uncertainty measures across all macro series:
                                                  NM
                                                  X     1 M
                          UtM (h)       plimNM !1         Ujt (h)                 M
                                                                               E[Ujt (h)]:
                                                  j =1
                                                       NM


For JLN macro uncertainty, they use a monthly macro dataset consisting of NM = 134
mostly macroeconomic time series listed in McCracken and Ng (2016). Intuitively, if the
expectation of the squared error in forecasting yjt+h rises, uncertainty in that variable
increases. In this paper, we update JLN uncertainty index to 2018:12 and use the one-
month ahead (h = 1) macro uncertainty as our baseline measure of uncertainty, following
Ludvigson et al. (2019). Our sample is monthly and spans the period 1973:01 to 2018:12,
unless otherwise noted.

                                                            6
                                                                  Median




                        Growth Rate (%)
                                          2

                                          0

                                          -2

                                          -4
                                               0   10   20           30            40   50         60
                                                                    Month
                                                             Interquartile Range
                        Growth Rate (%)
                                          4

                                          2

                                          0

                                          -2
                                               0   10   20           30            40   50         60
                                                                   Month
                                                               5th Percentile
                  Growth Rate (%)




                                          0


                                          -5


                                    -10
                                               0   10   20           30            40   50         60
                                                                   Month



Figure 2: Impact of a one-standard deviation increase in uncertainty measure on the
annualized growth rate. Note: this ...gure report the estimated coe¢ cient of uncertainty over h =
1; 2:::; 60 months from the baseline quantile regression described in the texts. The bootstrapped 68%
con...dence intervals are reported in red dashed lines.


2.2      Results
By construction, any e¤ects of changes in xt on h-month ahead growth at percentile is
captured by the slope estimate ^ ;h . Figure 2 reports the estimates of marginal coe¢ cient
of uncertainty over h = 1; 2:::; 60 months.3 The top panel reports the e¤ect of uncertainty
on changes in expected median growth. We ...nd that a one-standard-deviation increase
in uncertainty decreases the median of the annualized growth by 3% over the next month.
The e¤ect gradually weakens over time with a half-life of 23 months. The middle panel
shows that the distribution of the growth becomes more dispersed following an increase
in uncertainty. The interquartile range (75th minus 25th percentile) rises at short- and
medium- terms. Similarly, the bottom panel shows that when uncertainty increases, the
distribution of the growth is more negatively skewed. The 5th percentile of the growth
falls by 6% at short horizon, and 2% over 2 to 4 years. As a result, the impact of the
uncertainty on skewness of the distribution is long-lasting.
      In Figure 3, we plot the estimated uncertainty coe¢ cients                             ;h   for di¤erent   over
  3
    One can interpret the co¢ cients from equation (1) over h as the impulse responses to uncertainty
shock, as in the local projection method from Jordà (2005).


                                                                    7
                                                Estimates of Uncertainty Coefficients
                                      2


                                      1


                                      0


                                      -1
                    Growth Rate (%)
                                      -2


                                      -3


                                      -4
                                                                                5 percentile
                                                                                25 percentile
                                      -5
                                                                                Median
                                      -6                                        75 percentile
                                                                                95 percentile
                                      -7
                                           0   10       20       30       40        50          60
                                                               Month

Figure 3: Asymmetric impact of uncertainty on growth. Note: this ...gure reports the estimated
uncertianty coe¢ cients for di¤erent quantiles                 over horizon h from the baseline quantile regression
described in the texts.


horizon h. In most cases, an increase in uncertainty is associated with a larger decrease
in the lower tail of the growth distribution while it has much smaller impact on the upper
tail. This asymmetric response shows that the impact of uncertainty on growth is highly
nonlinear.

2.3     Growth-at-Risk
We de...ne Growth-at-Risk (GaR) as the lower 5th percentile of the estimated conditional
distribution of real IP growth. It'
                                  s worth noting that our measure of GaR di¤ers from the
one in Adrian, Grinberg, Liang and Malik (2018) because they use the national ...nancial
condition index (NFCI) from the Chicago Fed in conditional variables xt whereas we use
the uncertainty measure.4 In fact, in Appendix 6, we show that JLN uncertainty has more
accurate out-of-sample forecast of IP growth distribution (i.e. higher average predictive
scores) than NFCI. Figure 4 shows the time series of one-month ahead GaR estimated
using uncertainty measure. The red line in the ...gure shows the he GaR estimated using
NFCI for comparisons. First, it shows that both measures of GaR are counter-cyclical
   4
    In addition, Adrian et al. (2018) uses quarterly GDP growth to measure of economic growth whereas
we use monthly IP growth.


                                                                8
and with a less than 5% probability, a one-standard deviation increase in uncertainty is
associated with as much as a 3% decline in IP Growth within a month during recessions.
Second, GaR estimated with uncertainty is more volatile and exhibit larger spikes during
recessions. For the rest of the paper, we refer to GaR as the one that is estimated using
uncertainty.

                              One-month-ahead Growth-at-Risk (%)
               1
                                                                      Macro Uncertainty
             0.5                                                      NFCI
               0
            -0.5
              -1
            -1.5
              -2
            -2.5
              -3
            -3.5
              -4
               1970         1980           1990           2000           2010             2020


Figure 4: Growth-at-Risk. Note: this ...gure reports the estimated Growth-at-Risk using NFCI (red
line) and JLN Macro uncertainty (black line). The baseline quantile regression is described in the texts.
The sample spans the period 1973:01 to 2018:12.


       Our baseline measure of uncertainty is based on macro variables but some papers in
the literature, such as Ludvigson et al. (2019), found evidence that volatility related to
the asset returns also lead to persistent decline IP growth. This evidence suggests that
the uncertainty should be associated with a larger decline in growth when asset prices
are more volatile. To directly test this argument, Figure 4 plots the estimated GaR
against the standardized implied volatility indices (VIX), which is a popular measure of
                s expectation of volatility implied by S&P 500 index options.5 It shows
the stock market'
that when the US equity market is more volatile, an increase in macro uncertainty has
a larger negative impact on IP growth and thus leads to a lower GaR. On average, a
two-standard-deviation increase in VIX is associated with a 0.5% decline in GaR.
   5
   In the paper, we chose to use the VXO implied volatility index that is available since 1962 instead of
VIX because the latter is only available after 1990 and the two measures are 99% correlated.


                                                   9
                                                        VIX and Growth at Risk
                                         0



                                      -0.5
             G ro wth a t Risk (% )

                                        -1



                                      -1.5



                                        -2



                                      -2.5



                                        -3
                                          -2   -1   0   1       2        3       4   5   6   7
                                                            VIX (Standarized)

Figure 5: Growth-at-Risk and VIX. Note: this ...gure shows the contempraneous relationship
between standardized VIX and estimated Growth-at-Risk. The Growth-at-Risk is estimated conditional
on JLN macro uncertainty. The red line reports the OLS Estimate. The sample spans the period 1973:01
to 2018:12.


    To sum up, we document some empirical evidence on the real e¤ect of uncertainty.
First, we ...nd that an increase in uncertainty leads to lower median and yet more volatile
IP growth, and a more negative GaR. Second, the response of IP growth to an increase in
uncertainty is highly nonlinear, especially at the short term. Third, higher asset volatil-
ity magni...es a negative e¤ect of uncertainty on growth. The next section presents an
endogenous growth model that captures these facts.


3    Model

The following model endogenizes growth and uncertainty. It features a collection of agents
that can raise their productivities by adopting new technologies. We ...rst focus on a single
agent and then in Sec. 3.1 discuss why the representative agent assumption holds up in
a group of agents in spite of the informational spillovers involved. Consider an agent
"Crusoe,"with preferences over consumption sequences (ct )
                                     (1          )
                                      X
                                           t
                                  E0         lnct :
                                                                0



                                                                    10
We use log utility here for analytical tractability. In Section 4.3, we extend the model
using Epstein and Zin (2013) recursive preferences and show that it delivers the same
economic insights.
    Production.-- For simplicity of the exposition, we assume there is a single production
good y and there is no physical capital. The output depends on the level of technology A
                 s skill mix h. The potential output, y p , is de...ned as
as well as Crusoe'

                                                                      2
                                  y p = exp A         (sA       h0 )        :                                  (3)
                                                  2

where sA is the skill-mix ideal for technology A. By construction,                     2
                                                                                           (sA       h0 )2 captures
the foregone output due to the "skill gap" between Crusoe'
                                                         s current skill and the ideal
skill for technology A.
    Adoption of Technology.-- Crusoe can raise his technology by any amount, x                                   0,
so that starting today at A; tomorrow'
                                     s technology is

                                            A0 = A + x:

Crusoe must use technology A0 for at least one period. We assume that adopting a new
technology is free but adoption of the new technology A0 makes unpredictable demands
on the skill mix,
                                           sA0 = sA + x";                                                      (4)

where " F (") is time speci...c and i.i.d., having mean zero and variance 2 . Once " is
drawn, sA0 becomes an invariant skill requirement for technology A0 . Crusoe chooses A0
before seeing ", and he cannot return to technologies that he used in the past.
    Adjustment of h.-- Crusoe starts the period with h. Before producing, he can change
it to h0   h+       at an adjustment cost of

                              C (y p ; )     1   exp              2
                                                                            yp:
                                                            2

Finally, Crusoe'
               s net output is

              yp     C (y p ; )    y (u; ; A) = exp A                  (u         )2        2
                                                                                                 ;             (5)
                                                                  2                    2

where
                                            u = sA     h;                                                      (6)

is the gap between ideal and actual skill (hereafter the "skill gap").


                                                 11
3.1     Optimal Investment in skill and in technological upgrading
Crusoe' s state is his skill gap u and technology level A. His decisions are (x; ). He has
no assets other than h and A, and he simply consumes his output. His Bellman equation
is                                                         Z
              V (u; A) = max lny (u; ; A) +                        V (u + x"               ; A + x) dF (") :               (7)
                           x;

The following result is proved in Jovanovic (2006, Proposition 1), but in Proposition 3
we shall generalize it to the case in which the parameter                                  follows a two-state Markov
process, and in Proposition 5 we shall partially generalize it to cover recursive preferences
with an intertemporal elasticity of substitution di¤erent from unity. The solution to (7),
derived in Appendix 1, can be summarized as follows:

Proposition 1 The policy functions are
                                                               1
                                      x=         2
                                                                                   ;                                       (8)
                                                     (1            ) (1        )
and
                                                 = (1               ) u;                                                   (9)

where                           8                         s                                        9
                              1 <                                                                  =
                                                                                       2
                           =      1+         +                     1+      +                   4       ;                  (10)
                             2 :                                                                   ;

is the fraction of the gap that Crusoe leaves open. The solution for V is
                                                 A             1
                                V (u; A) =                       (1            ) u2 + J;                                  (11)
                                             1                 2
where
                       x                                                       1
     J=                                2
                                            x2   2
                                                      ; and                =               2
                                                                                               + (1          )2 :         (12)
          1        1            1                                              2

     Thus Crusoe upgrades technology at a constant rate x, and his adjustment of skills
is proportional to his current skill gap u. As a result, using equation (4) and (6), the skill
gap u follows a AR(1) process as follows,

                                           ut+1 = ut + x"t+1 :                                                            (13)

     Reductions in          are expansionary.-- Eq. (8) states that if                                     falls, x rises. If a
more predictable policy lowers        that would have an expansionary e¤ect. In line with this
prediction, Gulen and Ion (2016) use a news-based index of policy uncertainty and show

                                                          12
that higher uncertainty reduces investment, especially in industries where investment is
irreversible ­as investment in A is in our model. Similarly, Mody and Nedeljkovic (2018)
stress the expansionary e¤ect of unambiguous ECB monetary policy during the Euro
Crisis. In Sec. 4.1 we shall extend the model and assume a Markov switching process for
 2
   and study the e¤ect of periodic switches in 2 that are not expected to remain ...xed
forever and there, too, periodic reductions in are expansionary.6
         Uncertainty.-- Our notion of uncertainty is captured by the volatility of the skill gap
u. Because         is between zero and one, ut is stationary and its variance is

                                     x2   2
                                                                                       1
                       V ar (u) =             2
                                                  = (1        )2 1   2   2
                                                                             (1   )2       2
                                                                                               ;        (14)
                                    1
where the second equality derives from equation (8). Conditional on the current skill gap
u, the rise in x prompted by a lower , leads to higher uncertainty. On the other hand, an
increase in , or penalty for skill mismatch, lowers investment x and lowers uncertainty.
From equation (14), it's noteworthy that uncertainty is a linear function of the parameter
  2
    , we therefore consider changes in parameter 2 as a shock to uncertainty in the rest
of this section. Intuitively, a lower             increases new technology adoption through a higher
x; consequently, it becomes harder for Crusoe to predict next-period skill mix sA0 , and
uncertainty hence rises.
   Decentralization of the optimum.-- All agents start in the same state (u; A) and if
they all then take the same actions, the equilibrium is symmetric and it has only aggregate
risk. At each date the choice of x and the realization of " on the RHS of Eq. (13) would
then be the same for all agents and there would be no bene...t to ex-post reallocation
of h. Section 4 of Jovanovic (2006) analyzes the incentives of agents to deviate from
this situation by considering the option to "wait and see" how other ...rms fare with
the newly adopted technology. The decentralized version assumes that there are two
markets: A market for output, and a market for ...rm'
                                                    s shares ­the only assets available
to households. Firms maximize shareholder utility and still reject the option to wait and
see the realization of u0 before committing to A0 . It also assumes that agents are measure
zero, and that a deviation from equilibrium actions not change the aggregate state and,
particularly, the beliefs of the representative agent.7
     6
     This in contrast to the e¤ects of a mean-preserving spread in TFP shocks in Jones, Manuelli, Siu,
and Stacchetti (2005), who ...nd that through the orecautionary savings channel (which is absent here)
this can raise average growth under some conditions.
   7
     By contrast, in ...nite-player one-arm bandit models such as Bolton and Harris (1999) and Keller,
Rady and Cripps (2005), a player'   s actions do a¤ect the beliefs of others, and a player takes the reactions
of others into account. In both these models the unknown state is binary and player types remain the



                                                         13
3.2     Growth Distribution
Suppose that C (y p ; ) consists entirely of foregone output. As Appendix 1 also shows,
the log of measured output then is,

                               lnyt = A                     2 2
                                                             ut            (1       )2 u2
                                                                                        t                    (15)
                                            2                        2
                                      = A0 + xt                    u2
                                                                    t,

where       is given in Eq. (12).8 Because ut is stationary, lny is trend-stationary; the trend
and the long-run rate of output growth is x. Growth can be expressed as,

                           gt+1    lnyt+1           lnyt = x                 u2
                                                                              t+1     u2
                                                                                       t :                   (16)

Eq. (16) shows that growth is driven not just by the adoption of new technology, x; but
                             s skill gap u2
also by the changes in Crusoe'            t+1                         u2
                                                                       t . On the one hand, a decrease in the
skill gap stimulates growth. On the other hand, adjusting h towards its technologically
ideal value is costly and will therefore take time, and output will fall sharply whenever an
unlucky draw of sA occurs. So we should expect the growth distribution to be negatively
skewed especially when         is large. This leads to the following proposition, proved in
Appendix 2.

Proposition 2 Conditional on initial output and technology level y0 and A0 , if "t follows
a normal distribution N (0; 2 ), the distribution of growth gt is left skewed and is expressed
as
                                                        2         2                         t
                      gt = x       Ct + 1                         t   + ( At        Bt )        u0   t   ;
where   t     N (0; 1) follows standard normal distribution and
                                     s
                                                     1     2t
                             At =      4 (1    2)             +1
                                                     1     2
                                     s
                                                     1     2t
                             Bt =      4 (1    2)
                                                     1     2

                                           t        2             t 1        2
                               Ct =            u0                       u0
                                       r
                                            1
                               u0 =             (lny0            A0 )2 :

same, both in the symmetric equilibria (which sometimes do exist) and asymmetric equilibria that can
Pareto dominate the symmetric outcome. In those models, however, there is no counterpart to our
variable u; indeed, u would become di¤erent for players that take di¤erent actions, and both u and A
would be di¤erent for those that choose a value for x di¤erent from that chosen by other players. Thus,
to analyze the possible existence and properties of asymmetric equilibria would require admitting the
distribution of types as the aggregate state.
   8
     In Sec. 4.2, we analyze the case when the output is measured by y p .


                                                            14
   Because t follows a normal distribution, 2t follows the chi-squared distribution with
the degree of freedom of one and gt therefore follows a noncentral chi-squared distribu-
tion.9 Since       > 0, the distribution of gt is negatively skewed. The following corollary
characterizes the ...rst two moments of the growth distribution, including mean, median,
variance and interquartile range (IQR).

Corollary 1 In equilibrium, the distribution of growth gt+1 satis...es,10

                                                                            2
                     E (gt+1 ) = x           Ct+1                 1
                                         2          2 2       2         2                                     t        2
                      V (gt+1 ) = 2          1                    +             ( At+1        Bt+1 )              u0
                                                                                   2
               M edian (gt+1 )       x       Ct+1     0:47             1
                                                          2                                              t
                  IQR (gt+1 )            1:22 1                       + 1:34 ( At             Bt )           u0 :

                                                                                                     2
If the parameter ratio r             satisfy r > [2 (1                      )     (1         )]          (1             ), mean and
median of the growth distribution are decreasing in uncertainty                                      whereas the variance
and IQR increase in uncertainty,

             @E (gt+1 )      @M edian (gt+1 )      @ V (gt+1 )      @IQR (gt+1 )
                        < 0,                  < 0;             > 0,              > 0:
                @                  @                   @               @
   As uncertainty rises, mean and median growth fall while the growth distribution be-
comes more dispersed. Intuitively, higher uncertainty raises the skill gap volatility. As a
result, it becomes harder for Crusoe to predict "ideal"skill and it'
                                                                   s more likely to generate
a even larger foregone output due to the skill mismatch in the next period (i.e., higher
chance of generating low growth). The future growth distribution therefore becomes more
left-skewed.
       However, we ...nd this argument holds if and only if the penalty for skill mismatch                                                     is
                                                                                                                                         2
su¢ ciently large, i.e., under our parameter restriction r                             > [2 (1           )         (1           )]            (1        )
where depends on r as shown in Eq. (10). In the limit when there is no penalty for skill
mismatch, ! 0, growth increases in as the investment x rises. Figure 6 visually illus-
                                                                                                                                     2
trates the parameter restrictions on r. The blue line plots r [2 (1                                  )        (1           )]            (1         )
                                                                                @E (gt+1 )
on r so that the E(g ) decreases in uncertainty ; i.e.,                            @
                                                                                             < 0, when the blue curve
is above zero and the opposite holds otherwise. Thus, uncertainty is contractionary if
the ratio of the penalty for skill mismatch over the cost of skill adjustment is 0.2%
or higher. In Section 3.3, we estimate the model using monthly industrial production
   9
    See details in https://mathworld.wolfram.com/NoncentralChi-SquaredDistribution.html
  10
    The exact closed-form expression of quantiles of noncentral chi-squared distribution does not exist,
we therefore use the approximation from Result 26.4.32 on page 942 of Abramowitz and Stegun (1948).


                                                     15
                         10 -3                    Param eter Restrictions
              4.5
                                                                -2
                                 r- [2(1- ) - (1- )](1- )
                4
                                                                                         Table 1
              3.5


                3


              2.5
                                                                                 J


                2


              1.5


                1


              0.5


                0


              -0.5
                     0             1          2             3              4         5       6         7

                                                                r= /                               10 -3



Figure 6: Parameter Restrictions for Uncertainty Impacts on Mean Growth. Note: the
blue line portrarys r [2 (1      ) (1      )] 2 (1     ) over r = = . The red and grey dashed lines
indicate the value of r used in Jovanovic (2006) and in Table 1 of the paper.


and ...nd that this restriction holds (portrayed in dashed grey vertical line). Similarly,
Jovanovic (2006) estimated the model using annual GDP per capita, and this restriction
also holds (portrayed by point J on the dashed red vertical line).
    In the long run as t ! 1, the growth distribution doesn't depend on the initial values
of u0 and measures of centrality and dispersion of the growth distribution are bounded as
long as ut is stationary. The following corollary summarizes this ...nding.

Corollary 2 When t ! 1, the (long run) distribution of growth gt does not depend on
the initial condition u0 and satis...es

                                                                           2 2
                                                  gt = x              x2     t                             (17)

The ...rst two moments of the growth distribution are bounded in the limit and satisfy the




                                                                 16
following expressions if and only if           < 1;

                                                                                2
                                     lim E (g ) = x                     1
                                     t!1
                                                                2           2 2     2
                                     lim V (g ) = 2                 1
                                     t!1
                                                                                        2
                             lim M edian (g )              x        0:47    1
                             t!1
                                                                                2
                                 lim IQR (g )              1:22         1               :
                                t!1

       Growth-at-Risk (GaR).-- Following Adrian et al. (2018), the Growth-at-Risk (GaR)
at time t is de...ned as the lower 5th percentile of the growth distribution gt+1 . Because
gt+1 follows a noncentral chi-squared distribution, its 5th percentile can be expressed
approximately as

                                                       2                                             t
                t    x       Ct+1     3:84     1                    1:65 ( At+1             Bt+1 )       u0 :        (18)

In equilibrium, GaR decreases in uncertainty ( );

                                          @ t
                                               < 0:
                                           @
Consistent with the empirical ...ndings, larger uncertainty is associated with higher down-
side risk.

3.3       Impact of Uncertainty on Growth
Parameter choice.-- The parameters are                      ;       and     . We cannot identify                ; ;and
separately, only (       ;   ). Therefore we set           = 1. Table 1 reports the parameter estimates
of the baseline model.11



                                    Table 1 ­Parameter Estimates

                                             0:95     13; 573        83

In order to capture the transitory impact of uncertainty as in the empirical section, we
restrict parameters so that the uncertainty shock does not have a permanent e¤ect on the
distribution of the growth rate. More speci...cally, we set the discount rate at                                  = 0:95
  11
    These estimates are similar to those in Jovanovic (2006, Table 1) which had = 85,                       = 16733, where
the model was estimated using GDP per capita, instead of industrial production.




                                                       17
and jointly estimate the parameters ( ; ) to target the annualized long-run mean and
standard deviation of the growth rate which are set to be 2% and 4:5%, respectively or,12



                                lim E (gt+1 ) = x    x2 = 2%, and                                   (19)
                               t!1
                                  p             p
                             lim V (gt+1 ) =      2 x2 = 4:5%:
                             t!1

       We now examine the impact of uncertainty on growth in the model. Starting with
   = 1; we change          according to Eq. (14) to rise uncertainty               by 15% and 30%,
respectively, while adjusting ( ; ) accordingly in each case to meet the target (19). In
Sec. 4.1, by contrast, we shall introduce a two-state Markov process for and consider
uncertainty shocks as occasional changes in while keeping ( ; ) ...xed. A 15% increase
in uncertainty corresponds to a one-standard-deviation increase in JLN uncertainty.
       We simulate the model for 60 periods and compute the changes in growth relative to the
case when is ...xed at 1. Figure 7 depicts the response of median growth in the top panel
, interquartile range in the middle panel and 5th percentile (GaR) in the bottom panel to
a unexpected increase in uncertainty at time 0. The blue line depicts the case with small
uncertainty (15% increase in ) while the red line reports results with large uncertainty
(30% increase in ). The dotted black line depicts the data counterpart reported in Figure
2. Similar to the empirical evidence, an increase in uncertainty is associated with lower
median growth, higher interquartile range, and lower Growth-at-Risk. Quantitatively, our
model suggests that one standard deviation increase in uncertainty immediately results in
a 2% decline in median growth, a 2% increase in the growth dispersion and a 4% decline
in GaR. Compared to the data, our model ...ts the impact response well but underpredicts
(overpredicts) the median and GaR (interquartile range) in the long terms.13 This suggests
the e¤ect of uncertainty is more persistent in the data.
    Figure 8 depicts the response of various quantiles of the expected growth distribution
to a 15% increase in uncertainty. Consistent with the empirical evidence reported in Figure
3, the response of the expected growth is highly nonlinear: an increase in uncertainty is
associated with a larger decrease in the lower tail of the growth distribution whereas it
has much smaller impact on the upper tail. Quantitatively, a 15% increase in uncertainty
results in 3% decrease in 25th percentile of the expected growth distribution but only
  12
     The targets are calculated as the historical mean and standard deviation of annual log di¤erences in
US industrial production from 1973:01 to 2018:12.
  13
     One reason that the model doesn'   t match the empirical impulse responses well could be due to the
nonparametric nature of local projections which are known to behave erratically at longer horizons in the
conditional mean setting. See Barnichon and Brownlees (2019).


                                                   18
                                                          Median




                Growth Rate (%)
                                     0



                                  -2



                                  -4
                                         0   10   20         30         40         50             60


                                                   Interquartile Range
                   Growth Rate (%)


                                     4
                                                                        Small Uncertainty (15%)
                                     2                                  Large Uncertainty (30%)
                                                                        Data
                                     0

                                         0   10   20         30         40         50             60


                                                       5th Percentile
                Growth Rate (%)




                                     0

                                  -2

                                  -4

                                  -6


                                         0   10   20         30         40         50             60
                                                           M onth




Figure 7: Uncertainty and Growth. Note: this ...gure depicts the response of median growth in
the top panel , interquartile range in the middle panel and 5th percentile (GaR) in the bottom panel to
an unexpected 15% (blue line) and 30% increase (red line) in uncertainty at time 0. The dashed black
line is the empirical estimates from the baseline quantile regression described in the texts.


contributes to a 1% decline of the 75th percentile.

3.4     Occupational and job-to-job ows
One interpretation of h is that of organization capital in the sense of Prescott and Visscher
(1980) in which a new technology has an unpredictable task-requirement coe¢ cients.
In that model labor is heterogeneous in its aptitude to perform the tasks well, and a
realization of x"t+1 on the RHS of Eq. (13) would be interpreted as the change in the task
requirements of the newly adopted technology, and this would call forth some adjustment
of workers across tasks. With x" being identical across ...rms, the resulting adjustment of
h would be purely internal to a ...rm, and could be seen as occupational switching by the
...rm's employees.
     One can speculate on what the model would produce if, on the RHS of Eq. (13), "t+1
was allowed to di¤er across ...rms. As a result, ut+1 would then also di¤er across ...rms
and would imply a coexistence of heterogeneous technologies in a putty-clay framework.


                                                           19
                   Response to 15% increase in Uncertainty (Model)                                Response to 15% increase in Uncertainty (Data)
                   1                                                                             2


                                                                                                 1
                   0
                                                                                                 0


                   -1                                                                            -1
 Growth Rate (%)




                                                                               Growth Rate (%)
                                                                                                 -2
                   -2
                                                                                                 -3


                   -3                                                                            -4
                                                     5 percentile                                                                   5 percentile
                                                     25 percentile                               -5                                 25 percentile
                   -4                                Median                                                                         Median
                                                     75 percentile                               -6                                 75 percentile
                                                     95 percentile                                                                  95 percentile
                   -5                                                                            -7
                        0   10    20     30     40         50        60                               0   10    20      30     40         50        60
                                       Month                                                                          Month


Figure 8: Asymmetric impact of uncertainty on growth. Note: the left panel depicts the
response of various quantiles of the expected growth distribution to a 15% increase in uncertainty. The
right panel reports the the empirical estimates from the baseline quantile regression described in the
texts.


These include a labor market (Johansen (1959)) and ...rm-speci...c shocks to the cost of
investment (Campbell (1998) and Gilchrist and Williams (2000)). These features would
call forth for reallocation of labor among ...rms and would show up as job-to-job ows.
                   In sum, we shall think of occupational mobility and job-to-job mobility as proxies
for the size of the skill gap, and uncertainty in these measures will be measured by
the volatility of these measures. In this subsection, then, we empirically establish the
connection between these two measures of labor reallocation ­ occupational and job-to-
job mobility ­and JLN macro uncertainty that is directly estimated by the volatility of
the forecast errors of macro series.
   We combine two data sources on labor mobility. The ...rst data set is from Kambourov
and Manovskii (2008); it reports occupational mobility at the 3-digit level between 1968
and 1997. We start the analysis in 1971, so as to match the start date of our uncertainty
sample. The second data set is job-to-job mobility described in Hyatt, McEntarfer, McK-
inney, Tibbets and Walton (2014), which reports the sector-level job-to-job separation
 ows after 2000. We aggregated the job separations over all sectors.
                   For each measure, we compute its volatility as the 5-year rolling-window standard
deviation. Figure 9 reports the scatterplot of these two measures of job mobility volatility


                                                                          20
                                                              Uncertainty & Volatility of Job Mobility
                                                           1971-1997                                                                           2000-2018
                                          0.7                                                                                 0.7




                                                                                  Volatility of Job-to Job Separation Flows
                                          0.6                                                                                 0.6
       Occupational Mobility Volatility




                                                Slope = 0.10 (2.82)                                                                 Slope = 0.09 (7.93)
                                          0.5                                                                                 0.5
                                                Correlation = 48%                                                                   Correlation = 69%

                                          0.4                                                                                 0.4


                                          0.3                                                                                 0.3


                                          0.2                                                                                 0.2


                                          0.1                                                                                 0.1


                                           0                                                                                   0
                                                -1        0           1    2                                                        -1     0     1        2    3   4
                                                       Macro Uncertatiny                                                                   Macro Uncertatiny

Figure 9: Uncertainty and volatility of occupational mobility. Note: this ...gure reports the
scatterplot of the 5-year rolling-window volatility of the measure of occupational mobility from Kam-
bourov and Manovskii (2008) against JLN macro uncertainty in the left panel. The right panel reports
the scatter plot of 5-year rolling-window volatility of the job-to-job separation   ow from Hyatt et al.
(2014) against JLN macro uncertainty. In each panel, the OLS slope is reported, and the associated
robust t-statistics are reported in parenthesis. The sample is annual for the left panel and is quarterly
for the right panel.


against macro uncertainty. For both measures, JLN macro uncertainty and job mobility
volatility are highly correlated, and we ...nd a statistically signi...cant positive relationship
between the two. The right panel shows that JLN uncertainty is as high as 69% correlated
with occupational mobility volatility, as measured by job-to-job separation ows. Results
for pre-2000 sample using the occupation mobility measure are similar: despite a lower
sample frequency for the pre-1997 sample, the JLN uncertainty is still 48% correlated
with volatility of the occupational mobility from Kambourov and Manovskii (2008).

3.5                     Capacity Utilization
King and Rebelo (1999) argue that capacity utilization combined with positive technology
shocks yields utilization in generating realistic variation in output. This ...ts our model
in which there never is technological regress because x is always positive. The model has
no employed resources or spare capacity, but we may assume that the skill gap ut is an


                                                                                21
index of the fraction of capital ­human or physical ­that does not meet the needs of the
date-t technology.
      To do so, we return again to Prescott and Visscher (1980) whose model includes three
tasks; two of the tasks are production tasks, while the third is a training task in which the
...rm is testing workers and trying to ...nd out which of the two productive tasks a worker is
better suited for. If adopting a new technology garbles some of the workers'task-speci...c
abilities, then those workers would need to be re-tested and during the testing period
would not be employed on productive tasks. The larger the technological leap x, the
larger the fraction of workers whose abilities are garbled and then need re-testing. We
may thus think of the workers being tested as spare capacity.
      This interpretation of ut would also be in the general spirit of Ljungqvist and Sargent
(1988) explanation for high European unemployment in the last two decades of the 20th
century in which higher unemployment re    ected restructuring from manufacturing to
services, adoption of new information technologies, and globalization. And since Klein
and Su (1979) a number of studies show that capital and labor are utilized, by industries,
at approximately the same rate in short run, implying a positive correlation at high
frequencies between unemployment and spare capacity.
    From equation (15), detrended output in the model depends on the skill gap ut . While
it'
  s empirically challenging to directly estimate the skill gap in the data, the capacity
utilization rate ­ the ratio of actual output to the potential output ­ can be used to
test the relationship between u and growth. Monthly data on U.S. capacity utilization is
available at the FRED economic data maintained by the St. Louis Fed (series id TCU).
As before, we simulate the model using calibrated parameters reported in Table 1, and
calculate skill gap ut according to equation (13).14 We de...ne the capacity utilization as
1= jut j so that an increase in the skill gap leads to a fall in capacity utilization.
    Figure 10 plots relation between model-implied Growth-at-Risk and the capacity uti-
lization for the baseline model with        = 1. Consistent with the data, the downside risk of
the economy is much larger conditioning on small capacity utilization (i.e. large skill gap):
a small changes in ut can lead to drastic drop in growth-at-risk when capacity utilization
is one standard deviation below its mean. Similar to what we will ...nd with the VIX in
the next subsection, our baseline model produces a better ...t for the relation observed in
the data than the OLS model.
 14                                                     t
      We consider the mean ut at each t so that ut =        u0 .




                                                   22
                                                 2


                                                 1



                 Growth at Risk (standardized)
                                                 0


                                                 -1


                                                 -2


                                                 -3


                                                 -4
                                                                                               Data
                                                 -5                                            Empirical Regression
                                                                                               Model
                                                 -6
                                                   -4   -3          -2           -1        0       1        2         3
                                                                  Capacity Utilization (standardized)

Figure 10: Capacity Utilization and Growth-at-Risk. Note: The red (yellow) reports model-
generated contempraneous relationship between capacity utilization and Growth-at-Risk under OLS re-
gression and our baseline model, respectively. Both series are standardized to have zero mean and unit
variance. The blue dots depict the empirical counterpart.


3.6      Growth-at-Risk, the value of options and the VIX
For the price of a representative security p (u; A) we have the Lucas (1978) equation
                          Z
                                c (u; A)
             p (u; A) =                     [c (u0 ; A + x) + p (u0 ; A + x)] dF (") ; (20)
                             c (u0 ; A + x)
where u0 = u + x"                                       . Although preferences being log, prices will uctuate because
consumption growth is autocorrelated. If low consumption today means high consumption
growth, a disaster is accompanied by very low asset prices. A put option15 is more valuable
in such states, i.e., more likely to be "in the money."The opposite holds for call options.
Therefore today'  s prices of those two derivative assets should be a good signal of Growth-
at-Risk. Taking today' s price as the strike price for both assets,
                          Z
                 put
               p      =                      (p (u; A) p (u0 ; A + x)) dF (")                                             (21)
                           p(u0 ;A+x) p(u;A)
                          Z
                 call
               p      =                      (p (u0 ; A + x) p (u; A)) dF (") :                                           (22)
                                                             p(u0 ;A+x) p(u;A)

  15
    From Investopedia: A put option is an option contract giving the owner the right, but not the obliga-
tion, to sell a speci...ed amount of an underlying security at a speci...ed price within a speci...ed time frame.
.

                                                                                      23
The VIX index used in the empirical exercise contains put and call options on the in-
dividual ...rms in the S&P 500 index, and its price would reect idiosyncratic as well as
aggregate risk. The natural de...nition in our model is the sum of the prices of a call op-
tion and a put option with a strike price tomorrow equal to today'
                                                                 s price of the security
p (u; A),
                                     VIX (u; A)        pput + pcall :                              (23)

We simulate the model and calculate the price the security from equation (20), and price
of options and VIX according to equations (21) to (23) based on parameters reported in
Table 1. The calculated VIX is further standardized to have zero mean and unit variance
as in the empirical exercise.
       Two series are plotted in Figure 11: the red line portrays data regression slope of GaR
in the data on the VIX, while yellow lines depict model-generated VIX according equation
(23) against GaR from equation (18). It shows that an increase in the VIX decreases the
GaR in the model. This is consistent with the feature in the data that higher equity
price volatility magni...es the negative impact of uncertainty on IP growth. Compared
to a naive empirical linear regression, our model produces a better ...t for the empirical
relation between VIX and GaR.16

3.7       Long Run Growth Distribution
Based on equation (17), growth distribution follows a negative chi-squared distribution
in the long run. The top panel of Figure 12 depicts the simulated long run distribution
for di¤erent values of . We again use calibrated ( ; ) such that the mean and variance
of the long run distribution remain the same. It shows higher uncertainty leads to a
more negatively skewed distribution (portrayed by red bars) and lower 5th percentile (red
dashed line).
   The chi-squared distribution is well known as a light-tailed distribution whereas in the
traditional growth literature (e.g. Barro and Jin (2011)), the heavy-tailed distribution,
such as the Pareto Distribution, has been commonly used to calculate the tail risk. To
  16
    The baseline model produces a 38% smaller root-mean squared errors than OLS. The root-mean-
squared error (RMSE) is de...ned as
                                            v
                                            u     T
                                            u1 X
                                    RM SE = t
                                                             2
                                                     (^
                                                      yi yi )
                                               T i=1

where the "hat" refers to the estimated value of GaR at time t. We ...nd our model is able to outperform
a quadratic regression model too.



                                                  24
                                                2



                                                1


                Growth at Risk (standardized)
                                                0



                                                -1



                                                -2



                                                -3


                                                        Data
                                                -4
                                                        Em pirical Regression
                                                        M odel
                                                -5
                                                  -2   -1     0       1         2         3              4       5   6   7
                                                                          VIX (standardized)


Figure 11: Asset Volatility and Growth-at-Risk. Note: The yellow (purple) reports model-
generated contempraneous relationship between VIX and Growth-at-Risk under our baseline model and
empirical OLS. The blue dots depict the empirical relationship. Both VIX and GaR are standardized to
have zero mean and unit variance. The red line reports the OLS Estimate.


address this issue, we assume that in the long horizon, the growth distribution follows,


                                                                     gt = x              x2   2
                                                                                                  zt :

The variable zt 2 [0; 1) follows a Type-II Pareto Distribution with associated CDF,

                                                                  F (zt ) = 1        (1 + x)                 ;

where    is the shape parameter that governs the tail thickness.
   We randomly draw 10,000 zt from F (zt ) and numerically calculate                                                         by targeting
the lower 5th percentile to be the corresponding value in the calibrated Chi-squared
distribution with 2 = 1. The bottom panel of Figure 12 depicts the simulated growth
distribution using Pareto distribution with                                              = 2:83 (in red bars) against the baseline
growth distribution with chi-squared distribution. It shows that Pareto distribution has
a thicker tail than the Chi-squared distribution. Therefore, in order to generate the same
downside risk, measured by the lower 5th percentile, the growth distribution with Pareto
has much smaller mean growth (0:78%) than the chi-squared distribution (1:50%).

                                                                                    25
Figure 12: Simulated Long-run Growth Distribution. Note: the upper panel shows the sim-
ulated long-run growth distribution for small uncertainty (blue bars) and large uncertainty (red bars).
The lower panel shows the simulated long-run growth distribution with Pareto distribution (red bars)
and Chi-squared distribution (blue bars).


3.8        Technological commitment
It'
  s worth noting that the assumption of irreversible technological commitment is essential
to generate the negatively skewed growth distribution in equilibrium: output could fall
because of commitment to technology before an unfavorable shock " is realized. If a ...rm
could revert quickly and costlessly to technologies it used before, it would always use the
best technology up to date and output never declines. For example, Jovanovic and Rob
(1990) assume costless recall of past technologies.17 In contrast to our empirical evidence,
instead of having a left tail, the distribution of growth rates in their model exhibits a spike
at zero and a right tail. Therefore, we need at least partial technological commitment.
  17
       Recent related papers include Bardhi (2019) and Wong (2020).




                                                   26
4         Extensions of the model

The following subsections present three extensions. Sec. 4.1 considers a two-state Markov
process for ; so far, to derive the impact of uncertainty on growth, Sec. 3 starts with
    = 1 and then lowers it to 0:95 and 0:87, interpreting the change in               as permanent and
completely unexpected. Here, as in Bloom (2009), we shall model as a shock that follows
a two-state Markov process the parameters of which the agents understand. Predictably,
growth is slower when uncertainty is high but               is state independent, and it is the same
as it was in the constant- case.
    Sec. 4.2 changes the de...nition of measured output. So far we assumed that output,
y , was net output, which is potential output minus the adjustment cost of production.
One may ask whether this is the reasonable counterpart to the data, and how the results
change if we use y p instead of y: It turns out, however, that the theoretical predictions
are virtually the same due to the presence of foregone output from the skill gap.
   Finally, Sec. 4.3 analyzes Epstein-Zin preferences; the model so far used log prefer-
ences which are not ideal for explaining stock-price movements and the equity premium
puzzle. This seems relevant when analyzing the VIX. We indeed ...nd that our model un-
der recursive preferences is able to produce the same predictions from the baseline model
under standard choices of preference parameters while generating a more realistic VIX.

4.1          A two-state Markov process for
Instead of comparing long run growth for two di¤erent values of , we now follow Bloom
(2009, Eqs. 3.5 and 3.6) and imagine a two state symmetric Markov process for 2
f L ; H g with transition probabilities pi;j between the states i; j 2 fL, Hg. This allows us
to study the e¤ects of uncertainty shifts that are that agents expected to be temporary
(unless pi;i = 1).18
     The Bellman equation (7) now acquires a new state i 2 fL, Hg:
                    (               Z X                                !                          )
                                                                                             "
     Vi (u; A) = max lny (u; ; A) +          pi;j Vj (u + x"   ; A + x) dF                            :
                     x;                                                                       i
                                                      j
                                                                                                  (24)
Assume symmetry of the process so that pi;i = pj;j = p. In an abbreviated form Eq. (24)
then reads                                        Z
                            Vi = max lny +            pVi0 + (1    p) Vj0 dFi ;                   (25)
                                   x;

    18
         Other related papers are Gourio (2012), Gabaix (2012), and Wachter (2013).


                                                      27
                      "
where Fi = F           i
                           ; and where primes denote next period values of a variable.
       The optimal policies are the same as in the constant-                                                          case: The e¤ect on x of a
temporary reduction in             is identical to its e¤ect in Eq. (8) where it is assumed to be
permanent:

Proposition 3 The optimal x is state-dependent; for i 2 fL, Hg we have
                                                                                1
                                                 xi =             2
                                                                                                     :                                                   (26)
                                                                  i   (1            ) (1         )
The optimal           does not depend on the state, and is the same as in the constant- case:

                                                          L   =       H    = (1            ) u;                                                          (27)

where       remains the same as constant- case and is expressed by (10).

The proof is in Appendix 3. Proposition 3 also shows that the adjustment                                                                           indicating
the fraction of the skill gap that the agent closes is the same the one from as constant-
case. As a result, the agent chooses the same amount of investment in skills, whether
is expected to be changed or not in the future.19
       Proposition 1 is a special case that obtains when p = 1 or, equivalently, when                                                                L   =   H.

Similar to the case where              i   is ...xed over time, the conditional growth distribution gi is
a linear combination of a normal distribution and a chi-squared. We summarize our key
...ndings in the following corollary also proved in Appendix 3:

Corollary 3 At state i 2 fL; H g growth equals
                                                              2                                                            2 2
                            gi = x i +            1                   u2 + 2               uxi       i                x2
                                                                                                                       i   i   :                         (28)

where
                                                 1
                                 N (0; 1)               2
                                                          and
                                                          + (1     )2       =
                                                 2
Conditional on u, the distribution of growth g a is left skewed and its mean and skewness
satisfy
                                                                                                     2
                                           E (gi ju) = xi +                            1                     u2            i
                                                                                                         2
                              Skewness (gi ju) =                            2:82           1                      i   <0                                 (29)

where the uncertainty at state i satis...es
                                            x2    2
                                                                                                                                   1
                  i        var (u) =         i
                                                      2
                                                          = (1                  )2 1             2           2
                                                                                                                 (1        )2          i
                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                               :         (30)
                                           1
  19
    This is due to the assumption of log utility. Section 4.3 shall show that under a more general recursive
preferences, varies with current skill gap u, instead of being a constant.

                                                                           28
                           Simulated Growth Distribution, Two-state Markov
                   0.3
                              Low Uncertainty State
                              High Uncertainty State
                  0.25



                   0.2



                  0.15



                   0.1



                  0.05



                     0
                      -8     -6      -4      -2        0   2       4     6    8



Figure 13: Conditional growth distribution. Note: this ...gure plots the simulated growth distri-
bution for = 0.95 (blue line) and = 0.87 (red line) conditional on u = 1. We draw 5000      randomly
from the standard normal distribution, and generate gL and gH according to Eq.( 28).


   Equation (29) shows that the higher uncertainty             i   induces a more negative-skewed
distribution in equilibrium; and according to equation (30), state with high uncertainty
corresponds to the state with low i . Fig. 13 depicts the simulated distribution under low
uncertainty state where we set       L    = 0:95 and high uncertainty state where we set          H   =
0:87, conditional on u = 1. We draw 5,000 randomly from standard normal distribution,
and generate gL and gH according to Eq. 28. The red line shows the simulated conditional
PDF of gH conditional on u = 1 and the blue line shows the counterpart PDF of gL . As
shown in the ...gure, higher uncertainty induces a more negatively-skewed distribution and
the distribution under the red curve exhibits a fatter left tail than the blue curve.
   While we have shown analytically that state with higher uncertainty is associated with
a more left-skewed conditional growth distribution, it is still of interest to study impact
of the uncertainty on the unconditional growth distribution. While there is no closed-
form solution to the unconditional growth distribution, we simulate the model for T = 10
periods and calculate the evolution of the growth distribution. More speci...cally, we start
with u0 = 1 and 0 = L = 0:95. For each t = 1; 2:::; T , we draw 5000 randomly
from standard normal distribution and calculate the growth distribution according to Eq.
28 according to the state at time t. The state stays unchanged, i.e.               t   =   t 1,   with


                                                   29
probability p and ut+1 is updated according to equation (13).
   We set p = 0:71 following Bloom (2009b) so that the half-life of an uncertainty shock
on average is 2 months. We are thus looking at short-run changes in uncertainty. Figure 14
depicts the simulated distribution for t = 1; 4; 10. The top panel of the ...gure shows that
the simulated economy is changed from the low uncertainty state to the high uncertainty
state at t = 4. As a result, compared to the growth distribution at t = 1 (blue curve), the
growth distribution at the time of the uncertainty shock (red curve) immediately becomes
more dispersed and more negatively skewed. From time t = 5; 6:::; 10 sans uncertainty
shock, the growth distribution becomes less and less negatively skewed as the average skill
gap u decreases.

                                                                  -1
                                         Realized Path of              , p = 0.71
              1.15




               1.1




              1.05
                     1    2          3        4      5        6              7      8       9   10
                                                       t
                                   Simulated Grow th Distribution, Markov
               0.4
                          t=1
                          t=4
               0.3
                          t = 10

               0.2

               0.1

                 0
                         -4              -2           0                  2              4       6
                                                  Grow th Rate(%)

Figure 14: Simulated growth distribution. Note: this ...gure plots the simulated evolution of
(top panel) and the growth distribution (bottom panel) at time 1, 4, and 10 when the economy starts at
u = 1 and = 0:95. For each time t, we draw 5000 randomly from the standard normal distribution,
and generate gL and gH according to Eq. (28).


   Thus the ...ndings in Sec. 3 that were based on the constant- model and related to
permanent changes in ; still hold up here in the sense that the rise in uncertainty at date
4, now perceived to be fairly temporary, still leads to a thicker lower tail of the growth
distribution and to a much smaller impact on its upper tail.


                                                         30
4.2       Potential output versus net output
In our baseline model, forgone output C (y p ; ) captures the cost of adjustment of skill h.
The closeness of u to zero can be viewed as a form of intangible capital. Rapid adjustment
of technology causes this intangible capital to depreciate, and C (y p ; ) can be interpreted
as unmeasured investment.20
   We now show that our analytical results on the impact of uncertainty are not driven
by the presence of C (y p ; ); the model'
                                        s implications remain qualitatively the same when
potential output, instead of net output, is used to measure the economic growth.
       First, according to Eqs. (3) and (5), potential output y p can be expressed as

                                  y p = exp A                        (u             )2
                                                                 2

                                         = y exp                (1            )2 u2
                                                            2
Then the log of potential output is
                                         p
                                      lnyt = lnyt +                  (1            )2 u2
                                                                2
                                                                                2 2
                                            = A0 + xt                            ut ;
                                                                          2
where the second line follows from equation (15) and equation (12). Then the growth of
y p can be expressed as
                           p          p            p                           2
                          gt+1     lnyt+1       lnyt =x                            u2
                                                                                    t+1      u2
                                                                                              t ;
                                                                         2
and the following result is proved in the Appendix 4:
                                                                  p
Proposition 4 Conditional on initial output and technology level y0 and A0 , if "t follows
                                  2                                  p
a normal distribution N (0;           ), the distribution of growth gt is left-skewed and expressed
as
                     p             2                        2        2                            t p
                    gt =x               Ct + 1                       t       ;
                                                                         + ( At            Bt )    u0 t
                               2
where      t   N (0; 1) follows standard normal distribution and At ; Bt , and Ct are the same
as in proposition 2, and                        r
                                                    2
                                       up
                                        0   =           2
                                                                p
                                                            (lny0             A0 )2 :

  20
    McGrattan and Prescott (2014) and Bhandari and McGrattan (2018) use data from U.S. national
accounts and business census data and estimate a ratio of intangible to total assets in private business
that is close to 60 percent, and that intangible are especially large for high-technology sectors that have
important input-output linkages with other sectors. Table 2 of Chappell and Ja¤e (2018) reports results
for New Zealand.

                                                        31
                                                                                        p
    Therefore, similar to the net output, the distribution of the total output growth gt
is also left-skewed and the following corollary suggests that our results remain the same
qualitatively if total output is used.

Corollary 4 In equilibrium, the moments of distribution of growth g p and the growth-at-
       p
risk       satisfy,
           p                  p             p              p                                 p
       @E gt+1      @M edian gt+1      @ V gt+1      @IQR gt+1      @
               < 0;               < 0;          > 0;           > 0;                              <0
         @                @               @             @           @

4.3        Recursive Preferences
The model so far used log preferences for analytical tractability. However, this assumption
generates counterfactual stock-price movements (i.e. the equity premium puzzle). In this
section, we extend the model using Epstein and Zin (2013) recursive preferences. The
Bellman equation (7) now becomes
                           "                    Z                                                1   #11
                                                                                         "       1
 VEZ (u; A) = max y (u; ; A)1             +         VEZ (u + x"         ; A + x)1   dF
                      x;

                                                                                                      (31)
                                               22
where y (u; ; A) = exp A 2 (u         )     2
                                                  , is the risk aversion coe¢ cient, and
the parameter is the inverse of the elasticity of substitution (IES).
   Because recursive preferences are homothetic, the following proposition shows that the
optimal investments (x; ) are independent of the productivity A.

Proposition 5 The value function can be expressed as

                                          VEZ (u; A) = eA v (u)

and x and        are independent of A.

   While there are no general closed-form solutions to VEZ (u; A) for all pairs ( ; ), the
following corollary shows that in a special case where              =    = 1, the log of the EZ value
function satis...es equation (11).

Corollary 5 When               =   = 1,
                                                    A        1
                               lnVEZ (u; A) =                  (1   ) u2 + J
                                                1            2

where J satis...es equation (12).

                                                        32
   Parameter choice.-- The parameters of this extended model are                                             ; ; ;   and :
Table 2 reports the parameter estimates.



               Table 2 ­Parameters Estimates under Recursive Preferences

                                                                1
                                         0:95     5     0:95          8     21

To solve the model, we follow the baseline model and set parameters ( ; ) to target the
long-run mean and standard deviations of the growth rate valued at 2% and 4:5%, re-
spectively. For other parameters, we set the risk aversion parameter to be                                     = 5, and set
1= , the elasticity of intertemporal substitution (IES), to be 0:95, which is in line with
macro studies such as Hall (1988). As in the baseline model, we express the optimal skill
investment in terms of         EZ   (u) so that       EZ   (u) = [1            EZ     (u)] u, and numerically calcu-
late the policy functions (xEZ (u) ;            EZ   (u)) based on the numerical procedure described
in the Appendix.
    Figure (15) shows the optimal xEZ (u) and                    EZ   (u). Di¤erent from the baseline model
featuring log utility where x and               are constant, optimal investment decisions xEZ (u)
and   EZ   (u) under recursive preferences now vary with the skill gap u. Under the current
parametrization, the investment in technology x declines as the skill gap rises while the
fraction of skill gap invested in skill, 1 EZ , increases in u.

   Turning to the growth, the log of measured output satis...es,

                                                        2   2                           2
                               lnyt = A                 EZ ut         (1            EZ )    u2
                                                                                             t
                                              2         2
                                               Xt
                                                                                2
                                        = A0 +    xEZ;s                   EZ;t ut ,
                                                     s=1

                 1      2                        2
where   EZ;t     2      EZ;t   + (1        EZ;t )     . Therefore, the log growth can be expressed as,

                                                                              2                        2
                     gt+1      lnyt+1     lnyt = xEZ;t+1              EZ;t+1 ut+1       +        EZ;t ut :            (32)

where the skill gap follows ut+1 =              EZ ut   + xEZ;t+1           t+1 .     While there is no closed-form
solution to the growth distribution (32) under recursive preferences, we start with u0 = 1
and simulate the model for T = 10 periods using the parameterization for Figure (15).
For each t = 1; 2:::; T , we draw 5000 randomly from standard normal distribution and
calculate the growth distribution according to Eq. 32 for low uncertainty where we set
  = 0:95 and high uncertainty where we set                      = 0:87.


                                                           33
                                                       Optim al 1- EZ
                        0.36

                        0.34

                        0.32

                         0.3
                                   0.1       0.2      0.3      0.4      0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8
                                                                u
                                                           Optim al x
                                                                     EZ

                        0.14

                        0.12

                         0.1

                        0.08
                                   0.1       0.2      0.3      0.4      0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8
                                                                u


Figure 15: Policy Functions under Recursive Preferences. Note: this ...gure plots the optimal
policy function x and       under recursive preferences over the grid of skill gap u. See texts for the parameter
choices.


                   Simulated Growth Distribution at T = 10, Recursive Preferences
                    1.4
                                   Low Uncertainty
                                   High Uncertainty
                    1.2


                        1


                    0.8


                    0.6


                    0.4


                    0.2


                        0
                         -4        -3        -2       -1        0         1    2      3     4
                                                      Growth Rate(%)

Figure 16: Simulated growth distribution under Recursive Preferences. Note: this ...gure
plots the simulated growth distribution time 10 when the economy starts at u = 1. For each time t,
we draw 5000 randomly from the standard normal distribution, and generate g according to Eq. (32)
under high and low uncertainty, respectively.


                                                              34
    Figure 16 plots the simulated growth distribution at time T = 10. Similar to the base-
line model, the growth distribution is negatively skewed. Compared to the distribution
under low uncertainty (portrayed by the blue curve), high uncertainty (portrayed by the
red curve) induces a more dispersed and more negative skewed growth distribution.
   Asset Pricing.-- For the price of a representative security p (u; A), the Lucas (1978)
equation (20) now becomes
                        Z
                                                                        "
             p (u; A) =   M (u; A) [c (u0 ; A + x) + p (u0 ; A + x)] dF    ;

where the stochastic discount factor satis...es,
                                                                                 !
                     y (u0 ; A + x)          VEZ (u + x"    ; A + x)1
      M (u; A) =                         R                                           :
                        y (u; A)           VEZ (u + x"   ; A + x)1 dF        "



The model'
         s VIX can be then calculated based on equation (23). We use the same
parameterization for Figure (15) and simulate the model for T = 508 periods, which
corresponds to the sample size of our empirical exercise. The model'
                                                                   s VIX is further
normalized to have zero mean and unit variance over the simulation sample.
   We ...nd that the more general recursive preferences improve model's ...t to the data.
The correlation between the model implied VIX and the data is 31%, increasing from
18% under log utility. In short, our model under recursive preferences is able to generate
the same implications from the baseline model while matching the mean and variance of
long-run growth and generating more realistic VIX under standard choices of preference
parameters ( ; ) from macro literature.


5    Conclusion

In this paper, we documented several stylized facts on the real e¤ects of uncertainty. First,
we showed that higher economic uncertainty is closely associated with a more dispersed
growth distribution. Second, we found that the response of IP growth to an increase in
uncertainty is highly nonlinear and asymmetric. Third, we presented evidence that higher
asset volatility magni...es the negative impact of uncertainty on growth.
    We then presented and estimated a model in which growth and uncertainty are both
endogenous. Rapid adoption of new technology leads in equilibrium to higher economic
uncertainty that may cause measured productivity to decline for a while. The model
matches several key features in the data. The equilibrium growth distribution is nega-
tively skewed and higher uncertainty leads to higher downside risk, and to more labor

                                             35
reallocation among jobs and among occupations. The model also generates a negative
nonlinear relation between asset price volatility and Growth-at-Risk, as observed in the
data.


References
Abramowitz, Milton and Irene A Stegun, Handbook of mathematical functions with
   formulas, graphs, and mathematical tables, Vol. 55, US Government printing o¢ ce,
   1948.

Adrian, Tobias, Federico Grinberg, Nellie Liang, and Sheheryar Malik, The
   term structure of growth-at-risk, International Monetary Fund, 2018.

    , Nina Boyarchenko, and Domenico Giannone, "Vulnerable growth,"American
    Economic Review, 2019, 109 (4), 1263­89.

Alfaro, Ivan, Nicholas Bloom, and Xiaoji Lin, "The Real and Financial Impact of
    Uncertainty Shocks,"in "Stanford Institute for Theoretical Economics (SITE) 2016
    Workshop. Retrieved from https://site. stanford. edu/sites/default/...les/alfaro. pdf"
    2016.
Angelini, Giovanni, Emanuele Bacchiocchi, Giovanni Caggiano, and Luca
   Fanelli, "Uncertainty across volatility regimes," Journal of Applied Econometrics,
   2019.
Arellano, Cristina, Yan Bai, and Patrick Kehoe, "Financial Markets and Fluctua-
    tions in Uncertainty,"January 2011. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Research
    Department Sta¤ Report 466.

Baker, Scott R and Nicholas Bloom, "Does uncertainty reduce growth? Using dis-
   asters as natural experiments,"Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Re-
   search 2013.
    ,      , and Steven J Davis, "Measuring economic policy uncertainty," The Quar-
    terly Journal of Economics, 2016, 131 (4), 1593­1636.
Bardhi, Arjada, "Evaluation and In  uence through Selective Learning of Attributes,"
   Available at SSRN 3468546, 2019.
Barnichon, Regis and Christian Brownlees, "Impulse response estimation by smooth
   local projections," Review of Economics and Statistics, 2019, 101 (3), 522­530.

Barro, Robert J and Tao Jin, "On the size distribution of macroeconomic disasters,"
    Econometrica, 2011, 79 (5), 1567­1589.

Basu, Susanto and Brent Bundick, "Uncertainty shocks in a model of e¤ective de-
   mand," Econometrica, 2017, 85 (3), 937­958.


                                           36
Berger, David, Ian Dew-Becker, and Stefano Giglio, "Uncertainty shocks as
    second-moment news shocks," The Review of Economic Studies, 2020, 87 (1), 40­76.

Bernanke, Ben S., "Irreversibility, Uncertainty, and Cyclical Investment," The Quar-
   terly Journal of Economics, 1983, 98 (1), 85­106.

Bhandari, Anmol and Ellen R McGrattan, "Sweat equity in US private business,"
   Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2018.

Bianchi, Francesco, Cosmin L Ilut, and Martin Schneider, "Uncertainty shocks,
    asset supply and pricing over the business cycle," The Review of Economic Studies,
    2017, 85 (2), 810­854.
    , Howard Kung, and Mikhail Tirskikh, "The origins and e¤ects of macroeco-
    nomic uncertainty,"Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2018.
Bloom, Nicholas, "The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks," Econometrica, May 2009, 77
    (3), 623­85.

    , "The impact of uncertainty shocks," econometrica, 2009, 77 (3), 623­685.
    , Max Floetotto, Nir Jaimovich, Itay Saporta-Eksten, and Stephen J
    Terry, "Really uncertain business cycles," Econometrica, 2018, 86 (3), 1031­1065.
Bolton, Patrick and Christopher Harris, "Strategic experimentation," Economet-
    rica, 1999, 67 (2), 349­374.
Caldara, Dario, Cristina Fuentes-Albero, Simon Gilchrist, and Egon Zakra-
    jsek, "The macroeconomic impact of ...nancial and uncertainty shocks," European
    Economic Review, 2016, 88, 185­207.

Campbell, Je¤rey R, "Entry, exit, embodied technology, and business cycles," Review
   of economic dynamics, 1998, 1 (2), 371­408.

Carriero, Andrea, Todd E Clark, and Massimiliano Marcellino, "Measuring un-
    certainty and its impact on the economy," Review of Economics and Statistics, 2018,
    100 (5), 799­815.
Chalkley, Martin and In Ho Lee, "Learning and asymmetric business cycles," Review
   of Economic Dynamics, 1998, 1 (3), 623­645.
Chappell, Nathan and Adam Ja¤e, "Intangible investment and ...rm performance,"
   Review of Industrial Organization, 2018, 52 (4), 509­559.

Dew-Becker, Ian, Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, and Andrea Vedolin, "Skewness and
   time-varying second moments in a nonlinear production network: theory and evi-
   dence,"2020.




                                          37
Epstein, Larry G and Stanley E Zin, "Substitution, risk aversion and the temporal
    behavior of consumption and asset returns: A theoretical framework,"in "Handbook
    of the fundamentals of ...nancial decision making: Part i," World Scienti...c, 2013,
    pp. 207­ 239.
Fajgelbaum, Pablo D, Edouard Schaal, and Mathieu Taschereau-Dumouchel,
    "Uncertainty traps," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2017, 132 (4), 1641­1692.
Fernández-Villaverde, Jesús, Juan F. Rubio-Ramírez Pablo Guerrón-
    Quintana, and Martin Uribe, "Risk Matters: The Real E¤ects of Volatility
    Shocks," American Economic Review, October 2011, 6 (101), 2530­61.

Gabaix, Xavier, "Variable rare disasters: An exactly solved framework for ten puzzles
   in macro-...nance," The Quarterly journal of economics, 2012, 127 (2), 645­700.
Gilchrist, Simon and John C Williams, "Putty-clay and investment: a business cycle
    analysis," Journal of Political Economy, 2000, 108 (5), 928­960.
    , Jae W. Sim, and Egon Zakrajsek, "Uncertainty, Financial Frictions, and Invest-
    ment Dynamics," June 2010. Society for Economic Dynamics 2010 Meeting Papers
    No.1285.

Gourio, Francois, "Disaster risk and business cycles," American Economic Review,
   2012, 102 (6), 2734­66.

Gulen, Huseyin and Mihai Ion, "Policy uncertainty and corporate investment," The
   Review of Financial Studies, 2016, 29 (3), 523­564.

Hall, Robert E, "Intertemporal substitution in consumption," Journal of political econ-
    omy, 1988, 96 (2), 339­357.

Hengge, Martina, "Uncertainty as a Predictor of Economic Activity,"2019.
Hyatt, Henry R, Erika McEntarfer, Kevin L McKinney, Stephen Tibbets, and
   Doug Walton, "Job-to-job (J2J)   ows: New labor market statistics from linked
   employer-employee data," US Census Bureau Center for Economic Studies Paper
   No. CES-WP-14-34, 2014.
Johansen, Leif, "Substitution versus ...xed production coe¢ cients in the theory of eco-
    nomic growth: a synthesis,"Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 1959,
    pp. 157­176.
Jordà, Òscar, "Estimation and inference of impulse responses by local projections,"
    American economic review, 2005, 95 (1), 161­182.
Jovanovic, Boyan, "Asymmetric cycles," The Review of Economic Studies, 2006, 73
    (1), 145­162.




                                          38
     and Rafael Rob, "Long waves and short waves: Growth through intensive and ex-
    tensive search," Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 1990, pp. 1391­
    1409.
Jurado, Kyle, Sydney C. Ludvigson, and Serena Ng, "Measuring Uncertainty,"
    The American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (3), 117­1216.
Kambourov, Gueorgui and Iourii Manovskii, "Rising occupational and industry
   mobility in the United States: 1968­97," International Economic Review, 2008, 49
   (1), 41­79.
Keller, Godfrey, Sven Rady, and Martin Cripps, "Strategic experimentation with
    exponential bandits," Econometrica, 2005, 73 (1), 39­68.
King, Robert G and Sergio T Rebelo, "Resuscitating real business cycles," Handbook
   of macroeconomics, 1999, 1, 927­1007.
Klein, Lawrence R and Vincent Su, "Direct estimates of unemployment rate and
    capacity utilization in macroeconometric models," International Economic Review,
    1979, pp. 725­ 740.
Klenow, Peter J, "Learning curves and the cyclical behavior of manufacturing indus-
    tries," Review of Economic dynamics, 1998, 1 (2), 531­550.
Leduc, Sylvain and Zheng Liu, "Uncertainty shocks are aggregate demand shocks,"
   Journal of Monetary Economics, 2016, 82, 20­35.
Ljungqvist, L and T Sargent, "The European Unemployment Dilemma," , Journal of
    Political Economy, 1988.
Lucas, Robert, "Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy," Econometrica, 1978, 46, 1429­
   1446.
Ludvigson, Sydney C., Sai Ma, and Serena Ng, "Uncertainty and Business Cy-
   cles: Exogenous Impulse or Endogenous Response?," American Economic Journal:
   Macroeconomics, forthcoming, 2019.
McCracken, Michael W and Serena Ng, "FRED-MD: A monthly database for macro-
   economic research," Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 2016, 34 (4), 574­
   589.

McDonald, Robert and Daniel Siegel, "The Value of Waiting to Invest," The Quar-
   terly Journal of Economics, 1986, 101 (4), 707­728.

McGrattan, Ellen R and Edward C Prescott, "A reassessment of real business cycle
   theory," American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (5), 177­82.

Miranda, Mario J and Paul L Fackler, Applied computational economics and ...nance,
   MIT press, 2004.


                                         39
Mody, Ashoka and Milan Nedeljkovic, "Central Bank Policies and Financial Mar-
   kets: Lessons from the Euro Crisis," CESifo Working Paper, 2018.

Parente, Stephen L, "Technology adoption, learning-by-doing, and economic growth,"
    Journal of economic theory, 1994, 63 (2), 346­369.

Prescott, Edward C and Michael Visscher, "Organization capital," Journal of po-
    litical Economy, 1980, 88 (3), 446­461.

Ramey, Garey and Valerie A Ramey, "Technology commitment and the cost of
   economic uctuations," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research
   1991.
Shin, Minchul and Molin Zhong, "A new approach to identifying the real e¤ects of
    uncertainty shocks," Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 2018, pp. 1­13.
Veldkamp, Laura L, "Slow boom, sudden crash," Journal of Economic theory, 2005,
    124 (2), 230­257.
Wachter, Jessica A, "Can time-varying risk of rare disasters explain aggregate stock
   market volatility?," The Journal of Finance, 2013, 68 (3), 987­1035.

Wong, Yu Fu, "Spatial Experimentation,"2020. Unpublished paper, Columbia Univer-
   sity.




                                        40
Appendix
5.1    1. Proof of Proposition 1
The ...rst-order condition for the optimality of                    is
                                                                   Z
                               (u           )                         V1 dF = 0;                            (33)

and the ...rst-order condition for the optimality of x is
                                    Z
                                       ("V1 + V2 ) dF = 0:                                                  (34)


   Solving for    .-- The envelope theorem gives
                                               Z
                           V1 =    (u    )+      V1 dF =                               ;                    (35)

where the second equality uses (33). Substituting into (33) we have
                                                Z
                                                     0
                            (u      )=                 dF (") :                                             (36)

We seek a solution of the form (9) where                   is a constant to be solved for. If (9) holds,
(36) reads
                                                       Z
                     u =      (1            )u                 (1      ) ( u + x") dF (")
                         =    (1            )u         (1            ) u;

which, after cancellation of u leaves a quadratic in , namely (1                               )   (1   )
   = 0, or
                                    2
                                             1+        +              + 1 = 0:                              (37)

This implicit function has the solution for                given in (10).
   Solving for x.-- The envelope theorem also gives
                                        Z
                                                                           1
                              V2 = 1 +     V2 dF =                             :                            (38)
                                                                       1
The second equality follows because the right-hand side of (38) is a contraction map with
at most one solution for V2 . Substituting from (9) into (35) and from there (in an updated
form) into (34) gives
                                   Z
                                                0              1
                        0 =             "           dF +
                                                           1
                                   Z
                                                                                       1
                          =             " (1           ) ( u + x") dF +                    ;                (39)
                                                                                   1

                                                       41
          0
because       = (1               ) u0 = (1                         ) ( u + x"). But E ("u) = 0, which leads to (8).
   We must show that this function solves (7). Let us proceed with the method of
undetermined coe¢ cients. Since V = aA bu2 + c,
                                     Z
              2
      aA bu + c = A             2
                               u +     a (A + x)                                                                    b (u + x"                            )2 + c dF (")
                                     Z
                     = A       u2 +    a (A + x)                                      b ( u + x")2 + c dF (")
                                                                                           Z
                                     = A                           2
                                                                  u + (a (A + x) + c)     b ( u + x")2 dF (")

                                     = A                          u2 + (a (A + x) + c)                                      b       2 2
                                                                                                                                        u               bx2              2
                                                                                                                                                                             :
                                                                                                2
Equating coe¢ cients: a = 1 + a , b =                                               +b              , and c =                       (ax + c                      bx2                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                         ), so that
                                     1
                       a=                        , b=                              2
                                                                                       , and c =                                    ax              bx2      2
                                                                                                                                                                         :
                                 1                                 1                                         1
This leads to
                                                                                                                                h                   i
                                                                                                                x
                                                      A                                                     1                       1           2       x2       2
                                                                                            2
                   V (u; A) =                                                          2
                                                                                           u +                                                                               ;
                                                  1                    1                                                    1
                       1
where x =       2 (1       )(1       )
                                         . Then V2 (u; A) = 1= (1                                           ) which is consistent with (38). It re-
mains to be shown that V1 (u; A) agrees with (35) and (9). Now, since                                                                                            =           1
                                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                                                                                + (1         )2 ,
they agree only if
                                              1
                                         2
                                           =     (1    );
                                  1           2
i.e., if
                                                          2
                                                              + (1             )2          = (1             ) 1                         2
                                                                                                                                                :                                                     (40)

But from (37),
                                                                               1
                                                                           =        +                   1           :
Substitute for = into (40) to conclude that V1 (u; A) is consistent with (35) and (9) if
and only if
                                 +           3                2            2
                                                                               + (1             )2 = (1                         ) 1                          2
                                                                                                                                                                     :                                (41)
But expanding the left-hand side of (41) yields
                                         3            2                2                   2                                3                   2
                           +                                               +1+                      2       =                                       +1                           :

Conversely, expanding the right-hand side of (41) yields
                                                                                2                                       2                   3
                                             (1               ) 1                      =1                                   +                   :

Therefore (41) holds, and V is therefore given by (11).

                                                                                           42
2. Proof of Proposition 2 and of Corollaries 1 and 2
Note that we can re-write 13 as M A (t) process

                                                                                        X
                                                                                        t
                                                                      t                                     t s
                                                     ut =                 u0 + x                                  "s :
                                                                                        s=0

As a result, we have

  u2
   t+1   u2
          t = (ut+1 + ut ) (ut+1                        ut )
              (                                           ( t+1                                                                          ))
                                                             X                                                    X
                                                                                                                  t
                                 t+1           t                                    t+1 s                                     t s
                =                      +           u0 + x                                           "s +                            "s
                                                                          s=0                                     s=0
                     (                                           ( t+1                                                                   ))
                                                                  X                                               X
                                                                                                                  t
                                 t+1           t                                    t+1 s                                     t s
                                                   u0 + x                                           "s                              "s
                     (                                   ( s=0t                                                   s=0
                                                                                                                          ))
                                                            X
                                 t+1           t                                        t s                                              t+1       t
                =                      +           u0 + x 2                                     "s + "t+1                                            u0 + x"t+1 :
                                                                           s=0
                                                                                                                                  |                {z          }
                     |                                            {z                                                          }                        2
                                                                      1


This is product of two variables                         1   and           2    that follow normal distributions
                                                                                                                      2(t+1)
                                                   t+1            t                                     1
                     1               N                   +                u0 ; x2 4                                       2
                                                                                                                                      +1       2
                                                                                                             1
                                                   t+1        t
                     2               N                                u0 ; x2           2
                                                                                                :

It'
  s worth noting that the product of two variables can be written as
                                                   1                                                1
                                               XY = (X + Y )2                                         (X              Y )2 :
                                                   4                                                4
It follows that since X =                  1   and Y =                2    are normal distribution
                                                                                                                 2(t+1)
                                       t+1                                                      1
                1+       2       2           u0              N            0; 4x2                                      2
                                                                                                                               +1          2
                                                                                                                                               =A          t
                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                             2(t+1)
                                                                                            1
                    1+       2         2 t u0                N            0; 4x2                                  2
                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                         = B t:
                                                                                                    1
where    t   is a standard normal and
                                                             s
                                                                                    1                   2(t+1)
                                               A =                4x2          2
                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                      +1
                                                                                            1
                                                             s
                                                                                1               2(t+1)
                                               B =                4x2                                   2
                                                                                                                      2:
                                                                                    1

                                                                                   43
Therefore, we have
                              1                   2   1               2
                      1 2   =    A t + 2 t+1 u0         B t + 2 t u0
                              4                       4
                              1                      2
                            =     [A t ]2 + 2 t+1 u0 + 4 t+1 u0 A t
                              4
                                1                    2
                                    [B t ]2 + 2 t u0 + 4 t u0 B t
                                4
                                   1
                            = C + A2 B 2 2        t +( A    B ) t u0 t ;
                                   4
where the constant
                                                t+1        2      t        2
                                    C=                u0              u0       :

Now note that
                                          A2        B 2 = 4x2     2
                                                                      ;

this leads to
                                                    2 2
                             1 2   = C + x2           t    +( A           B)       t
                                                                                       u0 t :

We now have the growth distribution

                                                      2 2
                       gt = x           C t + x2        t      +( A        B)           t
                                                                                            u0       t   ;    (42)

where t N (0; 1) and A, B and C are as stated in the proposition.
   Proof of Corollaries 1 and 2:
     Now notice that we can re-write the growth distribution in Eqs. (42) as follows,

                      gt = D0             x2    2
                                                    ( + D1 )2
                                                      2
                            = D0          x2    2                    2
                                                           + 2 D1 + D1
                                                2 2
                            = D0          x2               2 D1 x2         2
                                                                                         x2          2    2
                                                                                                         D1

Matching the coe¢ cients, we have

                                   2D1 x2       2
                                                      =         ( A            B)           t
                                                                                                u0
                            D0       x2    2    2
                                               D1 = x             Ct

or
                                              ( A B ) t u0
                                   D1 =
                                                 2x2 2
                                   D0     = x    Ct + x2 2 D1
                                                            2
                                                              :



                                                       44
Now, gt = D0      x2 2 ( + D1 )2 is a linear function of a noncentral chi-squared distribu-
                                                                               2
tion, with the degree of freedom of 1 and the centrality parameter equal to D1   . Its mean
and variance satisfy,21

                                         E ( + D1 )2 = 1 + D1
                                                            2


                                 V ar ( + D1 )2 = 2 1 + 2D1
                                                          2



Therefore, we have

                       E (gt ) = D0              x2    2
                                                           (1 + D1 )
                                 = x            Ct + x2          2      2
                                                                       D1         x2       2            2
                                                                                                   1 + D1
                                 = x            Ct         x2      2



as stated in the corollary, and
                                                     2 2
                      V ar (gt ) =          x2                     2
                                                           2 1 + 2D1
                                            2          2 2             2                                        2
                                     = 2         x2            +              ( A              B)      t
                                                                                                           u0

as stated in the corollary.
      The skewness satis...es,
                                                                       "                               #
                                                                           23=2 (1 + 3D1
                                                                                       2
                                                                                         )
                           Skewness (gt ) =                 x2     2
                                                                                               3=2
                                                                                   2
                                                                            (1 + 2D1 )

which is decreasing in 2 .
   For quantiles, it'
                    s well-known that there are no closed-form expressions for chi-squared
distribution but there exist an approximation from Result 26.4.32 on page 942 of Abramowitz
and Stegun (1948) where the pth percentile of the noncentral chi-squared is,
                                                                            2                  3
                                 2             2                   2 (1 + 2D1 )
                                 p        1 + D1           1               2           2           :
                                                                   9 (1 + D1 )
Plugging in D1 , we have
                                                                                           2
                M edian (gt+1 ) = x              Ct+1            0:47         1
                                           2          2
                   IQR (gt+1 ) =           75         25
                                                                   2                                                t
                                     =       1:22 1                         + 1:34 ( At                    Bt )         u0 ;

as stated in the corollary.
 21
      https://mathworld.wolfram.com/NoncentralChi-SquaredDistribution.html

                                                           45
   Uncertainty shocks ­ we consider rises in 2 as positive shocks to uncertainty
according to equation (14). Therefore, we consider,
                                   p         p                                     2
                               @E gt+1   @E gt+1 @
                                       =                                               ;
                                 @         @ 2    @
                                                              p
                                                         @E (gt+1 )
and analogously for other moments. Therefore, to show       @
                                                                    < 0, it'
                                                                           s su¢ cient to
          p
     @E (gt   )       2
show @ +1   2   as @ @ > 0 according to equation (14). Now according to proposition 1,
mean growth satis...es, E (gt+1 ) = x              Ct+1            x2    2
                                                                             , and therefore
                              p
                          @E gt+1    @x                                       2    @x2       2

                                2
                                  =                                 1
                            @       @ 2                                            @         2

                                                    2
because neither     nor Ct+1 depend on                  . Plugging in x from equation (8), we have
                      p
                  @E gt+1                                                                  1             2
                          = 1                                                                                ;
                    @ 2                   (1         ) (1           )         (1           ) (1     )

so we have                    p
                          @E gt+1
                                  < 0 i¤ 1 <
                            @ 2                                    (1          ) (1          )
or   > (1       ) (1   ) as stated in the proposition 2. This inequality holds under
parameters in Table 1.
   The proofs for median, variance and IQR are similar. If                                   > (1            ) (1         )
                                           2          2       2                    2
                  @ V (gt+1 )      2           (1       )     @ ( 2)
                              =                                          >0
                    @    2
                                [ (1             ) (1     )]2 | @ {z 2 }
                                                                  >0
                                  2                                   3

          @M edian (gt+1 )   6                                                   7                1
                             6                                                   7
                           = 60:47                                               7                                   <0
              @ 2            4                      (1            ) (1         ) 5 (1             ) (1           )
                               |                         {z                    }
                                          <0 if     > (1          )(1    )

             @IQR (gt+1 )                                2      @
                          = 1:22               1                     >0
                @ 2                                           @ {z 2
                                                              |    }
                                                                  >0

as stated in the Proposition 2.
                                      t
   Limit: As t ! 1, we have               ! 0 because                    2 (0; 1) and hence Ct ! 0, we thus
achieve the limits of the moments stated in the Corollary 2.




                                                        46
3. Proof of Proposition 3 and Corollary 3
Proof of Proposition 3: There are four ...rst-order conditions. The ...rst-order condition
for the optimality of i in state i 2 fL, Hg is
                                       Z
                                               0           0
                    (u    i)       i       pVu;i + (1 p) Vu;j dFi = 0;                (43)

     Solving for         i .-- The envelope theorem gives
                                               Z
                                                     0                               0
                     Vu;i    =    (u     i) +     pVu;i + (1                    p) Vu;j dFi =                 i;     (44)

                                                    0      0
where the second equality uses (43). Substituting Vu;i =   i ;into (43) we have
                                          Z
                    (u      i) =    i         p 0i + (1 p) 0j dFi :                                                  (45)

We seek a solution of the form (9), so that where (                            1;     2)   are constants to be solved for.
If (27) holds, (45) reads
                                                               Z
                             iu   =          (1       i) u          (1         i) ( iu     + xi ") dF (")
                                  =          (1       i) u     (1         i)   i u;


which is an equation in                i   alone, of the same form as Eq. (37), and with the same solution
 L   =   H   = , with             given in (10). This proves Eq. (9).
     Solving for xi .-- The ...rst-order condition for the optimality of xi for i 2 fL, Hg is
                       Z
                                                         0     0
                          p ("Vu;i + VA;i ) + (1 p) "Vu;j  + VA;j   dFi = 0:                (46)

The envelope theorem also gives
                                                  Z
                                                                                                   1
                             VA; i = 1 +              (pVA;i + (1        p) VA;j ) dFi =                :            (47)
                                                                                               1
               0                      0         0
Substituting Vu;i =                   i    and VA;i = 1= (1   ) into Eq. (46) and rearranging, it reads
                                                   Z
                                            1
                                                =     p" 0i + (1 p) " 0j dFi :
                                          1
         0       0
Now      i   =   j   = (1             ) u = (1         ) ( u + xi ") : And since " has zero mean, we are left
with                                  Z
                         1
                                  =        [p + (1       p) ] (1     ) xi "2 dFi = (1                  ) xi   2
                                                                                                              i;
                     1
implying Eq. (26). That completes the proof of the Proposition.

                                                               47
   Proof of Corollary 3: The growth for state i 2 fL; H g can be expressed as

                          gi        lny 0       lny = xi                              u02          u2 :
                                = xi                ( u + xi ")2                        u2
                                                                     2                                                                 2 2
                                =    xi +               1                    u2 + 2                uxi        i               x2
                                                                                                                               i       i   ;

i.e., Eq. (28)

4. Proof of Proposition 4 and Corollary 4
Proof of Proposition 4: Because we can express the total output as

                                                   p                                                2 2
                                                lnyt = A0 + xt                                       ut ;
                                                                                             2
it'
  s straightforward to see that the proof of proposition 2 goes through in this case when
                           2
we replace       by   2
                               . Therefore the growth distribution satis...es,

                                                    2                             2 2
                               gt = x                       C t + x2                t   +( A                  B)          t
                                                                                                                              u0   t
                                            2
with
                                                        s
                                                                                             1           2t
                                    At =                    4 (1                 2)                               +1
                                                                                             1            2
                                                        s
                                                                                             1           2t
                                    Bt =                    4 (1                 2)
                                                                                             1            2

                                                            t p 2                     t 1 p 2
                                    Ct =                     u0                          u0
                                                        s
                                                                                  1
                                    up
                                     0 =
                                                                         2            (lny0             A0 )2 :
                                                                 2

   In equilibrium, the distribution of growth gt+1 therefore satis...es

                p                                   2                             2                2
             E gt+1             = x                     Ct+1                          1
                                            2                            2
                   p                                2                                          2                      2
       M edian    gt+1          = x                     Ct+1             0:47                           1
                                            2                                           2
                                                        2                                                         2
                   p                            2                            2 2       2                  2                                             t p 2
             V    gt+1          = 2                          1                             +                          ( At+1                   Bt+1 )    u0
                                        2                                                           2
              p                         2                                    2                                                     t p
         IQR gt+1               =               1:22 1                                + 1:34 ( At                     Bt )          u0     :
                                    2
   Proof of Corollary 4:

                                                                                 48
   Therefore we have,
                 p                  p             p              p
             @E gt+1      @M edian gt+1      @ V gt+1      @IQR gt+1
                     < 0,               < 0;          > 0,           > 0:
               @                @               @             @
The 5th percentile, or the growth-at-risk, satis...es

    p                   2                                  2                     2                                           2                             t p
    t   =x                  Ct+1        3:84                        1                        + 1:65                                   ( At+1    Bt+1 )      u0 ;        (48)
               2                                  2                                                                  2

and because             2 (0; 1), we thus have
                                                  p
                                              @   t                                      2                          2
                                                       =        3:84                                 1                   <0
                                              @                                     2
as stated in the corollary.

5. Proof of Proposition 5 and Corollary 5 (Recursive Preferences)
Proof of Proposition 5: We guess that the value function takes the following form,

                                                               V (u; A) = eA v (u) :                                                                                    (49)

To verify this guess, we plug the guess into the RHS of value function (31), and it becomes
                        "                                                                                                         Z                                                1   #11
                                                                                                         1                                                                         1
RHS = max e(1                      )A
                                        exp                (u               )2                   2
                                                                                                                 +                     e(A+x) v (u + x"            )1     dF
              x;                                      2                                  2
                             "                                                                                                        Z                                   1    #11
                                                                                             1                                                                            1
        = eA max exp                             (u            )2                    2
                                                                                                     + e(1                   )x
                                                                                                                                          v (u + x"        )1      dF                      :
                   x;                        2                              2
                   |                                                                                         {z                                                                        }
                                                                                                             v (u)


As a result, the RHS of value function (31) can be expressed as eA v (u) where
               "                                                                                                         Z                                      1       #11
                                                                             1                                                                                  1
v (u) = max exp                         (u        )2                    2
                                                                                         + e(1                 )x
                                                                                                                                 v (u + x"        )1       dF                  :
         x;                        2                           2
                                                                                                                                                                        (50)
which is exactly our guess. Because the RHS of equation (50) is independent of A, so are
optimal policy functions (x; ).
   Proof of Corollary 5: When                                      = , we can re-write v (u) from equation (50) as
                   "                                                                                                     Z                                         #11
                                                                                1
v (u) = max exp                         (u            )2                2
                                                                                         + e(1                 )x
                                                                                                                                  v (u + x"           )1   dF             ;
         x;                         2                           2

                                                                                    49
therefore, we have
                                                                                            "Z                                 #
                                                           2 1
  v (u)1                exp      (u            )2                                                v (u + x"       )1
               = max           2                      2
                                                                     + e(1             )x
                                                                                                                         dF :
   1              x;                  1                                                                1
                                 v (u)1
When       =     ! 1, we have       1
                                               ! lnv (u), and therefore we have
                                                               Z
                                                 2      2
               lnv (u) = max         (u         )         +       ln (v (u + x"                            )) dF :
                          x;     2                   2
As a result,
 lnVEZ (u; A) = A + ln (v (u))
                                                                                   Z
                                                       2         2
                       = max A            (u          )              +                 lnVEZ (u + x"           ; A + x) dF
                         x;           2                     2
which is the same as (7) with,
                                          V (u; A) = lnVEZ (u; A) :
Therefore, using results from Proposition 1, we have
                                          A     1
                         lnVEZ (u; A) =           (1                                       ) u2 + J
                                        1       2
where J satis...es equation (12).
   Numerical Procedure for Computation of xEZ (u) and                                                 EZ   (u): We guess and
verify numerically that
                                                                           2
                                                    v (u) = D0 eD1 u                                                           (51)
where D0 and D1 are two constants remained to be solved. Using the guess and substitute
  =1       u
               , v (u) can be expressed as
                                2                                                                               3
                                       exp (1                )         2
                                                                               2
                                                                                       2
                                                                                           (1     )2 u2
                v (u)1
                         = max  4                            hR                i1    5                                         (52)
                                              1                                )D1 ( u+x Z )2
                                                                                1
                            x;    + e(1 )x D0                        e(1 d (Z )
                                                                         R                                            Z )2
where Z follows N (0; 1) and          (Z ) is the CDF of Z . The integral e(1 )D1 ( u+x                                      d (Z ),
which is the expectation of the exponential of a noncentral chi-squared distribution, has
no closed-form solution. Therefore, we numerically calculate this integral by using the
"qnwnorm" function in the Matlab CompEcon toolbox from Miranda and Fackler (2004).
   Next, for any given pair (D0; D1 ), we numerically calculate the optimal (x; ) that
maximize RHS of equation (52) which restricts                              2 (0; 1) and x 2 (0; xmax ). The upper
bound xmax is set to make sure the optimal solutions are interior points. Last, at the
optimal (x; ), we compute the value function, denoted by v Num (u; D0; D1 ). The algorithm
                                                     1
                                                        P     Num                      2
                                                                                         2
stops if we ...nd a pair (D0 ; D1 ) that satis...es N u   u v     (u; D0; D1 ) D0 eD1 u    < 10 2
where Nu is the size of the grid of u.

                                                            50
6. Out-of-sample Predictive Scores
In this section, we evaluate the forecast performance of our empirical quantile regression
with JLN uncertainty and compare it to the one from Adrian et al. (2019). Following
Adrian et al. (2019), we evaluate the out-of-sample prediction performance among di¤er-
ent models using predictive scores. The predictive scores are computed as the predictive
distribution generated by a model and then evaluated at the realized value of the time
series. By construction, higher predictive scores are indicative of a more accurate fore-
cast. We produce the predictive distributions recursively starting with the sample ranging
from 1971:01 to 1994:12 to predict growth distribution for 1995:01 by estimating quantile
regressions (1) and then matching a skewed t -distribution. We then repeat the exercise
for 1995:02 by expanding the estimation sample to 1995:01, and so on until reaching the
end of the sample at 2018:12.
   We consider three alternative models. The ...rst one is our baseline model using JLN
uncertainty as the predictor. The second is the one studied in Adrian et al. (2019), which
uses NFCI. The third model includes both JLN uncertainty and NFCI. In all models,
we include the contemporaneous IP growth as the second predictor. Table A1 reports
the average predictive scores for each model for h = 1 and 12 month-ahead forecasts.
Our baseline model with JLN uncertainty produces the highest average out-of-sample
predictive score among the three models; it outperforms the NFCI model out-of-sample.
Interestingly, when we add NFCI to the baseline model, the out-of-sample prediction
performance decreases, which shows that JLN uncertainty brings additional predictive
power over NFCI for predicting future IP growth.


                       Table A1. Out-of-sample Predictive Scores
                      Model                  Predictive Scores
                                             h=1      h = 12
                      JLN Uncertainty Only   0:0447 0:1061
                      NFCI                   0:0439 0:1004
                      JLN Uncertainty + NFCI 0:0431 0:0998
          Note: This table reports the average predictive scores from 1995:01 to 2018:12.




                                                51
